1:1 The begynnynge of the Gospell of Iesu Chryst the sonne of God,
1:2 as it is written in the Prophetes, behold, I sende my messenger before thy face which shall prepare thy waye before the.
1:3 The voyce of a cryer in the wildernes: prepare ye the waye of the Lorde, Ꟶ make his pathes strayte.
1:4 Iohn dyd baptyse in the wyldernes, and preached the baptyme of repentaunce, for the remissyon of synnes.
1:5 And all the lande of Iewrie and they of Ierusalem, went out vnto hym, and were all baptised of him in the ryuer Iordan, confessynge their synnes.
1:6 Iohn was clothed with camilles herr, and wt a gerdyll of a sayng about hys loynes. And he dyd eate locustes and wilde hony,
1:7 and preached sayinge. He that is stronger then I, commeth after me, whose sho latchet I am not worthy to stoupe downe, and vnlose,
1:8 I haue baptysed you wyth water: but he shall baptyse you with the holy gost.
1:9 And it came to passe in those dayes, that Iesus cam from Nazareth, of Galile: and was baptysed of Iohn in Iordan:
1:10 And assone as he was come vp out of the water: he sawe heauen open, Ꟶ the sprete descendynge vpon him lyke adoue:
1:11 And ther came a voyce from heauen. Thou art my deare sonne in whom I delyte.
1:12 And immediatly sprete droue him into wildernes:
1:13 and he was there in the wyldernes .xl. dayes, and was tempted of Satan, Ꟶ was with wilde beastes. And the angels minystred vnto hym.
1:14 After that Iohn was taken Iesus came into Galile preachinge the Gospell, of the kyngdom of God,
1:15 Ꟶ sayinge. the tyme is come, Ꟶ the kyngdom of God is at hand repent, and beleue the Gospell.
1:16 As he walked by the see of Galile, he sawe Simon Ꟶ Andrew his brother, castynge nettes into the see, for they were fisshers.
1:17 And Iesus sayde vnto them: folowe me, Ꟶ I will make you to become fysshers of men.
1:18 And strayght waye, they forsoke their nettes, and folowed him.
1:19 And when he had gone a lytell further thence, he sawe Iames the sonne of zebede, and Iohn his brother, which also were in the shyppe, mendynge their nettes.
1:20 And anone he called them. And they leeft their father zebede in the shyp wyth the hyred seruauntes, and folowed hym.
1:21 And they came into Capernaum: and streyght waye on the Saboth dayes, he entred into the synagoge, Ꟶ taught.
1:22 And they were astonnyed at hys learnynge. For he taught them as one that had auctorite, Ꟶ not as the Scribes.
1:23 And there was in their Sinagoge a man vexed with an vnclene spirite, and he cryed
1:24 sayinge: Alas, what haue we to do with the thou Iesus of Nazareth? Art thou come to destroye vs? I knowe the what thou art euen that holy one of God.
1:25 And Iesus rebuked hym sayinge: holde thy peace, and come out of the man.
1:26 And whan the vncleane spirite had toarne him, Ꟶ cryed with a loude voyce, he came out of him.
1:27 And they were all amased, in so moch that they demaunded one of another amonge them selues sayinge: what thyng is this? What newe doctrine is thys? For with auctorite commaunded he the foule spirites, and they obeyed hym.
1:28 And immediatly his fame spred abroad through out all the region borderinge on Galile.
1:29 And forth with, whan they were come out of the Synagoge they entred into the house of Symon and Andrew, wyth Iames and Iohn.
1:30 But Simons mother in lawe laye sycke of a feuer. And anone they tell him of her.
1:31 And he came, Ꟶ toke her by the hande: Ꟶ lifte her vp: Ꟶ ymediatly the feuer forsoke hyr, Ꟶ she mynistred vnto them.
1:32 And at euen when the sonne was downe, they brought vnto him all that were dyseased, and them that were vexed with deuyls.
1:33 And all the cytie was gathred to gether at the dore,
1:34 and he healed many that were sycke of dyuers deseases, and cast out many deuyls, Ꟶ suffred not the deuyls to speake, because they knewe him.
1:35 And in the mornynge very early, Iesus (whan he was rysen vp) departed, and went out into a solitary place, and there prayed.
1:36 And Symon and they that were with hym, folowed after hym.
1:37 And when they had founde him, they saye vnto him: all men seke for the.
1:38 And he sayd vnto them: let vs go into the next townes, that I maye preach there also: for therfore am I come.
1:39 And he preached in their Synagoges, in all Galile, and cast the deuyls out.
1:40 And ther came a leper to him, besechynge hym, and knelyng downe, and sayeng vnto him, yf thou wilt, thou cannest make me cleane.
1:41 And Iesus had compassion on hym, Ꟶ puth forth his hande, touched hym, Ꟶ sayeth vnto him: I wyll, be thou cleane.
1:42 And assone as he had spoken, immediatly the leprosy departed from him,
1:43 and he sent him awaye forth with,
1:44 and sayeth vnto hym. Se thou saye nothynge to any man: but get the hence, shewe thy selfe to the Preaste, and offer for thy clensinge, those thinges whych Moses commaunded, for a witnesse vnto them.
1:45 But he (assone as he was departed) beganne to tell many thinges, and to publyshe the sayenge: in so moch that Iesus coulde nomore openly entre into the cytie, but was with out in desert places. And they came to hym from euery quarter.
2:1 After a feawe dayes also, he entred into Capernaum agayne, and it was noysed that he was in the house.
2:2 And anone many were gathered together, in so moch that now there was no rome to receaue them, no not so moche as about the dore. And he preached the worde vnto them.
2:3 And they came vnto him, bringing one sycke of the palsye whych was borne of fowre men.
2:4 And when they coulde not come nye vnto him for prease, they vncouered the rofe of the house that he was in. And when they had broken vp the rofe, they dyd (wyth coardes) let downe the bed wherin the sycke of the palsye laye.
2:5 When Iesus sawe their fayth, he sayde vnto the sycke of the palsye: sonne thy synnes be forgeuen the.
2:6 But ther were certayne of the Scribes syttinge there, Ꟶ thinking in their hertes:
2:7 why doth he speake thys blasphemyes? who can forgeue synnes, but God onely?
2:8 And immediatly when Iesus perceaued in hys sprete, that they so thought wyth in them selues, he sayeth vnto them: why thynke ye soch thinges in youre hertes?
2:9 Whether is it esayer to saye to the sycke of the palsye: thy synnes be forgeuen the: or to saye, aryse, take vp thy bed, and walke?
2:10 But that ye maye knowe, that the sonne of man hath power in earth to forgeue synnes, he spake vnto the sycke of the palsye:
2:11 I saye vnto the: aryse, and take vp thy beed, and get the hense vnto thyne awne house.
2:12 And immediatly he arose, toke vp the bed, and went forth before them all: in so moch that they were all amased, Ꟶ glorifyed God, sayinge: we neuer sawe it on this fassyon.
2:13 And he went agayne vnto the see, Ꟶ all the people resorted vnto hym, and he taught them.
2:14 And as Iesus passed by, he sawe Leuy the sonne of Alphe, sytting at the receyte of custome, and sayde vnto him: folowe me. And he arose, and folowed hym.
2:15 And it came to passe that whan Iesus sate at meate in hys house, many publicans and synners sate also together at meate wyth Iesus and his disciples. For there were many, that folowed hym.
2:16 And when the Scrybes and Pharises sawe him eate with publicans and synners, they sayde vnto his disciples: how happeneth it, that he eateth Ꟶ dryncketh wyth publicans and synners?
2:17 When Iesus hearde that, he sayde vnto them: They that be whole, haue no nede of the Phisycion, but they that are sycke. I came not to call the ryghtwyse, but synners to repentaunce.
2:18 And the disciples of Iohn and the Pharises dyd fast: and they come and saye vnto him. Why do the disciples of Iohn and of the Pharises fast, but thy disciples fast not?
2:19 And Iesus sayde vnto them: can the children of the weddinge fast while the brydgrome is with them? As longe as they haue the brydgrome with them, they cannot fast.
2:20 But the dayes wyll come, when the brydgrome shalbe taken awaye from them, and then shall they fast in those dayes.
2:21 No man also soweth a pece of new cloth vnto an olde garment, els taketh he awaye the new pece therof from the olde, Ꟶ so is the rent worse.
2:22 And no man powreth new wine into olde botels: els the new wynd doth burst the bottels, and the wyne runneth out, and the bottels are marred. But new wine must be putt into new bottels.
2:23 And it chaunsed that he went thorow the corne feldes on the Sabboth dayes, and hys disciples, beganne by the waye to plucke the eares of corne.
2:24 And the Pharises sayde vnto him: beholde, why do they on the Sabboth dayes, that whych is not laufull?
2:25 And he sayde vnto them: haue ye neuer red what Dauid dyd, when he had nede, Ꟶ was an hongred, both he, and they that were with him?
2:26 How he went into the house of God in the dayes of Abiathar the hye Preast, and dyd eate the shewbread, (whych is not lawfull to eate, but for the Prestes onely) Ꟶ gaue also to them whych were wyth hym?
2:27 And he sayde vnto them: the Sabboth was made for man, Ꟶ not man for the Sabboth.
2:28 Therfore is the sonne of man, Lorde also of the Sabboth.
3:1 And he entred agayne into the synagoge, and ther was a man there whych and a wythred hande.
3:2 And they watched hym, whether he wolde heale hym on the Sabboth daye, that they myght accuse hym.
3:3 And he sayde vnto the man whych had the wythred hande: aryse, and stande in the middes.
3:4 And he sayth vnto them, whether is it lawfull to do good on the Sabboth dayes, or to do euyll? to saue lyfe, or to kyll? But they helde their peace.
3:5 And whan he had looked round aboute on them, wyth anger, mournynge on the blyndnes of their hertes, he sayeth to the man, stretch forth thine hande. And he stretched it out. And hys hande was restored, euen as whole as the other.
3:6 And the Pharises departed, and streight waye gathred a councell (with them that belonged to Herode) agaynst hym, that they myght destroye him.
3:7 But Iesus auoyded wt his disciples to the see. And a greate multitude folowed hym from Galile: and from Iurie,
3:8 and from Ierusalem, and from Idumea, and from beyonde Iordane, and they that dwelled about Tyre and Sidon, a greate multitude of men: which (when they had herde what thinges he dyd) came vnto hym.
3:9 And Iesus commaunded his disciples, that a ship shuld wayt on hym, because of the people, leste they shuld thronge him.
3:10 For he had healed many, in somoch that they preased vpon him, for to touch him, as many as had plages.
3:11 And when the vncleane spretes sawe him, they fell downe before him, Ꟶ cryed, sayinge: thou art the sonne of God.
3:12 And he straytly charged them, that they shuld not make him knowne.
3:13 And he went vp into a mountayne, Ꟶ called vnto hym whom he wolde, and they came vnto him.
3:14 And he ordeyned the twelue that they shuld be with him, and that he myght sende them forth to preach:
3:15 Ꟶ that they myght haue power to heale syknesses, Ꟶ to cast out deuyls.
3:16 And he gaue vnto Symon to name, Peter.
3:17 And he called Iames the sonne of zebede and Iohn, Iames brother, and gaue them to name Boanarges, whych is to saye, the sonnes of thonder.
3:18 And Andrew, Ꟶ Philip, and Bartholomew, and Mathew, Ꟶ Thomas, and Iames the sonne of Alphe, and Thaddeus, and Symon of Canaan,
3:19 and Iudas Iscarioth: whych also betrayed him. And they came into the house,
3:20 and the people assembled together agayne, so that they had not leysar, so moch as to eate breed.
3:21 And when they that belonged vnto hym, heard of it, they went out to laye handes vpon him. For they sayde: he is madd.
3:22 And the Scrybes whych came downe from Ierusalem, sayde: he hath Belzebub, and by the chefe deuyll, casteth he out deuyls.
3:23 And he called them vnto him, and sayde vnto them in parables. How can Satan dryue out Satan?
3:24 And yf a realme be deuyded agaynste it selfe, that realme cannot endure:
3:25 And yf a house be deuided againste it selfe, that house cannot contynue.
3:26 And yf Satan make insurreccyon agaynst him selfe, Ꟶ be deuided, he cannot contynue, but hath an ende:
3:27 No man can entre into astronge mans house, Ꟶ take awaye hys goodes, excepte he fyrst bynde the stronge man, Ꟶ then spoyle his house.
3:28 Uerely I saye vnto you, all synnes shalbe forgeuen vnto mens children: and blasphemyes wherwith soeuer they haue blasphemed.
3:29 But he that speaketh blasphemy agaynst the holy goost, hath neuer forgeuenes, but is in daunger of eternall damnacyon:
3:30 For they sayde: he hath an vncleane sprete.
3:31 There came also his mother Ꟶ his brethren, and stode with out, and sent vnto him to call him out.
3:32 And the people sat aboute him, and sayde vnto him: beholde, thy mother Ꟶ thy brethren seke for the with out.
3:33 And he answered them, sayinge: who is my mother and my brethren?
3:34 And whan he had loked rounde about on his discyples, which sat in compasse about him, he sayde: behold my mother and my brethren.
3:35 For whosoeuer doeth the wyll of God, the same is my brother and my syster and mother.
4:1 And he began agayne, to teach by the see syde. And there gathered together vnto him moch people, so greatly that he entred into a ship, and sat in the see, and all the people was by the see syde on the shore.
4:2 And he taught them many thinges by parables, and sayde vnto them in his doctrine?
4:3 Herken to: beholde, there went out a sower to sowe.
4:4 And it fortuned as he sowed, that some fell by the waye syde, and the fowles of the ayre came, and deuoured it vp:
4:5 Some fell on stony grounde where it had not moch erth: and immediatly sprange vp, because it had not deepth of erth:
4:6 but as sone as the sonne was vp, it caught heat: Ꟶ because it had not rotynge, it wyddred awaye.
4:7 And some fell amonge thornes, Ꟶ the thornes grew vp, and choked it, and it gaue no frute.
4:8 And some fel vpon good grounde, and dyd yelde frute that sprong vp, and grewe, and brought forth, some thyrty folde, and some syxtye folde, and some an hundred folde.
4:9 And he sayde vnto them: he that hath eares to heare let him heare.
4:10 And when he was alone, they that were aboute hym wyth the twelue asked hym of the parable.
4:11 And he sayde vnto them. To you is it geuen to knowe the mystery of the kyngdome of God. But vnto them that are with out, all thinges happen by parables:
4:12 that when they se, they maye se, and not discerne, and when they heare, they maye heare, and not vnderstande: lest at any tyme they shulde turne, and their synnes shuld be forgeuen them.
4:13 And he sayde vnto them: Knowe ye not this parable? and how then wyll ye knowe all other parables?
4:14 The sower soweth the worde.
4:15 And they (wherof some be rehearsed to be by the waye syde) are those, where the worde is sowen: And whan they heare, Sathan cometh immediatly, and taketh awaye the worde that was sowen in theyr hertes.
4:16 And lyke wyse the other that receaue sede in to the stonye grounde, are they: whych when they heare the worde, at once receaue it wt gladnes,
4:17 yet haue no rote in them selues, and so endure but a tyme: and anone whan trouble Ꟶ persecucyon aryseth for the wordes sake, they fall immediatly.
4:18 There be other also that receaue sede into thornes and those are soche as heare the worde,
4:19 Ꟶ the cares of this worlde, and the disseytfulnes of ryches and the lustes of other thinges, entre in and choke the worde, and it is made vnfrutfull:
4:20 and other ther be, that haue receaued sede into a good ground: they are soche that heare the worde, and receaue it, so that one corne doth brynge forth thyrty, some syxty, some an hundred.
4:21 And he sayde vnto them: is the candle lyghted, to be put vnder a bushell, or vnder the table? Is it not lyghted to be put on a candelstyk?
4:22 For there is nothynge so preuy, that shall not be opened: nether hath it bene so secret, but that it shall come abroade.
4:23 If eny man haue eares to heare, let him heare.
4:24 And he sayde vnto them: take hede what ye heare: With what measure ye meete, with the same shall other men measure vnto you agayne. And vnto you that heare, shall more be geuen.
4:25 For vnto him that hath, shall it be geuen, and from him that hath not, shalbe taken awaye, euen that which he hath.
4:26 And he sayde: so is the kyngdome of God, euen as yf a man shuld sowe sede in the grounde
4:27 and shulde slepe, and ryse vp nyght and daye: and the sede shuld sprynge and growe vp, while he is not aware.
4:28 For the earth bryngeth forth frute of her selfe: fyrst the blade, then the eare, after that the full corne in the eare.
4:29 But whan the frute is brought forth, anone he throusteth in the sykell, because the heruest is come.
4:30 And he sayde: where vnto shall we lyken the kyngdome of God? or with what comparison shall we compare it?
4:31 It is lyke a grayne of mustarst seed: whych when it is sowen in the earth, is lesse then all seedes that be in the earth:
4:32 whan it is sowen, it groweth vp, and is greater then all herbes: and beareth greate braunches, so that the fowles of the ayre maye make their nestes vnder the shadow of it.
4:33 And with many soche parables spake he the worde vnto them, after as they myght heare it.
4:34 But wyth out parable spake he nothynge vnto them. But when they were alone, he expounded all thynges to his discyples.
4:35 And the same daye when euen was come, he sayde vnto them: let vs passe ouer vnto the other syde,
4:36 And they lefte the people, Ꟶ toke him euen as he was in the ship. And ther were also wyth hym other shippes.
4:37 And ther arose a great storme of wynde, Ꟶ the waues dashed in to the ship, so that it was now full.
4:38 And he was in the sterne a slepe on a pelowe. And they awake him, Ꟶ saye vnto hym: Master, carest thou not, that we perishe?
4:39 And he rose vp, and rebuked the wynde, and sayde vnto the see: peace, be styll. And the wynde ceassed, and ther folowed a greate calme.
4:40 And he sayde vnto them: why are ye so fearfull? How happeneth it, that ye haue no fayth?
4:41 And they feared exceadingly, and sayde one to another: who is thys? For both wynde and see obeye hym.
5:1 And they cam ouer to the other syde of the see into the countre of the Gaderenites.
5:2 And when he was come out of the shippe, immediatly there met hym out of the graues a man possessed of an vncleane sprete,
5:3 whych had hys abydinge amonge the graues. And no man coulde bynde him: no not with cheynes,
5:4 because that when he was often bounde with fetters and cheynes, he plucked the chaynes a sundre, and brake the fetters in peces, Nether coulde eny man tame him.
5:5 And alwayes, nyght and daye he was in the mountaynes and in the graues, cryeng and beatyng hym selfe wyth stones.
5:6 But when he had spyed Iesus a farre of, he ranne, and worshipped him,
5:7 and cryed with a loude voyce and sayde what haue I to do wyth the: Iesus thou sonne of the moost hyest God? I requyre the in the name of God that thou torment me not.
5:8 For he sayd vnto hym: come out of the man thou foule sprete.
5:9 And he asked hym: what is thy name? And he answered and sayde vnto hym: my name is Legion, for we are many.
5:10 And he prayd hym instantly, that he wolde not sende them awaye out of the countre.
5:11 But ther was there nye vnto the mountayns a greate heerd of swyne fedynge,
5:12 Ꟶ all the deuyls besought him, sayinge: sende vs in to the heerd of swyne, that we maye enter into them.
5:13 And anone Iesus gaue them leaue. And the vncleane spretes went out, and entred in to the swyne. And the heerd was caryed headlyng into the see. They were allmost .ij.M. and were drowned in the see.
5:14 And the swyne heerdes fleed, and tolde it in the cytie, and in the feldes. And they went out for to se, what had happened:
5:15 Ꟶ came to Iesus, and sawe him that was vexed with the fende Ꟶ had the Legion, syt, both clothed and in his ryght mynde, and they were afrayed.
5:16 And they that sawe it tolde them, how it had happened to him that was possessed wyth the deuyll: Ꟶ also of the swyne.
5:17 And they beganne to praye hym, that he wolde departe out of their coast.
5:18 And when he was come into the shippe, he that had the deuyll, prayed hym, that he myght be wt him.
5:19 Howbeit, Iesus wolde not suffre hym, but sayde vnto him: go to thyne awne house and to thy frendes, and shewe them how great thynges the Lorde hath done for the, and how he hath had compassyon on the.
5:20 And he departed, Ꟶ beganne to publyshe in the ten cytyes, how greate thinges Iesus had done for hym, and all men dyd merueyle.
5:21 And when Iesus was come ouer agayne by shyppe vnto the other syde, moch people gathered vnto him, and he was nye vnto the see.
5:22 And beholde, ther came one of the rulers of the Synagoge, whose name was Iairus: and when he sawe him, he fel downe at his fete,
5:23 and besought hym greatly, sayinge: my daughter lyeth at poynt of deeth, I pray the come, and laye thy hande on her, that she maye be safe and lyue.
5:24 And he went with hym, Ꟶ moch people folowed him, Ꟶ thronged hym.
5:25 And ther was a certen woman, which had bene diseased of an yssue of bloude .xij. yeres,
5:26 and had suffred many thinges of many physycions, Ꟶ had spent all that she had, Ꟶ felte none amendement at all, but rather was worsse, and worsse.
5:27 When she had herde of Iesus, she came in the preasse behinde him, Ꟶ touched his garment.
5:28 For she sayde: yf I maye but touch his clothes, I shall be whole.
5:29 And streyght waye the fountayne of her bloude was dryed vp, Ꟶ she felt in her body, that she was healed of that plage.
5:30 And Iesus immediatly felynge in him selfe, that vertue proceaded from him, tourned him aboute in the prease, and sayde, who touched my clothes?
5:31 And hys dyscyples sayde vnto him: thou seest the people thrust the, and askest, thou who dyd touch me?
5:32 And he loked round about for to se her that had done thys thynge.
5:33 But the woman fearing and trembling (knowyng what was done wyth in her) came, and fell downe before him, Ꟶ tolde him all the truth.
5:34 And he sayd vnto her: Daughter thy fayth hath saued the: go in peace, and be whole of thy plage.
5:35 Whyll he yet spake, ther came from the ruler of the Synagoges house, certayne which sayd: thy daughter is deed: why diseasest thou the Master any further?
5:36 Assone as Iesus hearde the worde that was spoken, he sayde vnto the ruler of the Synagoge: be not afrayed, onely beleue.
5:37 And he suffred no man to folowe him, saue Peter, and Iames, and Iohn the brother of Iames.
5:38 And he came vnto the house of the ruler of the Synagoge, and sawe the wondringe: and them that wepte and wayled greatly,
5:39 and went in, and sayde vnto them: why make ye this a doo, and wepe? The damosell is not deed, but slepeth.
5:40 And they laught him to scorne. But he put them all out, and taketh the father and the mother of the damosell, and them that were wyth him, and entreth in where the damosell laye,
5:41 Ꟶ taketh the damosell by the hande Ꟶ sayeth vnto hyr: Tabita, cumi: whych is (yf one do interprete it) damosell, I saye vnto the: aryse.
5:42 And streyght waye the damosell arose, and walked. For she was of the age of twelue yeres. And they were astonyed out of measure.
5:43 And he charged them straytely, that no man shuld knowe of it, and commaunded, to geue her meate.
6:1 And he departed thence, Ꟶ cam into hys awne countre, and hys dyscyples folowed hym.
6:2 And when the Sabboth daye was come, he beganne to teache in the synagoge. And many that hearde hym were astonnyed, and sayd: from whence hath he these thynges? And what wysdome is thys that is geuen vnto hym: and suche vertues that are wrought by hys handes?
6:3 Is not thys the carpenter Maryes sonne, the brother of Iames and Ioses and of Iuda Ꟶ Symon? Ꟶ are not hys systers here wyth vs? And they were offended at hym.
6:4 Iesus sayd vnto them: a Prophet is not despysed, but in hys awne countre, and amonge hys awne kynne, and in his owne houshold.
6:5 And he coulde there shewe no myracle, but layde hys handes vpon a fewe sycke folcke, and healed them,
6:6 and merueyled, because of theyr vnbelefe. And he went aboute by the tounes that laye on euery syde, teaching.
6:7 And he called the twelue, and beganne to sende them forth two Ꟶ two, and gaue them power agaynst vncleane spretes.
6:8 And commaunded them, that they shuld take nothing in their iorney saue a rodde onely: no scryppe, no bread, no money in theyr pourse,
6:9 but shuld be shood wt sandals. And that they shuld not put on two cootes.
6:10 And he sayde vnto them: whersoeuer ye entre in to an house, there abide, tyll ye departe thence.
6:11 And whosoeuer shall not receaue you nor heare you, when ye departe thence, shake of the duste that is vnder youre fete, for a witnesse vnto them. I saye verely vnto you: it shalbe easier for zodom Ꟶ Gomor in the daye of iudgement, then for that cytie.
6:12 And they went out Ꟶ preached, that men shuld repent:
6:13 Ꟶ they cast out many deuyls: Ꟶ annoynted many that were sycke wyth oyle, and healed them.
6:14 And kynge Herode hearde of hym (for hys name was spred abroade) and he sayde: Iohn Baptyste is rysen agayne from the deed, Ꟶ therfore myracles are wrought by him.
6:15 Other sayd it is Helyas: some sayd: it is a prophet, as one of the Prophetes.
6:16 But when Herode hearde of hym, he sayde: it is Iohn whom I beheaded, he is rysen from deeth agayne.
6:17 For Herode hym selfe had sent forth men of warre, and layed handes vpon Iohn, and bounde hym, Ꟶ cast hym into preson for Herodias sake, hys brother Phylyppes wyfe (because he had maryed her).
6:18 For Iohn sayde vnto Herode. It is not lawfull for the to haue thy brothers wyfe.
6:19 Herodias layd wayte for hym, and wolde haue kylled him, but she coulde not.
6:20 For Herod feared Iohn, knowing that he was a iust man Ꟶ an holy: Ꟶ gaue hym reuerence: and when he hearde hym, he dyd many thynges, and hearde hym gladly.
6:21 And when a conuenyent daye was come, that Herode on hys byrth daye, made a supper to the lordes hye captayns, Ꟶ chefe estates of Galile:
6:22 Ꟶ whan the daughter of the same Herodias cam in, Ꟶ daunsed, Ꟶ pleased Herode Ꟶ them that sate at bourde also: the kynge sayde vnto the damosell: aske of me what thou wilt, and I wyll geue it the.
6:23 And he sware vnto hyr: whatsoeuer thou shalt aske of me, I wyll geue it the euen vnto the one halfe of my kyngdome.
6:24 And she went forth, Ꟶ sayde vnto her mother: what shall I aske? she sayd: Iohn Baptystes head.
6:25 And she cam in streyght waye wyth haste vnto the kynge, Ꟶ asked, sayinge: I wyll, that thou geue me by and by in a charger, the heed, of Iohn Baptyst.
6:26 And the kynge was sory: howbeit for hys othes sake, and for theyr sakes whych sate at supper also, he wolde not cast her off.
6:27 And immediatly the kyng sent the hangman, and commaunded hys head to be brought in. And he went, and beheaded hym in the preson,
6:28 and brought his head in a charger, and gaue it to the damosell, and the damosell gaue it to her mother.
6:29 And when hys dyscyples hearde of it, they came, and toke vp hys body, and layed it in a graue.
6:30 And the Apostles gathered them selues together vnto Iesus, and told hym all thynges both what they had done, and what they had taught.
6:31 And he sayd vnto them come ye alone out of the waye into the wyldernes, Ꟶ rest a whyle. For there were many commers, and goers, and they had no leasure so moch as to eate.
6:32 And he went by shyp out of the waye into a deserte place.
6:33 And the people spyed them when they departed: Ꟶ many knewe hym, Ꟶ ranne a fote thyther out of all cyties, and cam thyther before them, and came together vnto hym.
6:34 And Iesus went out Ꟶ sawe moche people, Ꟶ had compassyon on them, because they were lyke shepe, not hauinge a shepherde. And he beganne to teach them many thynges.
6:35 And when the daye was now farre spent, hys discyples came vnto hym, sayinge: thys is a desert place, and now the tyme is farre passed,
6:36 let them departe, that they maye go into the countrey round about, and into the tounes, Ꟶ bye them bread: for they haue nothynge to eate.
6:37 He answered and sayd vnto them, geue ye them to eate. And they sayde vnto him: shall we go Ꟶ bye two hundred penyworth of bread, Ꟶ geue them to eate?
6:38 He sayde vnto them: how many loaues haue ye. Go Ꟶ loke. And when they had searched, they sayd: fyue Ꟶ two fysshes.
6:39 And he commaunded them, to make them all syt doune by companyes vpon the grene grasse.
6:40 And they sate doune here arowe and there arowe, by hundredes and by fyfties.
6:41 And whan he had taken the fyue loaues and the two fysshes, and loked vp to heauen, he blessed and brake the loaues, and gaue them to hys discyples, to set before them: Ꟶ the two fysshes deuided he among them all:
6:42 And they all dyd eate, and were satysfyed.
6:43 And they toke vp twelue baskettes full therof, and of the fysshes.
6:44 And they that dyd eate, were about fyue thousand men.
6:45 And streyght waye he caused his disciples to go into the shyppe, and to go ouer the see before vnto Bethsayda, whyle se sent awaye the people.
6:46 And assone as he had sent them awaye, he departed into a mountayne to pray.
6:47 And when euen was come, the shyppe was in the myddes of the see, and he alone on the lande,
6:48 Ꟶ he sawe them troubled in rowynge, for the wynde was contrary vnto them. And aboute the fourth watch of the nyght, he came vnto them, walkynge vpon the see, and wolde haue passed by them.
6:49 But when they sawe hym walkynge vpon the see, they supposed it had bene a sprete, Ꟶ cryed out:
6:50 for they all sawe hym, and were afrayed. And anone he talked wyth them, and sayd vnto them: be of good cheare, it is I, be not afrayed.
6:51 And he went vp vnto them into the shyppe, Ꟶ the wynde ceased, Ꟶ they were sore amased in them selues beyonde measure, and marueyled.
6:52 For they remembred not of the loaues, because their herte was blynded.
6:53 And whan they were ouer the water, they came into the lande of Genezareth Ꟶ drue vp into the hauen,
6:54 And assone as they were come out of the shyppe, streyght waye they knewe him,
6:55 and ranne forth through out all the regyon rounde about, Ꟶ began to cary about in beddes those that were sycke, when they heard that he was there.
6:56 And whyther soeuer he entred, into tounes, cytyes, or vyllages, they layde the sycke folkes in the streates, Ꟶ prayed hym that they myght touche, Ꟶ it were but the hemme of hys vesture. And as many as touched hym, were safe.
7:1 And the Pharyses came together vnto hym, Ꟶ dyuers of the Scrybes whych came from Ierusalem.
7:2 And when they sawe certaine of his discyples eate bread wyth commen (that is to saye, with vnwesshen) handes, they complayned.
7:3 For the Pharyses and all the Iewes, excepte they wasshe theyr handes ofte, eate not, obseruyng the tradicyons of the elders.
7:4 And when they come from the market, except they washe, they eate not. And many other thynges there be, which they haue taken vpon them to obserue, as the wasshynge of cuppes and cruses, and, brasen vessels, and of tables.
7:5 Then asked hym the Pharyses Ꟶ Scribes: why walke not thy dyscyples accordyng to the custome, ordeyned by the elders, but eate bread wyth vnwasshen handes?
7:6 He answered Ꟶ sayd vnto them: well prophesyed Esayas of you, ypocrytes, as it is wrytten: Thys people honoreth me wyth theyr lyppes, but theyr herte is farre from me:
7:7 howbeit, in vayne do they serue me, teachyng the doctrines and commaundementes of men.
7:8 For ye laye the commaundement of God a parte, Ꟶ obserue the constitucyons of men, as the wesshinge of cruses Ꟶ of cuppes, and many other soch lyke thynges ye do.
7:9 And he sayde vnto them: well, ye cast a syde the commaundement of God, to mayntayne youre awne constitucyons.
7:10 For Moses sayd: honoure thy father Ꟶ thy mother: Ꟶ whoso curseth father or mother, let him dye the death.
7:11 But ye saye: a man shall saye to father or mother, Corban: whych is: what gyfte soeuer commeth fro me, shalbe for thy profyt.
7:12 And so ye suffre him no more to do ought for hys father or his mother,
7:13 and make the worde of God of none effecte, through youre awne constitucyon whych ye haue ordeyned. And many soche thynges do ye.
7:14 And whan he had called all the people vnto hym, he sayde vnto them: herken vnto me, euery one of you, and vnderstande.
7:15 There is nothynge wyth out a man that can defyle him, when it entreth into him: but the thynges whych proceade out of a man, those are they that defyle the man.
7:16 If eny man haue eares to heare, let hym heare.
7:17 And when he came in to the house awaye from the people, his discyples asked him of the symilitude.
7:18 And he sayd vnto them: are ye also so greatly wyth out vnderstandinge? Do ye not yet perceaue, that what soeuer thynge from wtout, entreth into a man, it cannot defyle him,
7:19 because it entreth not into his hert but into the bely: Ꟶ goeth out into the draught, pourgyng out all meates?
7:20 And he sayde: that whych commeth out of a man
7:21 defyleth the man. For from wyth in, euen out of the herte of men proceade euyll thoughtes, aduoutry, fornicacyon, murther,
7:22 theft, couetousnes, fraude, deceyte, vnclennes, a wycked eye, blasphemyes, pryde, folyshnes:
7:23 all these euyll thynges come from wt in, and defyle a man.
7:24 And from thence he rose, Ꟶ went into the borders of Tyre Ꟶ Sidon: Ꟶ entred into an house, Ꟶ wolde that no man shuld haue knowen. But he coulde not be hyd.
7:25 For a certayne woman (whose daughter had a foule sprete) as soone as she heard of hym, came, and fell at hys fete.
7:26 The woman was a Greke out of the nacyon of Syrophenicia, Ꟶ she besought him, that he wolde cast out the deuyl from her daughter.
7:27 But Iesus sayd vnto her: let the chyldren fyrst be fedd. For it is not mete, to take the chyldrens bread, and to cast it vnto whelpes.
7:28 She answered Ꟶ sayde vnto hym: euen so lorde, neuerthelesse, the whelpes also eat vnder the table of the chyldrens cromes.
7:29 And he sayde vnto her: for thys sayinge go thy waye, the deuyl is gone out of thy daughter.
7:30 And when she was come home to her house, she founde that the deuyll was departed, and her daughter lyinge on the bedd.
7:31 And he departed agayne from the coastes of Tyre and Sidon, and came vnto the see of Galile thorow the myddes of the coastes of the ten cyties.
7:32 And they broughte vnto him one that was deaffe and had an impediment in hys speche, and they prayd hym to put his hande vpon him.
7:33 And when he had taken hym asyde from the people, he put hys fyngers into hys eares, and dyd spyt, Ꟶ touched hys tonge,
7:34 and loked vp to heauen, and syghed, and sayde vnto hym: Ephata, that is to saye, be opened.
7:35 And strayght waye his eares were opened, and the stryng of his tounge was lowsed, and he spake playne.
7:36 And he commaunded them, that they shulde tell no man. But the more he forbad them, so moch the more a greate deale they publisshed,
7:37 saying: He hath done all thynges well, he hath made both the deaffe to heare, and the dome to speake.
8:1 In those dayes when ther was a very great company, and had nothynge to eate. Iesus called his disciples to him, and sayde vnto them:
8:2 I haue compassion on the people, because they haue nowe bene wt me thre dayes, and haue nothing to eate:
8:3 and yf I sende them a waye fastyng to theyr awne houses, they shall faynt by the waye. For diuers of them came from farre.
8:4 And his discyples answered hym: where shulde a man haue bread here in the wyldernes to satysfye these?
8:5 And he asked them: how many loues haue ye? They sayde: seuen.
8:6 And he commaunded the people to syt downe on the grounde. And he toke the seuen loaues, and whan he had geuen thanckes, he brake, and gaue to hys dyscyples, to set before them. And they did set them before the people.
8:7 And they had a fewe small fysshes. And whan he had blessed, he commaunded them also to be sett before them.
8:8 And they dyd eate, and were suffysed. And they toke vp of the broken meate that was left seuen baskettes full.
8:9 And they that dyd eate: were about foure thousande. And he sent them awaye.
8:10 And anone he entred into a shyp with his disciples, and came into the parties of Dalmanutha.
8:11 And the Pharyses came forth, and beganne to dispute with hym, sekynge of hym a sygne from heauen, temptynge hym.
8:12 And whan he had syghted in hys sprete, he sayeth: why doth thys generacyon seke a sygne? Uerely I saye vnto you, there shall no sygne be geuen vnto thys generacyon.
8:13 And he left them, and went into the ship agayne, and departed ouer the water.
8:14 And they had forgotten to take bread wt them, nether had they in the shyp with them more then one loafe.
8:15 And he charged them, saying. Take hede, beware of the leuen of the Pharises, and of the leuen of Herode.
8:16 And they reasoned amonge them selues sayenge: We haue no bread.
8:17 And Iesus knewe it, and saith vnto them: why take ye thought, because ye haue no breed? perceaue ye not yet nether vnderstande? Haue ye youre hert yet blynded?
8:18 Haue ye eyes, and se not? and haue ye eares, and heare not? Do ye not also remembre?
8:19 When I brake fyue loaues among fyue thousande men, how many baskettes full of broken meat toke ye vp? They saye vnto him, twelue.
8:20 When I brake seuen amonge foure thousand, how many baskettes of the leauynges of the broken meate toke ye vp? They sayd: seuen.
8:21 And he sayd vnto them: how happeneth it that ye do not vnderstande?
8:22 And he came to Bethsayda, and they brought a blinde man vnto hym, and desired hym to touche him.
8:23 And he caught the blynde by the hand, and lead him out of the towne: and whan he had spyt in his eyes, and put his handes vpon him, he asked him yf he sawe ought.
8:24 And he loked vp, Ꟶ sayd: I se the men: for I perceaue them walke, as they were trees.
8:25 After that, he put hys handes agayne vpon hys eyes, and made hym se. And he was restored, and sawe euery man clearly.
8:26 And he sent him home to his house, saieng: nether go into the towne, ner tel it to eny in the towne.
8:27 And Iesus went out, Ꟶ hys disciples into the townes that longe to the cytie called, Cesarea Philippi. And by the waye he asked his disciples, saying vnto them: whom do men saye that I am?
8:28 And they answered: some saye, that thou art Iohn baptist, Ꟶ some saye, Helias. Agayne, some saye, that that thou arte one of the nombre of the prophetes.
8:29 And he sayde vnto them: but whom saye ye that I am? Peter answereth Ꟶ sayth vnto him: thou art very Christ.
8:30 And he charged them, that they shulde tell no man of him.
8:31 And he beganne to teach them how that the sonne of man must suffre many thinges, and be reproued of the elders, and of the hye prestes, and scribes, and be kylled, Ꟶ after thre dayes aryse agayne.
8:32 And he spake that sayinge openly. And Peter toke hym aside, and began to chyde him.
8:33 But he turned about, and loked on hys disciples, and rebuked Peter, saying: Go after me Satan. For thou sauerest not the thinges that be of God, but the thynges that be of men.
8:34 And when he had called the people vnto hym with hys discyples also, he sayde vnto them. Whosoeuer wyll folowe me, lett hym forsake him self, and take vp hys crosse, and folowe me.
8:35 For whosoeuer wil saue his life, shal lose it. But whosoeuer shal lose his life, for my sake Ꟶ the gospels, the same shall saue it.
8:36 For what shall it profet a man, yf he wynne all the world, and lose his awne soule:
8:37 or what shall a man geue to redeme hys soule with all agayne?
8:38 Whosoeuer therfore shalbe asshamed of me and of my wordes, in thys aduoutrous and synfull generacion: of hym also shall the sonne of man be asshamed, when he commeth in the glorye of hys father with the holy angels.
9:1 And he sayd vnto them: Uerely, I saye vnto you: Ther be some among them that stande here, which shall not taste of death, tyll they haue sene the kyngdome of God come with power.
9:2 And after sixe dayes Iesus taketh Peter and Iames, and Iohn, and leedeth them vp into an hye mountayne out of the waye alone: and he was transfigured before them.
9:3 And hys rayment dyd shyne, and became very whyte, euen as snowe: so whyt as no fuller can make vpon the earth.
9:4 And ther appeared vnto them Elias with Moses. And they talked with Iesu.
9:5 And Peter answered Ꟶ sayth to Iesu: Master, here is good beynge for vs: let vs make also .iij. tabernacles, one for the, and one for Moses, and one for Helias.
9:6 For he wyst not what he sayd: for they were afrayed.
9:7 And there was a cloude that shadowed them. And a voyce came out of the cloude, saying: Thys is my beloued sonne: heare hym.
9:8 And sodenly whan they had loked rounde aboute, they sawe no man more then Iesus onely with them.
9:9 And as they came downe from the hyll, he charged them, that they shuld tell no man those thynges that they had sene, tyll the sonne of man were rysen from death agayne.
9:10 And they kepte that saieng with them, and demaunded one of another, what the rysyng from death agayne shulde meane?
9:11 And they asked hym, sayenge: why then saye the scribes, that Helias must first come?
9:12 He answered and sayd: vnto them: Helias verely when he commeth fyrst, restoreth all thynges. And the sonne of man (as it is writen of him) shall suffre many thynges, Ꟶ be sett at naught.
9:13 But I saye vnto you, thut Helias is come, and they haue done vnto hym whatsoeuer they wolde, as it was wryten of hym.
9:14 And whan he came to hys disciples, he sawe moch people about them, Ꟶ the scribes disputing wt them.
9:15 And streight waye all the people (whan they behelde hym) were amased, and ran to hym, Ꟶ saluted hym.
9:16 And he asked the scribes: what dispute ye among them?
9:17 And one of the company answered, Ꟶ sayde: Master, I haue brought vnto the my sonne, whych hath a dome sprete.
9:18 And whensoeuer he taketh him, he teareth him, and he fometh, and gnassheth with hys teth, and pineth awaye. And I spake to thy disciples that they shuld caste hym out, and they coulde not.
9:19 He answereth him, and sayth: O faithles nacion, how longe shall I be wt you? How longe shall I suffre you? Brynge hym vnto me.
9:20 And they brought him vnto hym. And assone as the sprete sawe hym, he tare him. And he fell downe on the ground, walowing Ꟶ foming.
9:21 And he asketh his father: how longe is it ago: sens thys happened hym? And he sayde: of a chylde:
9:22 Ꟶ oft tymes it hath cast hym into the fyre, Ꟶ into the water, to destroye hym. But yf thou canst do eny thing, haue mercy on vs and helpe vs.
9:23 Iesus sayd vnto hym: yf thou couldest beleue all thynges are possyble to hym that beleueth.
9:24 And streyght waye the father of the chyld cried with teares, saieng, Lord, I beleue, helpe thou myne vnbelefe.
9:25 When Iesus sawe that the people came runnyng together vnto him, he rebuked the foule sprete, saying vnto hym: Thou domme Ꟶ deeff sprete, I charge the come out of him, and entre nomore into him.
9:26 And the sprete (whan he had cried, Ꟶ rent hym sore) came out of hym, and he was as one that had bene dead, in so moch that many sayd: he is deed.
9:27 But Iesus caught hys hand, and lyft him vp: and he rose.
9:28 And when he was come into the house, his disciples asked hym secretly: why coulde not we cast hym oute?
9:29 And he sayde vnto them: this kynde can come forth by nothing: but by prayer and fastynge.
9:30 And they departed thens, Ꟶ toke theyr iorney thorow Galile, and he wold not, that eny man shuld knowe it.
9:31 For he taught hys disciples, and sayd vnto them: the sonne of man shalbe deliuered into the handes of men, and they shall kyll hym: and after that he is kylled, he shall aryse agayne the thyrd daye.
9:32 But they wist not what he sayde, and were afrayed to aske him.
9:33 And he came to Capernaum. And when he was come into the house, he asked them: what was it that ye disputed among yourselues by the waye?
9:34 And they helde their peace: for by the waye they had reasoned among them selues, who shuld be the chefest.
9:35 And when he was set downe, he called the twelue to hym, and sayd vnto them: yf eny man desyre to be fyrst, the same shalbe last of all, and seruaunt to all.
9:36 And he toke a chylde, and set hym in the myddes of them: Ꟶ when he had taken hym in hys armes, he sayde vnto them:
9:37 whosoeuer receaueth eny soche a childe in my name, receaueth me. And whosoeuer receaueth me, receaueth not me, but hym that sent me.
9:38 Iohn answered hym, sayinge: Master, we sawe one cast out deuyls in thy name, Ꟶ he foloweth not vs: and we forbade hym, because he foloweth vs not.
9:39 But Iesus sayde: forbyd him not. For ther is no man whych (yf he do a myracle in my name) can lyghtely speake euill of me.
9:40 For he that is not agaynst vs, is on oure parte.
9:41 Whosoeuer shall in my name geue you a cuppe of water to drincke, because ye belonge to Chryste, verely I saye vnto you: he shall not loose hys reward.
9:42 And whosoeuer shall offende one of these lytelons, that beleue in me, it were better for hym, yf a mylstone were hanged aboute his necke, and he were cast into the see.
9:43 Wherfore yf thy hande hynder the, cut it of. It is beter for the, to entre into lyfe maymed, then (hauynge two handes) to go into hell, into fyre that neuer shalbe quenched,
9:44 where theyr worme dyeth not, and the fyre goeth not out.
9:45 And yf thy fote be a hynderaunce vnto the, cut it of. It is better for the to go halt into lyfe, then (hauynge two fete) to be cast into hell, into fyre that neuer shalbe quenched:
9:46 where theyr worme dyeth not, and the fyre goeth not out.
9:47 And yf thyne eye hinder the plucke it out. It is better for the to go into the kyngedome of God wyth one eye, then (hauynge two eyes) to be cast into hell fyre:
9:48 where theyr worme dyeth not, and the fyre goeth not out.
9:49 Euery man shalbe salted wyth fyre. And euery sacrifyce shalbe seasoned with salt.
9:50 Salt is good. But yf the salt be vnsauery, what shall ye season ther wyth? haue salt in youre selues: and haue peace amonge youre selues, one wyth another.
10:1 And whan he rose from thence, he went into the coastes of Iurye through the regyon that is beyonde Iordan: And the people resorted vnto hym a freshe. and as he was wont, he taught them agayne.
10:2 And the Pharyses came, and asked hym. Is it lawfull for a man to put awaye hys wyfe: to proue hym.
10:3 And he answered, and sayd vnto them: what dyd Moses byd you do:
10:4 and they sayde, Moses suffered to wryte a testimonall of deuorsement, and to put her awaye.
10:5 And Iesus answered and sayde vnto them: For the hardnes of youre herte he wrote thys precept vnto you.
10:6 But at the fyrst creacyon. God made them man and woman.
10:7 Therfore shall a man leaue hys father Ꟶ mother, Ꟶ byde by, hys wyfe,
10:8 Ꟶ they twayne shalbe one fleshe. So then are they now not twayne, but one fleshe.
10:9 Therfore, what God hath coupled together let not man separate.
10:10 And in the house hys discyples asked him againe of the same matter.
10:11 And he sayeth vnto them. Whosoeuer putteth awaye hys wyfe, Ꟶ maryeth another, breaketh wedlocke to her warde.
10:12 And yf a woman forsake her husband, and be maryed to another, she commytteth aduoutrye.
10:13 And they brought chyldren to hym, that he shulde touch them. And hys discyples rebuked those that brought them.
10:14 But when Iesus sawe it, he was dyspleased Ꟶ sayd vnto them: Suffre the children to come vnto me, forbyd them not. For of soch is the kyngdome of God.
10:15 Uerely I saye vnto you, whosoeuer doth not receaue the kyngdome of God as a childe, he shal not entre therin.
10:16 And whan he had taken them vp in hys armes, he put his handes vpon them, and blessed them.
10:17 And when he was gone forth into the waye, ther came one runnynge and kneled to hym, Ꟶ asked hym: good master, what shal I do, that I maye enheret eternall lyfe?
10:18 Iesus sayde vnto hym: why callest thou me good? There is no man good, but one, which is God.
10:19 Thou knowest the commaundementes: breake not matrimony: kyll not: steale not, beare no false wytnes: defraude no man: honoure thy father and mother.
10:20 He answered and sayd vnto hym: Master, all these, I haue obserued from my youth.
10:21 Iesus behelde hym, and fauoured hym, and sayd vnto hym: one thynge thou lackest. Go thy waye Sell that thou hast, and geue to the poore, and thou shalt haue treasure in heauen, and come, folowe me and take vp my crosse vpon thy shulders.
10:22 But he was discomforted because of that sayinge, and went awaye mournyng for he had great possessyons.
10:23 And whan Iesus had looked rounde aboute, he sayde vnto his discyples. How vneasye shall they that haue money: entre into the kyngdome of God.
10:24 And the discyples were astonnyed at hys wordes. But Iesus answereth againe, Ꟶ sayeth vnto them: children, how harde is it for them, that trust in money, to entre into the kingdome of God?
10:25 It is easyer for a camell to go thorow the eye of an nedle, then for the ryche to entre into the kyngdome of God.
10:26 And they were astonnyed out of measure, sayinge betwene them selues: who then can be saued?
10:27 Iesus loked vpon them, and sayd. with men it is vnpossible, but not with God: for with God all thynges are possyble.
10:28 And Peter beganne to saye vnto hym: Lo: We haue forsaken all, Ꟶ haue folowed the.
10:29 Iesus answered, Ꟶ sayde: Uerely I saye vnto you, ther is no man that hath forsaken house, or brethren, or systers, or father, or mother, or wyfe, or chyldren, or landes for my sake Ꟶ the Gospelles,
10:30 but he shall receaue an hundred foold nowe in this lyfe, houses and brethren, and systers, and mothers, and chyldren, and landes wyth persecucyons: Ꟶ in the worlde to come, eternall lyfe.
10:31 But many that are fyrst, shalbe last: Ꟶ the last, fyrst.
10:32 And they were in the waye goynge vp to Ierusalem. And Iesus went before them, and they were amased, Ꟶ folowed, and were afrayde. And Iesus toke the twelue agayne, and beganne to tell them what thynges shulde happen vnto hym.
10:33 Beholde, we go vp to Ierusalem, Ꟶ the sonne of man shalbe delyuered vnto the hye Prestes and vnto the Scribes: and they shall condemne hym to deeth, and shall delyuer hym to the gentyls,
10:34 and they shall mocke hym, and scourge hym, spyt vpon him, and kyll hym. And thyrde daye he shall ryse agayne.
10:35 And Iames and Iohn the sonnes of zebede came vnto him, sayinge: Master: we wolde, that thou shuldest do for vs whatsoeuer we desyre.
10:36 He sayde vnto them: what wolde ye that I shuld do for you?
10:37 They sayde vnto hym: graunt vnto vs, that we maye sytte, one on thy ryght hande, and the other on thy lyfte hande, in thy glory.
10:38 But Iesus sayd vnto them: Ye wote not what ye aske: Can ye dryncke of the cup, that I dryncke of? and be baptysed wyth the baptyme, that I am baptysed with?
10:39 And they sayde vnto hym: that we can. Iesus sayde vnto them: ye shall in dede dryncke of the cup that I dryncke of: and wyth the baptyme that I am baptysed wyth all, shall ye be baptysed in:
10:40 but to syt on my ryght hande Ꟶ on my lyfte hande, is not myne to geue, but it shall happen vnto them, for whom it is prepared.
10:41 And when the ten hearde it, they began to dysdayne at Iames and Iohn.
10:42 But Iesus whan he had called them to hym, sayd vnto them: ye knowe, that they whych are sene to beare rule amonge the people, raygne as Lordes ouer them.
10:43 And they that be greate amonge them, exercyse auctoryte vpon them. Neuertheles, so shall it not be amonge you: but whosoeuer of you wylbe greate amonge you, shalbe youre mynister.
10:44 And whosoeuer wylbe chefe, shalbe seruaunt of all.
10:45 For the sonne of man also came not to be mynystred vnto: but to mynister, and to geue hys lyfe for the redempcyon of many.
10:46 And they came to Hierico: And as he went out of the cytie of Hierico wyth his dyscyples, and a greate nombre of people: blynde Bartymeus the sonne of Tymeus, sate by the hye wayes syde beggyng.
10:47 And when he hearde that it was Iesus of Nazazeth, be began to crye, and to saye: Iesus, thou sonne of Dauid, haue mercy on me.
10:48 And many rebuked hym, that he shuld holde hys peace. But he cryed the more a greate deale: thou sonne of Dauid haue mercy on me.
10:49 And Iesus stode styll, and commaunded hym to be called: And they called the blynde, sayinge vnto hym: Be of good comforte: ryse he calleth the.
10:50 And he threwe awaye hys cloke, and rose, and came to Iesus.
10:51 And Iesus answered, and sayde vnto hym: what wylt thou that I do vnto the? The blynde sayde vnto hym: Master, that I myght se.
10:52 Iesus sayde vnto hym: go thy waye, thy fayth hath saued the. And immediatly he receaued hys syght, Ꟶ folowed Iesus in the waye.
11:1 And when they came nye to Ierusalem vnto Betphage Ꟶ Bethanie, besydes mount Olyuete, he sendeth forth two of hys discyples,
11:2 and sayeth vnto them: Go youre waye into the toune, that is ouer agaynst you. And as sone as ye be entred into it: ye shall fynde a colte bounde, wheron neuer man sate: lose hym, and brynge hym hither.
11:3 And yf eny man saye vnto you: why do ye so? Saye ye, that the Lorde hath neade of hym: and streyght waye he wyll sende hym hyther.
11:4 And they went theyr waye, and found the colte tyed by the dore wythout in a place wher two wayes met, Ꟶ they losed hym.
11:5 And dyuers of them that stode there, sayde vnto them: what do ye, losynge the colte?
11:6 And they sayde vnto them, euen as Iesus had commaunded. And they let them go.
11:7 And they brought the colte to Iesus and cast theyr garmentes on hym: and he sate vpon hym.
11:8 And many sprede theyr garmentes in the waye. Other cut downe braunches of the trees, and strawed them in the waye.
11:9 And they that went before and they that folowed: cryed, saying. Hosanna: blessed is he that commeth in the name of the Lorde.
11:10 Blessed be the kyngdome, that commeth in the name of hym that is Lorde of oure father Dauid: Hosanna in the hyest
11:11 And the Lorde entred into Ierusalem and into the temple. And when he had loked round about vpon all thynges, and now the euen tyde was come, he went out vnto Bethany wyth the twelue.
11:12 And on the morow when they were come out from Bethany, he hungred.
11:13 And whan he had spyed a fyg tree a farre of, hauynge leaues, he came to se, yf he myght fynde eny thynge theron. And when he came to it, he founde nothynge but leaues: for the tyme of fygges was not yet.
11:14 And Iesus answered, and sayde vnto the fygg tre: neuer man eate frute of the here after whyll the worlde standeth. And hys discyples hearde it.
11:15 And they came to Ierusalem. And Iesus went into the temple, Ꟶ beganne to cast out them that solde and bought in the temple, and ouer threwe the tables of the money chaungers, Ꟶ the stoles of them that solde doues:
11:16 and wolde not suffre, that eny man shuld carye a vessel thorow the temple.
11:17 And he taught, sayinge vnto them: is it not wrytten: my house shalbe called the house of prayer vnto all nacyons? But ye haue made it a denne of theues.
11:18 And the Scrybes and hye prestes hearde it, and sought howe to destroye hym. For they feared hym, because all the people marueled at hys doctryne.
11:19 And when euen was come, Iesus went out of the cytie.
11:20 And in the morninge as they passed by, they sawe the fygge tree dryed vp by the rotes.
11:21 And Peter remembred, and sayde vnto him: master, beholde, the fygg tree whych thou cursedst, is wyddred awaye.
11:22 And Iesus answered and sayde vnto them: haue confydens in God.
11:23 Uerely I saye vnto you, that whosoeuer shall saye vnto thys mountayne: remoue, and cast thy selfe into the see, and shall not doute in hys herte, but shall beleue that those thinges which he sayeth shal come to passe, whatsoeuer he sayeth he shall haue.
11:24 Therfore I saye vnto you, what thinges soeuer ye desyre when ye praye, beleue that ye receaue them, and ye shall haue them.
11:25 And when ye stand Ꟶ praye, forgeue, yf ye haue ought agaynst eny man, that youre father also whych is in heauen, maye forgeue you youre trespasses.
11:26 
11:27 And they came agayne to Ierusalem. And as he walked in the temple, ther came to him the hye Prestes, Ꟶ the Scrybes, Ꟶ the elders,
11:28 and saye vnto hym: by what auctorite doest thou these thynges? and who gaue the thys auctorite, to do these thynges?
11:29 Iesus answered, and sayd vnto them: I wyll also aske of of you a certayne thynge Ꟶ answere ye me, Ꟶ I will tell you by what auctorite I do these thinges.
11:30 The baptime of Iohn, whether was it from heauen or of men? Answer me.
11:31 And they thought in them selues, sayinge: yf we saye, from heauen: he wyll saye why then did ye not beleue hym?
11:32 but yf they had sayd, of men, they feared the people. For all men counted Iohn, that he was a verye Prophete.
11:33 And they answered Ꟶ sayd vnto Iesu: we cannot tell. And Iesus answered, and sayd vnto them: nether will I tell you by what auctorite I do these thinges.
12:1 And he beganne to speake vnto them by parables. A certayne man planted a vyneyarde, and compassed it aboute wt an hedge, and ordeined a wyne presse, and bylt a toure, and let it out to hyre vnto husbandmen, and went into a straunge countre.
12:2 And when the tyme was come, he sent to the husbandmen a seruaunt, that he myght receaue of the husbandmen of the frute of the vyneyarde.
12:3 And they caught hym, and bet hym, and sent hym awaye agayne emptye.
12:4 And moreouer, he sent vnto them another seruaunt, and at hym they cast stones and brake hys heed, Ꟶ sent him awaye agayne all to reuyled.
12:5 And agayne, he sent another, and him they kylled: and many other, beatynge some, and kyllinge some.
12:6 And so whan he had yet but one beloued sonne, he sent him also at the last vnto them, sayinge: they wyll feare my sonne.
12:7 But the husbandmen sayd amongest them selues: this is the heyre: come let vs kyl him, Ꟶ the inheritaunce shalbe oures.
12:8 And they toke him Ꟶ kylled him, Ꟶ cast hym out of the vyneyard.
12:9 What shall therfore the Lorde of the vyneyarde do? He shall come, ad destroye the husbandmen, Ꟶ let out the vyneyarde vnto other.
12:10 Haue ye not red this scrypture? The stone whych the buylders dyd refuse, is become the chefe stoone of the corner?
12:11 this is the Lordes doynge, Ꟶ it is meruelous in oure eyes.
12:12 They went about also to take him, Ꟶ feared the people. For they knewe, that he had spoken the parable agaynst them. And they left hym and went theyr waye:
12:13 And they sent vnto hym certayne of the Pharises Ꟶ Herodes seruauntes, to take him in his wordes.
12:14 And assone as they were come, they sayd vnto him: Master, we knowe that thou arte true, Ꟶ carest for no man: for thou consyderest not the outward appearaunce of men, but teachest the waye of God truly: Is it laufull to paye tribute to Cesar, or not?
12:15 Ought we to geue, or ought we not to geue? But he vnderstode theyr symulacyon, and sayd vnto them: Why tempte ye me? Bringe me a peny, that I maye se it.
12:16 And they brought it. And he sayeth vnto them: Whose is thys ymage Ꟶ superscripcyon? And they sayde vnto hym: Cesars.
12:17 And Iesus answered, and sayde vnto them: Geue to Cesar the thinges that belonge to Cesar: and to God, the thynges whych perteyne to God. And they meruelled at hym.
12:18 There came also vnto hym the Saduces, whych saye that ther is no resurreccyon. And they asked hym sayinge:
12:19 Master Moses wrote vnto vs, yf eny mans brother dye, and leaue hys wyfe behynde hym, and leaue no chyldren: that hys brother shuld take hys wyfe, and reyse vp seed vnto hys brother.
12:20 There were seuen brethren, and the fyrst toke a wyfe: and when he dyed, left no seed behynde hym.
12:21 And the seconde toke hyr, and dyed: nether left he any seed. And the thyrde lykewyse.
12:22 And seuen had her, and left no seed behynde them. Last of all the wyfe dyed also.
12:23 In the resurreccyon therfore when they shall ryse agayne: whose wyfe shall she be of them? For seuen had her to wyfe.
12:24 And Iesus answered, and sayd vnto them: Do ye not therfore erre, because ye vnderstande not the scriptures, nether the power of God?
12:25 For when they shall ryse agayne from deeth, they nether mary, nor are maryed: but are as the angels, whych are in heauen.
12:26 As touching the deed, that they ryse agayne: haue ye not redde in the boke of Moses, how in the bushe, God spake vnto hym, sayinge: I am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob?
12:27 He is no God of deed, but the God of lyuynge. Ye are therfore greatly deceaued.
12:28 And whan ther came one of the Scrybes, and had hearde them disputynge to gether (and perceaued that he had answered them well) he asked hym: whych is the fyrst of all the commaundementes?
12:29 Iesus answered him, the fyrste of all the commaundementes is: Heare O Israell: The Lorde oure God, is Lord onely:
12:30 And thou shalt loue the Lorde thy God with all thy hert, Ꟶ wyth all thy soule, and wyth all thy mynde, and with all thy strength. This is the fyrste commaundment.
12:31 And the seconde is lyke vnto thys: Thou shalt loue thy neyghbour as thy selfe. Ther is none other commaundment greater then these.
12:32 And the Scrybe sayde vnto him: well master, thou hast sayd the truthe, for ther is one God, Ꟶ ther is none but he.
12:33 And to loue hym wyth all the herte, and wyth all the mynde, Ꟶ wyth all the soule, Ꟶ wyth all the strength: and to loue a mans neyghbour as hym selfe, is a greater thynge, then all burt offerynges and sacrifyces.
12:34 And when Iesus sawe that he answered discretly, he sayde vnto hym: Thou art not farre from the kyngdome of God. And no man after that, durst aske hym any questyon.
12:35 And Iesus answered Ꟶ sayde, teachinge in the temple: how saye the Scrybes that Chryst is the sonne of Dauid?
12:36 for Dauid him selfe inspired wt the holy goost, sayd: The Lorde sayde to my Lorde, syt on my ryght hande tyll I make thyne enemyes thy fote stole.
12:37 Dauid him selfe calleth him Lord: Ꟶ how is he then hys sonne? And moche people hearde him gladly:
12:38 And he sayde vnto them in his doctrine: beware of the Scribes, which loue to go in longe clothynge: Ꟶ loue salutacions in the market places,
12:39 and the chefe seates in the congregacyons, and the vppermost roumes at feastes:
12:40 whych deuoure wydowes houses, and vnder a pretence, make longe prayers. These shall receaue greater dampnacyon.
12:41 And whan Iesus sat ouer agaynst the treasury, he behelde, how the people put money into the treasury. And many that were ryche, cast in moch.
12:42 And ther cam a certayne poore wydowe, and she threwe in two mytes, whych make a farthynge.
12:43 And he called vnto him hys discyples Ꟶ sayeth vnto them. Uerely I saye vnto you, that thys poore wydowe hath cast moare in, then all they which haue cast into the treasury.
12:44 For they all dyd cast in of their superfluyte: but she of her pouerte, dyd cast in all that she had, euen all her lyuynge.
13:1 And as he went of the temple, one of his discyples sayde vnto hym: Master, se what stones, and what byldynges are here.
13:2 And Iesus answered and sayde vnto hym: Seest thou these greate buyldynges? There shall not be lefte one stone vpon another, that shall not be throwen downe.
13:3 And as he sate on mounte Olyuete, ouer agaynst the temple, Peter, and Iames, and Iohn, and Andrew, asked hym secretly:
13:4 tell vs, when shal these thynges be? And what is the sygne when all these thynges shalbe fulfylled?
13:5 And Iesus answered them, and began to saye: take hede, lest any man deceaue you.
13:6 For many shall come in my name sayinge: I am Chryst, and shall deceaue many.
13:7 When ye shall heare of warres, and tydinges of warres, be ye not troubled. For soch thynges must nedes be? But the ende is not yet.
13:8 For ther shall nacyon aryse agaynste nacyon, and kyngdome agaynste kyngdome. And ther shalbe erth quakes in all quarters, and famyshment shall ther be, and troubles. These are the begynnynge of sorowes.
13:9 But take ye hede to youre selues. For they shall brynge you vp to the counsels, and into the synagoges, and ye shalbe beaten: yee, and shalbe brought before rulers and kinges for my sake, for a testimoniall vnto them.
13:10 And the Gospell must fyrste be publyshed amonge all nacyons.
13:11 But when they leade you and present you, take ye no thought, nether ymagin aforehande what ye shall saye: but what soeuer is geuen you in the same houre, that speake. For it is not ye that speake, but the holy ghost.
13:12 The brother shall delyuer vp the brother to deeth, and the father the sonne: and the chyldren shall ryse agaynste theyr fathers Ꟶ mothers, and shall put them to deeth.
13:13 And ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake. But whoso endureth vnto the ende, the same shalbe safe.
13:14 Moreouer, when ye se the abhominacion of desolacion (wherof is spoken by Daniel the prophet) stand where it ought not: let hym that readeth vnderstand. Then lett them that be in Iurye, flye to the mountaynes.
13:15 And let hym that is on the house toppe, not go downe into the house, nether entre therin, to fetch eny thing out of his house.
13:16 And let him that is in the felde, not tourne backe agayne vnto the thinges which he left behynde him, for to take his clothes with him.
13:17 Wo shall be then to them that are with chylde, and to them that geue sucke in those dayes.
13:18 But praye ye that youre flyght be not in the winter.
13:19 For ther shalbe in those dayes suche tribulacion, as was not from the begynnyng of creatures (which God created) vnto this tyme, nether shalbe.
13:20 And excepte that the Lord shuld shorten those dayes no flesshe shulde be saued. But for the electes sake, whom he hath chosen, he hath shortened those dayes.
13:21 And then, yf eny man saye to you, lo here is Christ: lo, he is there, beleue not.
13:22 For false Christes Ꟶ false prophetes shall ryse, Ꟶ shall shewe myracles Ꟶ wondres, to deceaue yf it were possible, euen the electe.
13:23 But take ye hede: behold, I haue shewed you all thinges before.
13:24 Moreouer, in those dayes, after that tribulacion, the sonne shall wexe darke, and the mone shal not geue her light,
13:25 Ꟶ the starres of heauen shall fall: Ꟶ the powers whych are in heauen, shall moue:
13:26 And then shall they se the sonne of man commynge in the cloudes, wt greate power Ꟶ glory.
13:27 And then shall he sende hys angels, Ꟶ shall gather together his electe from the fowre wyndes, from the ende of the erthe, to the vttemost parte of heauen.
13:28 Learne a symilitude of the fygge tree. When his braunche is yet tender, and hath brought forth leaues, ye knowe, that sommer is neare.
13:29 So ye in lyke maner: when ye se these thynges come to passe: vnderstand, that he is nye euen at the dores.
13:30 Uerely I saye vnto you, that thys generacion shall not passe, tyll these thinges de done.
13:31 Heauen and erth shall passe, but my wordes shall not passe;
13:32 But of that daye Ꟶ tyme knoweth no man: no not the Angels which are in heauen: nether the sonne him selfe: saue the father only.
13:33 Take hede, watche Ꟶ praye, for ye knowe not when the tyme is
13:34 As a man which is gone into a straunge contrey, and hath lefte his house, and geuen his substaunce to his seruauntes, and to euery man his worke, and commaunded the porter to watche.
13:35 Watche ye therfore, for ye knowe not when the master of the house will come, at euen, or at mydnyght, whether at the cocke crowyng, or in the dawnynge:
13:36 lest yf he come sodenly, he finde you slepynge.
13:37 And that I saye vnto you, I saye vnto all watche.
14:1 After two dayes was Easter, and the dayes of swete breed And the hye Prestes and the Scribes sought, how they myghte take hym by crafte, Ꟶ put him to deeth.
14:2 But they sayde: not in the feast daye, leest any busynes aryse amonge the people.
14:3 And whan he was at Bethania, in the house of Simon the leper, euen as he sate at meate, ther cam a woman hauyng an alabaster boxe of oyntment, called Narde, that was pure and costly: Ꟶ she brake the boxe, Ꟶ powred it on his heed.
14:4 And ther were some, that were not content wyth in them selues, Ꟶ sayde: what neded this waste of oyntment?
14:5 For it myght haue bene solde for more then thre hundred pens, Ꟶ haue bene geuen vnto the poore. And they grudged agaynst her.
14:6 And Iesus sayde: left her alone, why trouble ye her? She hath done a good worke on me.
14:7 For ye haue poore wt you all wayes Ꟶ when soeuer ye wyll, ye maye do them good: but me haue ye not alwayes.
14:8 She hath done that she coulde: she came a fore hande, to anoynt my body to the buryinge.
14:9 Uerely I saye vnto you: wheresoeuer this Gospell shalbe preached thorow out the whole worlde: this also that she hath done, shalbe rehearsed in remembraunce of her.
14:10 And Iudas Iscarioth, one of the twelue went awaye vnto the hye Prestes, to betraye him vnto them.
14:11 When they herde that, they were glad, and promysed that they wolde geue hym money. And he sought, how he myght conueniently betraye him.
14:12 And the fyrste daye of swete breed (when they offred Passeouer) his disciples sayd vnto him: where wylt thou that we go Ꟶ prepare, that thou mayest eate the Passeouer?
14:13 And he sendeth forth two of his disciples, Ꟶ sayeth vnto them: Go ye into the cytie, Ꟶ ther shall mete you a man bearing a pitcher of water, folowe him.
14:14 And whither soeuer he goeth in, saye ye to the good man of the house, the master sayeth: where is the geest chambre, where I shall eate passeouer wyth my disciples?
14:15 And he wyll shewe you a greate parlour, paued and prepared: there make ready for vs.
14:16 And hys disciples went forth, and came into the cytie, and founde as he had sayde vnto them: and they made ready the Passeouer.
14:17 And whan it was now euen tyde he came with the .xij.
14:18 And as they sate at borde Ꟶ dyd eate Iesus sayde: Uerely I saye vnto you: one of you (that eateth with me) shall betraye me.
14:19 And they beganne to be sorie, Ꟶ to saye to him one by one: is it I? And another sayde: is it I?
14:20 He answered Ꟶ sayd vnto them: It is one of the .xij. euen he that dyppeth wyth me in the platter.
14:21 The sonne of man trulye goeth as it is wrytten of him: but wo to that man by whom the sonne of man is betrayed. Good were it for that man, yf he had neuer bene borne.
14:22 And as they dyd eate, Iesus toke breed: and whan he had geuen thankes he brake it, and gaue to them, and sayde: Take, eate, this is my body.
14:23 And he toke the cup, Ꟶ when he had geuen thankes he toke it to them, Ꟶ they all dranke of it.
14:24 and he sayde vnto them: This is my bloude of the newe Testament, whych is shedd for many.
14:25 Uerely I saye vnto you: I wyll dryncke nomore of the frute of the vyne: vntyll that daye, that I drincke it newe in the kyngdome of God.
14:26 And when they had sayde grace: they went out to mount Oliuete.
14:27 And Iesus sayeth vnto them: All ye shalbe offended because of me this nyght. For it is written: I wyll smyte the shepherd, Ꟶ the shepe shalbe scattered:
14:28 But after that I am rysen agayne, I wyll go into Galile before you.
14:29 Peter sayde vnto him: And though all men be offended, yet wyll not I.
14:30 And Iesus sayeth vnto him: Uerely I saye vnto the, that this daye, euen, in this nyght before the cocke crowe twyse, thou shalt denye me thre tymes.
14:31 But he spake more vehemently: no, yf I shulde dye with the, I wyll not denye the. Lyke wyse also sayde they all.
14:32 And they came into a place which was named Gethsemani. And he sayeth to his disciples: Syt ye here, whyle I go asyde, and praye.
14:33 And he taketh wyth him Peter Ꟶ Iames Ꟶ Iohn, Ꟶ began to waxe abasshed, Ꟶ to be in an agonye,
14:34 Ꟶ sayeth vnto them: My soule is heuy, euen vnto the deeth, tary ye here and watche.
14:35 And he went forth a lytle Ꟶ fell downe flatt on the grounde, Ꟶ prayed: that yf it were possible, the houre myght passe from him.
14:36 And he sayde: Abba father, all thinges are possible vnto the, take awaye this cup from me. Neuerthelesse, not that I will: but that thou wilt, be done.
14:37 And he cam Ꟶ founde them slepyng, Ꟶ sayeth to Peter: Simon, slepest thou? Couldest not thou watche one houre?
14:38 watche ye, Ꟶ praye, leest ye entre into temptacion, the sprete trulye is ready, but the flesh is weake.
14:39 And agayne he went asyde, Ꟶ prayde, and spake the same wordes.
14:40 And he returned, Ꟶ founde them a slepe agayne. For their eyes were heuy: nether wist they, what to answere him.
14:41 And he came the thirde tyme Ꟶ sayde vnto them: slepe hens forth, and take youre ease, it is ynough. The houre is come, beholde, the sonne of man is betrayed into the handes of synners.
14:42 Ryse vp, let vs go. Lo, he that betrayeth me, is at hande.
14:43 And immediatly whill he yet spake, commeth Iudas (which was one of the twelue) Ꟶ with him a greate nomber of people wyth sweardes and staues from the hye Prestes and Scrybes Ꟶ elders.
14:44 And he that betrayed him, had geuen them a generall token, saying: whosoeuer I do kysse, that same is he: take him Ꟶ leade him awaye warely.
14:45 And as sone as he was come, he goeth streight waye to him, Ꟶ sayeth vnto him: Master, Master, Ꟶ kyssed him:
14:46 And they layde their handes on him, and toke him.
14:47 And one of them that stode by, drue out a swearde, and smote a seruaunt of the hye Preste, Ꟶ cut of his eare.
14:48 And Iesus answered Ꟶ sayd vnto them: ye be come out as vnto a thefe wt sweardes Ꟶ wt staues, for to take me.
14:49 I was daylye wt you in the temple, teachinge, Ꟶ ye toke me not: but these thinges come to passe, that the scriptures shuld be fulfylled.
14:50 And they all forsoke him, Ꟶ ranne awaye.
14:51 And there folowed him a certayne younge man, clothed in lynnen vpon the bare, Ꟶ the yongmen caught him,
14:52 Ꟶ he lefte his lynnen garment, Ꟶ fled from them naked.
14:53 And they ledd Iesus awaye to the hyest Preste of all Ꟶ with him come all the hye Prestes, Ꟶ the elders, Ꟶ the Scribes.
14:54 And Peter folowed him a greate waye of (euen tyll he was come into the palace of the hye preste) and he sat with the seruauntes, and warmed him selfe at the fyre.
14:55 And the hye Prestes Ꟶ all the counsell sought for witnes agaynst Iesu, to put hym to death, Ꟶ founde none:
14:56 for many bare false witnes agaynste hym, but their wytnesses agreed not together.
14:57 And ther arose certayne, and brought falsse witnes agaynst hym, sayinge.
14:58 We herde him saye: I will destroye this temple that is made wyth handes, and wyth in thre dayes I wyll buylde another, made without handes.
14:59 But yet their wytnesses agreed not together.
14:60 And the hye Preste stode vp amongest them, and asked Iesus, sayinge: answerest thou nothinge? How is it that these beare witnes agaynst the?
14:61 But he helde his peace, Ꟶ answered nothing. Agayne the hyeste Preste asked him, Ꟶ sayde vnto him. Art thou Christ the sonne of the blessed?
14:62 And Iesus sayd: I am. And ye shall se the sonne of man sytting on the ryght hand of power, Ꟶ commyng in the cloudes of heauen.
14:63 Then the hye preste rent his clothes, Ꟶ sayd: what nede we eny further of wytnesses?
14:64 Ye haue heard blasphemy, what thincke ye? and they all condemned hym to be worthy of deeth.
14:65 And some beganne to spit at him, Ꟶ to couer his face, Ꟶ to beate him with fistes, and to saye vnto him, Areade: And the seruauntes boffeted him on the face.
14:66 And as Peter was beneth in the palace ther cam one of the wenches of the hyest preste:
14:67 Ꟶ when she sawe Peter warminge hym self, she loketh on hym, Ꟶ sayeth: wast not thou also wt Iesus of Nazareth?
14:68 And he denyed, saying: I knowe hym not, nether wote I what thou sayest. And he went out into the porche, and the cocke crewe.
14:69 And a damsell (whan she sawe him) beganne agayne to saye to them that stode by, this is one of them.
14:70 And he denyed it agayne. And an one after, they that stode by, sayde agayne to Peter: suerly thou art one of them, for thou art of Galyle, Ꟶ thy speache agreth therto.
14:71 But he beganne to cursse, Ꟶ to sweare, sayinge: I knowe not thys man of whom ye speake.
14:72 And agayne the cocke krewe, Ꟶ Peter remembred the worde that Iesus sayde vnto him: before the cocke crowe twyse, thou shalt denye me thre tymes. And he beganne to wepe.
15:1 And anone in the dawninge the hye Prestes helde a counsell wt the elders Ꟶ the Scrybes, Ꟶ the whole congregacion, Ꟶ bounde Iesus, Ꟶ ledde him awaye, Ꟶ deliuered him to Pilate.
15:2 And Pilate asked him: art thou the kynge of the Iewes? And he answered, Ꟶ sayd vnto hym: thou sayest it.
15:3 And the hye prestes accused him of many thinges.
15:4 So Pilate asked him agayne, sayinge: Answerest thou nothing? Beholde, how many thinges they lay vnto thy charge.
15:5 Iesus yet answered nothing, so that Pilate merueyled.
15:6 At that feast Pilate dyd delyuer vnto them a presoner: whomsoeuer they wolde desyre.
15:7 And ther was one that was named Barrabas, whych laye bounde with them that made insurreccyon: he had commytted murther.
15:8 And the people called vnto him, and began to desyre him, that he wolde do, accordynge as he had euer done vnto them.
15:9 Pylate answered them sayenge: Will ye that I let lowse vnto you the kyng of the Iewes?
15:10 For he knewe, that the hye Prestes had delyuered him of enuy.
15:11 But the hye prestes moued the people, that he shulde rather delyuer Barrabas vnto them.
15:12 Pylate answered agayne, and sayde vnto them: What wyll ye then that I do vnto him, whom ye call the kyng of the Iewes?
15:13 And they cryed agayne: crucifye him:
15:14 Pylate sayd vnto them, What euyll hath he done: And they cryed the moare feruentlye: Crucifye hym:
15:15 And so Pylate wyllinge to content the people, let lose Barrabas vnto them Ꟶ delyuered vp Iesus (when he had scourged hym) for to be crucifyed.
15:16 And the soudyers leed him awaye into the commen hall, and called together the whole multitude,
15:17 Ꟶ they clothed him with purple, Ꟶ they platted a croune of thornes, Ꟶ crouned him withall,
15:18 Ꟶ beganne to salute him: Hayle kynge of the Iewes.
15:19 And they smote hym, on the heed wt a rede and dyd spitt vpon hym Ꟶ bowed their knees, Ꟶ worshyped him.
15:20 And when they had mocked him, they toke the purple of hym, Ꟶ put his awne clothes on him, Ꟶ ledde hym out, to crucifye him.
15:21 And they compelled one that passed by, called Simon of Cyrene (the father of Alexander and Rufus) which came out of the felde, to beare his crosse.
15:22 And they brought him to a place named Golgotha (whych is yf a man interprete it: the place of deed mens sculles)
15:23 and they gaue him to drinke, wyne mingled wyth myrre, but he receaued it not.
15:24 And when they had crucifyed him they parted hys garmentes, castinge lotes vpon them, what euery man shulde take.
15:25 And it was aboute the third houre, Ꟶ they crucifyed him.
15:26 And the tytle of his cause was wrytten: The kynge of the Iewes.
15:27 And they crucified with him two theues. the one on the right hande, Ꟶ the other on his lyfte.
15:28 And the scrypture was fulfylled which sayeth: he was counted amonge the wycked.
15:29 And they that went by, rayled on hym: wagging their heedes, and saying: A wretche thou that destroyest the temple, and byldest it in thre dayes:
15:30 saue thy selfe, Ꟶ come doune from the crosse.
15:31 Lykewyse also mocked hym the hye Prestes amonge them selues with the Scrybes Ꟶ sayde, he saued other men, hym selfe he cannot saue.
15:32 Let Christ the kynge of Israell descende now from the crosse, that we maye se, Ꟶ beleue. And they that were crucifyed with him checked him also.
15:33 And when the syxte houre was come, darcknes arose ouer all the erth, vntyll the nynth houre.
15:34 And at the nynth houre Iesus cryed with a loude voyce, saying: Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? whych is (yf one interpret it) my God, my God why hast thou forsaken me?
15:35 And some of them that stode by, when they hearde that, sayd: beholde, he calleth for Helias.
15:36 And one ran, and fylled a sponge full of veneger, and put it on a rede, Ꟶ gaue him to drincke, sayinge: let him alone, let vs se, whether Helias wyll come and take hym downe:
15:37 But Iesus cryed with a loude voyce, and gaue vp the goost.
15:38 And the vayle of the temple dyd rent in two peces, from the toppe to the bottome.
15:39 And when the Centurion (which stode before him) sawe, that he so cryed, and gaue vp the goost, he sayde: truly this man, was the sonne of God.
15:40 Ther were also wemen a good waye of, beholdinge him: amonge whom was Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother of Iames the lytle: Ꟶ of Ioses, Ꟶ Mary Salome
15:41 (which also when he was in Galile had folowed him Ꟶ mynistred vnto him) and many other wemen, whych came vp with him vnto Ierusalem.
15:42 And now when the euen was come (because it was the daye of preparing that goeth before the Sabboth)
15:43 Ioseph of the cite of Aramathia, a noble Councellour which also loked for the kyngdome of God, came, Ꟶ went in boldely vnto Pilate, Ꟶ begged of hym the body of Iesu.
15:44 And Pilate merueled, that he was alredy deed, and called vnto him the Centurion, and asked of him, whether he had bene eny whyle deed.
15:45 And when he knewe the trueth of the Centurion, he gaue the body to Ioseph.
15:46 And he bought a lynnen clothe, and toke him downe, and wrapped him in the lynnen clothe, and layde him in a sepulcre, that was hewen out of the rocke.
15:47 And Mary Magdalen and Mary Ioses behelde where he was layde.
16:1 And when the Saboth was past, Mary Magdalen, Ꟶ Mary Iacob, Ꟶ Salome, bought swete odoures, that they myght come, Ꟶ anoynt him?
16:2 And early in the mornyng the fyrst daye of the Sabboth they came vnto the sepulcre, when the Sonne was rysen.
16:3 And they sayd among them selues: who shall rolle vs awaye the stone from the dore of the sepulchre?
16:4 And when they loked, they sawe how that the stone was rolled awaye, for it was a very greate one.
16:5 And they went into the sepulcre, and sawe a younge man syttyng on the ryghtsyde, clothed in a longe white garment, Ꟶ they were afrayed.
16:6 And he sayeth vnto them, be not afrayed: ye seke Iesus of Nazareth, whych was crucifyed. He is rysen, he is not here. Beholde the place where they had put him.
16:7 But goo youre waye, and tell his disciples, Ꟶ Peter, that he goeth before you into Galile: there shall ye se him, as he sayd vnto you.
16:8 And they went oute quyckly, and fledd from the sepulcre. For they trembled Ꟶ were amased. Nether sayde they eny thynge to eny man, for they were afrayed.
16:9 When Iesus was rysen early the fyrst daye after the Sabboth he appeared fyrst to Mary Magdalen, out of whom he had cast seuen deuyls.
16:10 And she went, and tolde them that were with him, as they mourned Ꟶ weapte.
16:11 And they, whan they herde that he was a lyue, and had appered vnto her, beleued it not.
16:12 After that, appeared he vnto two of them in a straunge fygure, as they walked, Ꟶ went in to the country.
16:13 And they went Ꟶ tolde it to the remnaunt. And they beleued not these also.
16:14 Afterwarde he appeared vnto the eleuen as they sate at meate: and cast in their teth their vnbelefe, and hardnes of herte: because they beleued not them whych had sene that he was rysen agayne from the deed.
16:15 And he sayde vnto them: Goo ye into al the worlde, and preache the gospell to all creatures,
16:16 he that beleueth Ꟶ is baptised, shalbe saued. But he that beleueth not, shalbe dampned.
16:17 And these tokens shall folowe them that beleue. In my name they shall cast out deuyls, they shall speake with newe tonges,
16:18 they shall dryue awaye serpentes. And yf they drynke any deadly thynge, it shall not hurte them. They shall laye their handes on the sycke, Ꟶ they shall recouer.
16:19 So then, when the Lorde had spoken vnto them he was receaued into heauen, and is on the right hand of God.
16:20 And they went forth, and preached euery where: the Lorde workyng with them and confyrmyng the worde with myracles folowing.