1:1 This is the worde of the Lord, which cam vnto Sophony the sonne of Chusi, the sonne of Gedoliah, the sonne of Amariah, the sonne of Hezekiah in the tyme of Iosiah the sonne of Amon kyng of Iuda.
1:2 I wyll gather vp all thynges in the lande (sayeth the Lord)
1:3 I wyll gather vp man Ꟶ beast: I wyll gather vp the foules in the ayre and the fysh in the see (to the greate decaye of the wycked) and wyll vtterly destroye the men out of the lande, sayeth the Lord.
1:4 I will stretch oute myne hande vpon Iuda, Ꟶ vpon all soch as dwell at Ierusalem. Thus will I rote oute the remnaunt of Baal from this place, Ꟶ the names of the Remurins and prestes:
1:5 yee, Ꟶ soch as vpon their house toppes worshyppe and bowe them selues vnto the hoste of heauen: which sweare by the Lord, Ꟶ by their Malchom also:
1:6 which starte a backe from the Lord, and nether seke after the Lord ner regarde hym.
1:7 Be still at the presence of the Lord God for the daye of the Lord is at hande: yee, the Lord hath prepared a slayne offeryng, and called hys gestes therto.
1:8 And thus shall it happen in the daye of the Lordes slaynofferyng. I will viset the princes, the kynges chyldren, and all soch as were straunge clothinge.
1:9 In the same daye also wyll I vyset all those, that treade ouer the thresholde so proudly, which fyll their Lordes house with robbery Ꟶ falshede.
1:10 At the same tyme (sayeth the Lorde) there shalbe herde a greate crye from the fysh porte and an howlinge from the other porte, and a greate murthur from the hylles.
1:11 Howle ye that dwell in the myll, for all the marchaunt people are gone, Ꟶ all they that were laden with syluer, are roted out.
1:12 At the same tyme wyll I seke thorow Ierusalem with lanternes, Ꟶ vyset them that continue in their dregges, and saye in their hertes: Tush, the Lord wyll do nether good ner euell.
1:13 Their goodes shalbe spoyled, and their houses layed waste: they shal buylde houses, Ꟶ not dwell in them, they shall plante vynyardes, but not drincke that wyne therof.
1:14 For the greate daye of the Lord is at hande, it is herde by Ꟶ commeth on a pace. Horrible is the tydinges of the Lordes daye, then shal the giaunte crye out:
1:15 for that daye is a daye of wrath, a daye of trouble and heuynesse, a daye of vtter destruccion Ꟶ misery, a darcke Ꟶ glomynge daye, a cloudy Ꟶ stormy daye,
1:16 a daye of the noyse of trompettes Ꟶ shawmes, agaynst the stronge cyties Ꟶ hie towres.
1:17 I will bringe the people into soch vexacion, that they shal go aboute lyke blinde men, because they haue synned agaynst the Lord. Their bloude shalbe shed as the dust, Ꟶ their bodies as the myre.
1:18 Nether their syluer ner their golde shalbe able to deliuer them in that wrothful daye of the Lorde, but the whole lande shalbe consumed thorow the fyre of his gelousy: for he shall soone make clene ryddaunce of al them that dwell in the lande.
2:1 Examyne youre selues Ꟶ serche O thou Nacyon that hast no desire to the law
2:2 or the thing go forth that God hath concluded, Ꟶ or the tyme come wherin man shall passe awaye as the dust: or the fearfull wrath of the Lord come vpon you:
2:3 yee, or the daye of the Lordes sore displeasure come vpon you. Seke the Lord all yee meke harted vpon earth, ye that worcke after his iudgement: seke ryghteousnesse, seke lowlynesse: that ye maye be defended in the wrothful daye of the Lord:
2:4 For Gaza shal be destroyed, and Ascalon shall be layed waste. They shall cast out Asdod at the noone daye, and Accaron shalbe pluckte vp by the rotes
2:5 Wo vnto you that dwell vpon the see coost ye murtherous people: the worde of the Lord shal come vpon you. O Canaan thou lande of the Philistines, I will destroye the, so that there shall no man dwell in the eny more,
2:6 Ꟶ as for the see coast, it shall be heardemens cotages Ꟶ shepe foldes:
2:7 yee, it shalbe a porcion for soch as remayne of the house of Iuda, to fede ther vpon. In the houses of Ascalon shall they rest towarde nyght: for the Lord their God shal vyset them, Ꟶ turne awaye their captiuite.
2:8 I haue herde the despite of Moab, Ꟶ the blasphemyes of the children of Ammon how they haue shamefully intreated my people, Ꟶ magnified them selues within the borders of their lande.
2:9 Therfore, as truly as I lyue (sayeth the Lord of hostes the God of Israel) Moab shalbe as Sodome Ꟶ Ammon as Gomorra: euen drie thorne hedges, salt pittes Ꟶ a perpetuall wyldernes. The resydue of my folcke shal spoyle them, the remnaunt of my people shal haue them in possession.
2:10 This shall happen vnto them for their pryde, because they haue dealte so shamefully with the Lorde of hostes people, Ꟶ magnified them selues aboue them.
2:11 The Lord shall be grymme vpon them, Ꟶ destroye all the goddes in the lande. And all the Iles of the Heathen shall worshippe him, euery man in his place.
2:12 Ye Moryans also shall perish wt my swerde:
2:13 yee, he shall stretch out his hande ouer the north, and destroye Assur. As for Niniue, he shall make it desolate, drye Ꟶ waste.
2:14 The flockes Ꟶ all the beastes of the people shall lye in the middest of it, pellicanes Ꟶ storckes shal abyde in the vpper postes of it, foules shall synge in the wyndowes, Ꟶ rauens shall sytt vpon the balckes, for the boordes of Cedre shalbe ryuen downe.
2:15 This is the proude and carelesse citye, that sayde in her herte. I am, and there is els none. O how is she made so waste, that the beastes lye therin? Who so goeth by, mocketh her, and poynteth at her with his fynger.
3:1 Wo to the abhominable, fylthie, Ꟶ cruell cytie:
3:2 which will not heare, ner be refourmed. Her trust is not in the Lorde, nether will she holde her to her God.
3:3 Her rulers within her are as roarynge lyons: her iudges are as wolues in the euenyng, whych leaue nothyng behinde them tyll the morowe.
3:4 Her prophetes are lyght personnes Ꟶ vnfaithfull men: her prestes vnhalowe the sanctuary Ꟶ do wronge vnder the pretence of the lawe.
3:5 But the iust lord that doth no vnright, was amonge them, euery morning shewing them his lawe clearly, Ꟶ ceassed not. But the vngodly wyll not lerne to be ashamed.
3:6 Therfore wil I rote oute this people, Ꟶ destroye their towres: yee, and make their stretes so voyde, that no man shal goo therin. Their cityes shalbe broken downe, so that no body shall be left, ner dwell there eny more.
3:7 I sayd vnto them: O feare me, and be content to be refourmed. That their dwellinge shulde not be destroyed, Ꟶ that there shulde happen vnto them none of these thynges, wherwith I shall vyset them. But neuertheles, they stande vp early; to folowe the fylthynes of their awne ymaginacions.
3:8 Therfore, ye shall wayte vpon me (sayth the Lorde) vntyll the tyme that I stande vp: for I am determined, to gather the people Ꟶ to bring the kingdomes together, that I may poure out myne anger, ye all my wrothfull dyspleasure vpon them. For al the worlde shall be consumed with the fyre of my gelousy.
3:9 And then wyll I clense the lyppes of the people, that they maye euerychone call vpon the name of the Lorde, and serue him with one shulder.
3:10 Soche as I haue subdued, and my children also whom I haue scatred abrode, shall brynge me presentes beyonde the waters of Ethiopia.
3:11 In that tyme shalt thou nomore be confounded, because of all thy ymagynacions, wher thorow thou haddest offended me: for I will take awaye the proude boasters of thyne honour from the, so that thou shalt nomore triumphe because of my holy hyl.
3:12 In the also wyll I leaue a small poore simple people, which shall trust in the name of the Lord.
3:13 The remnaunt of Israell shall do no wyckednes, ner speake lyes: nether shall there eny disceatfull tunge be founde in their mouthes. For they shalbe fed, and take their rest, and no man shal make them afrayed.
3:14 Geue thankes, O daughter Syon, be ioyfull, O Israel: reioyce Ꟶ be glad from thy whole hert, O daughter Ierusalem,
3:15 for the Lorde hath taken awaye thy punyshement, and turned backe thyne enemyes. The kyng of Israel, euen the Lord hym selfe is with the: so that thou nedest nomore to feare eny mysfortune.
3:16 In that tyme it shalbe sayde to Ierusalem: feare not, Ꟶ to Syon: let not thyne handes be slacke,
3:17 for the Lorde thy God is with the, it is he that hath power to saue: he hath a speciall pleasure in the, Ꟶ a maruelous loue towarde the: yee, he reioyseth ouer the wt gladnesse.
3:18 Soch as haue bene in heuynesse, wyll I gather together, and take out of thy congregacion: as for the shame and reprofe that hath bene layed vpon the, it shalbe farre from the.
3:19 And lo, in that tyme wyll I destroye al those that vexe the: I wil helpe the lame, and gather vp the cast awaye: yee, I will get them prayse and honour in all landes, where they haue bene put to shame.
3:20 At that same tyme wyll I brynge you in, Ꟶ at the same tyme will I gather you. I wil get you a name and a good reporte amonge all people of the erth, when I turne backe your captyuite before your eyes, sayeth the Lorde.