1:1 These are the wordes of the Preather, the sonne of Dauid, kynge of Ierusalem.
1:2 All is but moste vayne vanite (sayeth the Preacher) Ꟶ al is moste vayne (I say) Ꟶ but plaine vanite.
1:3 For what els hath a man, of all the labour that he taketh vnder the Sunne?
1:4 One generacyon passeth awaye, another commeth, but the earth abydeth styll.
1:5 The Sunne aryseth, the sunne goeth downe, Ꟶ returneth to hys place, that he maye there rise vp againe.
1:6 The winde goeth toward the South, Ꟶ turneth vnto the northe, fetchith his compasse, whirleth aboute, Ꟶ goth forth, Ꟶ his circuite returneth agayne to him selfe.
1:7 All floudes runne into the see, Ꟶ yet the see yt selfe is not fylled: for loke vnto what place the waters runne, thence they come to flowe agayne.
1:8 All thinges are so harde to be knowen, that no man can expresse them. The eye is not satisfyed wt syght, the eare is not fylled wt hearinge.
1:9 The thing that hath bene, commeth to passe agayne: Ꟶ the thinge that hath bene done, shall be done agayne, there is no new thing vnder the sunne.
1:10 Is there eny thing wherof it maye be sayde: lo, this is new? For it was longe agoo in the times that haue bene before vs.
1:11 The thing that is past, is out of remembraunce: Euen so the thinges that are for to come, shal no more be thought vpon amonge them that come after.
1:12 I my selfe the Preacher, was kyng of Israel at Ierusalem,
1:13 Ꟶ dyd applie my mynde to seke out Ꟶ search for the knowledge of all thinges that are done vnder heauen. Soch trauayle and labour hath God geuen vnto the children of men, to excercyse them selues therin.
1:14 Thus I haue consydred all the thinges that come to passe vnder the Sunne, and lo, they are all but vanite, Ꟶ vexacion of minde.
1:15 The croked cannot be made strayght, nor the thinge that is vnperfecte, cannot be acompted wt thinges that are perfecte.
1:16 I commoned wt mine awne herte, sayinge: lo, I am come to a great estate, Ꟶ haue gotten more wysdome, then all they that haue bene before me in Ierusalem. Yee my herte had greate experience of wisdome Ꟶ knowledge,
1:17 for there vnto I applied my mynde: that I myght knowe what were wisdome Ꟶ vnderstanding, what were errour Ꟶ folishnes: Ꟶ I perceaued, that this also was but a vexacyon of minde:
1:18 for where moch wisdome is, there is also greate trauaile Ꟶ disquietnes: Ꟶ the more knowledge a man hath, the more is hys care.
2:1 Then sayd I thus in my herte: Now go to, I wil take mine ease Ꟶ haue good dayes. But lo, that is vanite:
2:2 also in so moch that I sayd vnto the man gyuen to laughter: thou arte madd, Ꟶ to myrth: what doest thou?
2:3 So I thought in my hert, to gyue my flesh vnto wyne and agayne to applie my mynde vnto wysdome, and to comprehende folyshnes vntyll the tyme that (amonge all the thinges whych are vnder the Sunne) I myght se what were best for men to do, so longe as they lyue vnder heauen.
2:4 I made gorgious fayre worckes. I buylded me houses, and planted vyneyardes.
2:5 I made me ortchardes and gardens of pleasure, and planted trees in them of al maner frutes.
2:6 I made poles of water, to water the grene and fruteful trees withall.
2:7 I bought seruauntes and maydens, and had a greate housholde. As for catell and shepe, I had more substaunce of them, then all they that were before me in Ierusalem.
2:8 I gathered syluer Ꟶ golde together, euen a treasure of kynges and landes. I prouyded me syngers Ꟶ wemen, which coulde playe of instrumentes, to make men myrth and pastime. I gat me psalteries Ꟶ songes of musicke.
2:9 And I was greater and in more worshipe, then all my predecessours in Ierusalem. For wisdome remained with me:
2:10 Ꟶ loke whatsoeuer myne eyes desyred, I let them haue it: and wherin soeuer my hert delyted, or had eny pleasure, I with helde it not from it. Thus my herte reioysed in all that I dyd, and this was my porcion of all my trauayle.
2:11 But when I consydred all the workes that my handes had wrought, and all the laboure that I had taken therin: lo, all was but vanite and vexacion of mynd, and nothing of eny value vnder the Sunne.
2:12 Then turned I me to considre wysdome, erroure, and folyshnesse (for what is he among men that myght be compared to me the kyng in soch worckes?)
2:13 and I sawe: that wysdome excelleth foolishnesse, as farre as light doth darcknesse.
2:14 For a wyse man hath his eyes in his head, but the foole goeth in the darkenesse: I perceaued also, that they both had one ende.
2:15 Then thought I in my mynde, If it happen vnto the foole as it doth vnto me, what nedeth me then to labour eny more for wisdome? So I confessed within my hert, that this also was but vanite.
2:16 For the wyse are euer as lytle in remembraunce as the folish, for the dayes shal come when all shal be forgotten, yee the wise man dieth as well as the foole.
2:17 Thus beganne I to be weery of my lyfe, in so moch that I coulde awaye with nothing that is done vnder the Sunne, for all was but vanite Ꟶ vexacion of minde:
2:18 Yee I was weery of all my labour, whych I had taken vnder the Sunne, because I shulde be fayne to leaue them vnto another man that commeth after me:
2:19 And who knoweth, whether he shalbe a wyse man or a fole? And yet shall he be lord of all my labours, which I with soch wysdome haue taken vnder the Sunne Thys is also a vayne thyng.
2:20 So I turned me to refrayne my mynde from all soch trauayle, as I toke vnder the Sunne:
2:21 for so moch as a man shulde weery hym selfe with wysdome, with vnderstanding and oportunite, Ꟶ yet be fayne to leaue his labours vnto another that neuer swett for them. This is also a vayne thing Ꟶ greate misery.
2:22 For what getteth a man of all the laboure and trauayle of his mynde, that he taketh vnder the Sunne,
2:23 but heuynesse, sorowe and desquyetnes all the dayes of hys lyfe? In so moch that his hert cannot rest in the nyght, this is also a vayne thing?
2:24 Is it not better then for a man to eate Ꟶ drynche, Ꟶ his soule to be mery in his labour? Yee I sawe that thys also was a gyfte of God:
2:25 For who will eat or go more lustely to hys worcke then I? And why?
2:26 God gyueth to the man that is good before him, wysdome, vnderstandyng, Ꟶ gladnesse. But vnto the synner he geueth weerynes that he maye gather and heape together the thynge, that afterwarde shalbe geuen vnto him, whom it pleaseth God. This is now a vayne thinge, yee a very disquietnesse and vexacyon of mynde.
3:1 Euery thinge hath a tyme, yee all that is vnder the heauen, hath his conuenient season.
3:2 There is a tyme to be borne, and a tyme to dye. There is a tyme to plante and a tyme to pleke vp the thing, that is planted.
3:3 A time to slaye, and a time to make whole. A tyme to breake downe, Ꟶ a tyme to build vp.
3:4 A tyme to wepe, and a tyme to laugh: A tyme to mourne, and a tyme to daunse.
3:5 A time to cast awaye stones, and a tyme to gather stones together. A tyme to embrace, and a tyme to refrayne from embracing.
3:6 A tyme to wynne, and a tyme to lese. A tyme to spare, and a tyme to spende.
3:7 A tyme to cut in peces, and a tyme to sowe together.
3:8 A tyme to loue, and a tyme to hate.
3:9 What hath a man els (that doth any thing) but werynesse Ꟶ labour?
3:10 For as touchinge the trauayle and carefulnesse whych God hath geuen vnto men, I se that he hath geuen it them, to be excercised in it.
3:11 All thys hath he ordened maruelous goodly, to euery thing his due tyme. He hath planted ignoraunce also in the hertes of men, that they shuld not comprehende the ground of hys worckes, which he doth from the begynning to the ende.
3:12 So I perceaued, that in these thinges there is nothing better for a man, then to be mery and to do well so longe as he lyueth.
3:13 For all that a man eateth Ꟶ dryncketh, yee whatsoeuer a man enioyeth of all his labour, that same is a gyfte of God.
3:14 I consydered also that whatsoeuer God doth, it continueth for euer and that nothing can be put vnto it, nor taken from it, and that God doth it to the intent, that men shuld feare hym.
3:15 The thing that hath bene is nowe: and the thyng that is for to come, hath bene afore time, for God restoreth agayne the thynge that was past
3:16 Moreouer, I sawe vnder the Sunne vngodlynesse in the steade of iudgement, and iniquyte in steade of ryghteousnesse.
3:17 Then thought I in my minde: God shal separate the ryghteous from the vngodly, and then shalbe the tyme and iudgement of all councels and worckes.
3:18 I commened with myne awne hert also, concernynge the children of men: how God hath chosen them, Ꟶ yet letteth them apeare: as though they were beastes:
3:19 for it happeneth vnto men as it doth vnto beastes, and as the one dyeth, so dyeth the other: yee they haue both one maner of breth: so that (in this) a man hath no preemynence aboue a beast, but all are subdued vnto vanytie.
3:20 They go all vnto one place, for as they be all of dust, so shall they all turne vnto dust agayne.
3:21 Who knoweth the sprete of man that goeth vpwarde, and the breth of the beast that goeth downe into the earth?
3:22 Wherfore I perceaue, that there is nothing better for a man, then to be ioyfull in hys laboure, for that is hys porcyon. But who wyll brynge him to se the thinge that shall come after hym?
4:1 So I turned me, Ꟶ considred all the violent wrong that is done vnder the sunne, Ꟶ beholde, the teares of soch as were oppressed, Ꟶ there was no man to conforte them, or that wolde delyuer Ꟶ defende them from the violence of their oppressours.
4:2 Wherfore I iudged those that are deed, to be more happye then soch as be alyue:
4:3 yee, him that is yet vnborne to be better at ease then they both, because he seyth not the miserable worckes that are done vnder the sunne.
4:4 Agayne, I sawe that all trauayle, Ꟶ dilygence of labour, that euery man taketh in hande, was done of enuy agaynst his neyboure This is also a vaine thinge, and a vexacion of mynde.
4:5 The foole foldeth his handes together, and eateth vp hys awne fleshe.
4:6 One hande full (sayeth he) is better with rest, then both the handes full with laboure Ꟶ trauayle of minde.
4:7 Moreouer, I turned me, Ꟶ beholde yet another vanyte vnder the Sunne.
4:8 There is one man, no mo but hym selfe alone, hauyng nether chylde ner brother: yet is there no ende of his carefull trauayle, his eyes can not be satysfyed with riches, For whom do I take soch trauayle? For whose pleasure do I thus consume awaye my lyfe? This is also a vayne Ꟶ myserable thinge?
4:9 Therfore, two are better then one, for they maye well enioye the profyt of theyr laboure.
4:10 For If one of them fall, his companyon helpeth him vp agayne: But wo is him that is alone, for yf he fall, he hath not another to helpe him vp.
4:11 Agayne, when two slepe together, they are warme: but how can a body be warme alone?
4:12 One maye be ouercome, but two maye make resistaunce: A threfold cable is not lyghtly broken.
4:13 A poore childe beynge wyse, is better then an olde kynge, that doteth, and cannot beware in tyme to come.
4:14 Some one commeth out of preson, and is made a kynge: and another which is borne in the kyngdome, commeth vnto pouerte.
4:15 And I perceaued, that all men lyuynge vnder the sonne, go with the seconde childe, that shall stonde vp in the steade of the other.
4:16 As for the people that haue bene before him, and that come after hym, they are innumerable: And they that come after him shall not reioyse of him. This is also a vayne thynge Ꟶ a vexacyon of mynde.
5:1 When thou commest into the house of God, kepe thy fote Ꟶ draw nye that God which is at hande may heare: that thou gyue not the offeringes of fooles, for they knowe nowght, but to do euell.
5:2 Be not hastye with thy mouth, and let not thine hert speake eny thing rashly before God. For God is in heauen, and thou vpon earth, therfore let thy wordes be few.
5:3 For where moch carefulnesse is, there are many dreames: and where many wordes are, there men maye heare fooles.
5:4 If thou make a vowe vnto God, be not slacke to perfourme it. As for folysh vowes, he hath no pleasure in them:
5:5 If thou promyse eny thinge, paye it: for better it is that thou make no vowe, then that thou shuldest promyse, and not paye.
5:6 Suffre not thy mouth to cause thy flesh for to synne, nether saye thou before the angell, that it is thy ignoraunce. For then God wilbe angrie at thy voyce, Ꟶ destroye all the worckes of thyne handes.
5:7 And why? where as are many dreames and many wordes, there are also diuerse vanytes: but loke that thou feare God.
5:8 If thou seyst the poore to be oppressed and wrongeously dealt withall, so that equite Ꟶ the ryght of the lawe is wrasted in the lande: maruell not thou at soch a thyng, for one greate man kepeth touch with another, Ꟶ the myghtie men are in auctorite ouer the pore.
5:9 The encrease of the erth vpholdeth all thinge, yea the kynge himselfe is mayntened by husbandrye.
5:10 He that loueth money, wyll neuer be satisfyed wt money: Ꟶ who so deliteth in riches, shal haue no profyt therof. This is also a vayne thinge.
5:11 Where as moche ryches is, there are many also that spende them awaye. And what pleasure more hath he that possesseth them, sauynge that he maye loke vpon them with his eyes?
5:12 A labouringe man slepeth swetely, whether it be lytle or moch that he eateth: but the aboundaunce of the ryche will not suffre him to slepe.
5:13 Yet is there a sore plage, which I haue sene vnder the sunne (namely) ryches kepte to the hurte of him that hath them in possession.
5:14 For oft tymes they perysh with his greate misery Ꟶ trouble: Ꟶ yf he haue a chylde, it getteth nothynge.
5:15 Lyke as he came naked out of hys mothers wombe, so goeth he thither agayne, Ꟶ carieth nothing awaye with hym of all his laboure.
5:16 This is a miserable plage, that he shall go awaye euen as he came. What helpeth it hym then, that he hath laboured in the wynde?
5:17 All the dayes of his lyfe also he dyd eate in the darcke, with greate carefulnesse, sycknesse and sorow.
5:18 Therfore me thincke it a better Ꟶ as fayrer thyng, a man to eate and dryncke, and to be refreshed of all hys laboure, that he taketh vnder the Sunne all the dayes of his lyfe which God geueth hym, for this is hys porcyon.
5:19 For vnto whomsoeuer God geueth riches goodes and power, he geueth it hym to enioye it, to take it for hys porcyon, and to be refreshed of hys laboure: thys is the gyfte of God.
5:20 For he thincketh not moch howe longe he shall lyue, for so moch as God fylleth his herte with gladnesse.
6:1 There is yet a plage vnder the sunne, Ꟶ it is a generall thing among men:
6:2 when God geueth a man ryches, goodes and honoure, so that he wanteth nothynge of all that hys herre can desyre: and yet God geueth him not leaue to enioye the same, but another man spendeth them. This is a vayne thinge Ꟶ a miserable plage.
6:3 If a man begett an hundred children, Ꟶ lyue many yeares, so that his dayes are many in nombre, and yet can not enioye his good, nether be buryed: as for him I saye, that an vntymely byrth is better then he.
6:4 For he commeth to naught, Ꟶ spendeth his tyme in darrknes, Ꟶ his name is forgotten.
6:5 Moreouer, he seeth not the sonne, Ꟶ knoweth not of it: Ꟶ yet hath he more rest then the other.
6:6 Yee though he lyued two thousande yeares, yet hath he no good lyfe. Come not all to one place?
6:7 All the labour that a man taketh, is for him selfe, Ꟶ yet his desire is neuer fylled after his minde.
6:8 For what hath the wyse more then the foole? What helpeth it the poore, that he knoweth to walke wt fooles before the lyuing?
6:9 The cleare syght of the eyes is better, then that the soule shulde walke after desires of the luste. Howbeit, this is also a vayne thinge Ꟶ a dysquietnesse of mynde.
6:10 The thinge that hath bene: is named allready, Ꟶ knowen that it is euen man him selfe: nether maye he go to lawe wt hym that is myghtier then he.
6:11 Many thinges ther be that increace vanite, Ꟶ what hath a man els.
6:12 For who knoweth what is good for man lyuinge, in the dayes of hys vayne lyfe, which is but a shadowe? Or who wyl tell a man, what shal happen after him vnder the Sunne?
7:1 A Good name is more worth then a precyous oyntment, and the daye of death is better then the daye of byrth.
7:2 It is better to go into an house of mourninge, then into a bancketinge house. For there is the ende of all men, Ꟶ he that is liuing, taketh it to hert:
7:3 grauytie is better then to laugh: for when the countenaunce is heuy, the herte is refourmed.
7:4 The hert of the wyse is in the mournyng house, but the hert of the folysh is in the house of myrth.
7:5 It is better to geue care to the chastenynge of a wyse man then to heare the songe of fooles.
7:6 For the laughinge of foles is lyke the crackynge of thornes vnder a pot. And that is but a vayne thynge.
7:7 The wyse man hateth wronge delynge: Ꟶ abhorreth the harte that couetith rewardes.
7:8 Better it is to consydre, the ende of a thinge then the begynnynge. The pacient of sprete is better then the hye mynded.
7:9 Be not hastely angrie in thy mynde, for wrath resteth in the bosome of fooles.
7:10 Saye not thou: What is the cause, that the dayes of the olde tyme were better, then they that be nowe? for that were no wyse question.
7:11 Wysdome wt enheritaunce is good yet better is it wt them that without care may beholde the sonne.
7:12 For wysdome defendeth as well as moneye, Ꟶ the excellent knowledge Ꟶ wysdome geueth lyfe vnto him that hath it in possession.
7:13 Considre the worke of God how that no man can make the thing straight which he maketh croked.
7:14 Use wel the tyme of prosperite, Ꟶ remembre the tyme of mysfortune: for God maketh the one by the other, so that a man can fynde nothing els.
7:15 All thinges haue I considred in the tyme of my vanite: that the iust man perisheth for his righteousnes sake, Ꟶ the vngodly lyueth in hys wyckednesse.
7:16 Therfore be thou nether to ryghteous ner ouer wyse, that thou perishe not:
7:17 be nether to vnryghteous also ner to folysh, lest thou dye before thy tyme.
7:18 It is good for the to take holde of this, Ꟶ not to let that go out of thy hand. For he that feareth God, commeth forth with them all.
7:19 Wysdome geueth more corage vnto the wyse, then ten myghtie men of the citye:
7:20 for there is not one iust vpon earth, that doth good, and synneth not.
7:21 Take not hede vnto euery worde that is spoken, lest thou heare thy seruaunt curse the:
7:22 for thine awne hert knoweth that thou thy selfe also hast oft tymes spoken euell by other men.
7:23 All these thinges haue I proued in wysdome: for I thought to be wyse but she went farther fro me then she was before,
7:24 yee Ꟶ so depe that I might not reach vnto her.
7:25 I applyed my mynde also vnto knowledge, Ꟶ to seke Ꟶ searche oute science, wysdome Ꟶ vnderstanding: to knowe the foolyshnesse of the vngodly, Ꟶ the errour of dotinge fooles.
7:26 And I founde, that a woman is bytterer then death: for she hath cast abrode, her herte as a nett that men fishe with, and her handes are cheynes. Who so pleaseth God, shall escape from her: but the synner will be taken with her.
7:27 Beholde (sayeth the preacher) thys haue I diligently searched oute Ꟶ proued. One thinge must be considred with another, that a man may come by knowledge: whych as yet I seke, Ꟶ fynde it not.
7:28 Among a thousande men I haue founde one, but not one woman amonge all.
7:29 Lo, this onely haue I founde, that God made man iust and ryght, but they sought many inuencions.
8:1 Who is wyse? Who hath knowledge to make answere? A mans wysdome maketh hys face to shine: but vnshamefastnes putteth it out of fauoure.
8:2 I must kepe the kynges commaundement, and the oth that I haue made vnto God.
8:3 Be not hastye to go out of hys syght, and se thou continue in no euell thinge: for whatsoeuer it pleaseth hym, that doeth he.
8:4 Lyke as when a kynge geueth a charge, his commaundement is myghtye: Euen so who maye saye vnto him: what doest thou?
8:5 Who so kepeth the commaundement: shall fele no harme: but a wyse mans herte discerneth the tyme Ꟶ iudgement:
8:6 For euery thing will haue oportunite Ꟶ iudgement, and this is the thynge that maketh men full of carefulnes and sorowe.
8:7 And why? a man knoweth not what is for to come: for who wyll tell him?
8:8 Nether is there eny man that hath power ouer the sprete, to kepe styll the sprete, ner to haue eny power in the tyme of death: is it not he also that can make an ende of the battayle, nether maye vngodlynes deliuer them that medle with all.
8:9 All these thinges haue I considered, and applied my mynde vnto euery worcke that is vnder the sonne: howe one man hath lordshype vpon another to his awne harme.
8:10 For I haue seane often the vngodly brought to ther graues: and yet they haue retorned into the citye ageyne, and came from the place of holy men, which in the citye were growen out of memory as were those also that lyued well. Thys is also a vayne thynge.
8:11 Because now that euell worckes are not hastely punysshed, the hert of man geueth hym selfe ouer vnto wyckednesse.
8:12 But though an euell persone offende an hundred tymes, Ꟶ God differ gyuinge him longe lyfe: yet am I sure, that it shal go well wt them that feare God, because they haue him before their eyes.
8:13 Agayne, as for the vngodly it shall not be well wt him, nether shall he prolonge his dayes: but euen as a shadowe, so shall he be that feareth not God.
8:14 Yet is there a vanyte vpon earth: There be iust men, vnto whom it happeneth, as though they had the worckes of the vngodly: Agayne, there be vngodly, with whom it goeth as though they had the workes of the ryghteous. Thys haue I called also a vayne thyng.
8:15 Therfore I commende gladnesse, because a man hath no better thing vnder the Sunne, then to eate and dryncke, Ꟶ to be mery: for that shall he haue of his labour all the dayes of his lyfe, which God geueth him vnder the sunne.
8:16 And so I applied my mynde to learne wysdome, Ꟶ to knowe the trauayle that is in the worlde (and that of soch a fassyon, that I suffred not myne eyes to slepe nether daye ner nyght)
8:17 I vnderstode of all the workes of God, but it is not possible for a man, to attayne vnto the workes that are done vnder the Sunne: and though he bestowe his laboure to seke them out, yet can he not reach vnto them: yee though a wyse man wolde vntertake to knowe them, yet shall he not fynde them.
9:1 For all these thinges purposed, I in my mynde to seke out. The ryghteous and wyse, yee and theyr seruauntes also, are in the hande of God: and there is no man that knoweth ether loue or hate, but all thynges are before them.
9:2 It happeneth vnto one as vnto another: it goeth with the ryghteous as with that the vngodly: with the good and cleane as wyth the vncleane: wyth hym that offereth as with him that offereth not: lyke as it goeth wyth the vertuous, so goeth it also with the synner: As it happeneth vnto the periured, so happeneth it also vnto him that is afrayed to be forsworne.
9:3 Amonge all thynges that come to passe vnder the Sunne, thys is a misery that it happeneth vnto all a lyke. This is the cause also that the hertes of men are full of wyckednesse, Ꟶ madd foolishnesse is in their hertes as longe as they lyue, vntyll they dye.
9:4 And why? As longe as a man lyueth, he hath a hope: for a quyck dogg (saye they) is better then a deed lion:
9:5 for they that be lyuing, knowe that they shall dye: but they that be deed: knowe nothing, nether deserue they eny more. For their memorial is forgotten,
9:6 so that they be nether loued, hated ner enuyed: nether haue they enymore parte in the world, in all that is done vnder the Sunne.
9:7 Go thou thy waye then, eate thy bred wyth ioye, and dryncke thy wyne with a glad hart, for thy workes please God.
9:8 Let thy garmentes be allwaye whyte, Ꟶ let thy head lack none oyntment.
9:9 Use thy self to liue ioyfully with thy wife whom thou louest, all the dayes of thy lyfe which is but vayne, that God geueth the vnder the Sunne, all the dayes of thy vanite: for that is thy porcion in this lyfe, of al thy laboure and trauyle that thou takest vnder the Sunne.
9:10 Whatsoeuer thou takest in hande to do, that do with all thy power, for in the graue that thou goest vnto, there is nether worcke, councell, knowledge ner wysdome.
9:11 So I turned me vnto other thinges vnder the Sunne, Ꟶ I sawe, that in runnyng, it helpeth not to be swyft: in batayle, it helpeth not to be stronge: to fedynge, it helpeth not to be wyse, so riches, it helpeth not to be suttell: to be had in fauoure, it helpeth not to be connyng: but that all lyeth in tyme Ꟶ fortune.
9:12 For a man knoweth not hys tyme, but lyke as the fyshe are taken with the angle, and as the byrdes are catched with the snare: Euen so are men taken in the perlous tyme, when it commeth sodenly vpon them.
9:13 Thys wysdome haue I sene also vnder the Sunne, Ꟶ me thought it a greate thing.
9:14 There was a lytle citie, Ꟶ a fewe men within it: so there came a greate kyng and beseged it, and made greate bulwarkes agaynst it.
9:15 And in the citie there was founde a poore man, (but he was wyse) which with hys wysdome delyuered the citye: yet was there no body, that had eny respect vnto soch a simple man.
9:16 Then sayde I: wysdome is better then strength. Neuertheles, a symple mans wysdome is despised, Ꟶ hys wordes are not herde.
9:17 A wyse mans councell that is folowed in sylence, is farre aboue the cryenge of a captayne amonge fooles.
9:18 For wysdome is better then harnesse: but one vnthryst alone destroyeth moch good.
10:1 A Deed flye doth corrupt swete oyntement Ꟶ maketh it to stynk: Euen so oft tymes he that is made for wysdome Ꟶ honour, is abhorred because of a lytle foolishnes.
10:2 A wyse mans herte is vpon the ryght hande, but a fooles herte vpon the left.
10:3 A foole will shewe him self when he goeth by the way, yet thinkethe he that euery man doth as foolyshly as him selfe.
10:4 If a principal sprete be geuen the to beare rule, be not necgligent then in thine office: for he that can take cure of him selfe, auoydeth great offences.
10:5 Another plage is there, which I haue sene vnder the sonne: namely, the ignoraunce that is commenly amonge princes:
10:6 in that a foole sytteth in greate dignite, Ꟶ the rych are sett downe beneth:
10:7 I haue sene seruauntes ryde vpon horses, and princes goyng vpon their fete as it were seruauntes.
10:8 But he that dyggeth vp a pyt, shal fall therin him selfe: and who so breaketh downe the hedge, a serpent shall byte hym.
10:9 Who so remoueth stones, shall haue trauayle withall: Ꟶ he that heweth wood, shalbe hurt therwith.
10:10 When an yron is blont, and the poynt not sharpened, it must be whet agayne, and that wt myght: Euen so doth wysdome folowe diligence.
10:11 A babler of hys tonge is no better, then a serpent that styngeth wythout hyssynge.
10:12 The wordes out of a wyse mans mouth are gracious, but the lyppes of a foole wyll destroye him selfe.
10:13 The beginnyng of his talkynge is foolyshnes, Ꟶ the last worde of his mouth is starke madnesse.
10:14 A foole is full of wordes, Ꟶ a man cannot tell what shall come to passe: who wyll then warne him of it that shall folow after him?
10:15 The laboure of the folysh is greuous vnto them, whyle they knowe not howe to go into the citye.
10:16 Wo be vnto the (O thou lande) whose kynge is but a child, and whose princes are early at their banckettes.
10:17 But well is the (O thou lande) whose kynge is come of nobles, Ꟶ whose princes eate in due season, for necessyte Ꟶ not for lust.
10:18 Thorow slouthfulnesse the balckes fall downe, Ꟶ thorow ydle handes it rayneth in at the house.
10:19 Meat maketh men to laugh, and wyne maketh them mery: but vnto money are all thinges obedient.
10:20 Wish the kyng no euell in thy thought Ꟶ speake no hurte of the ryche in thy preuy chambre: for a byrd of the ayre shall betraye thy voyce, and with hir fethers shal she bewraye thy wordes.
11:1 Lay thy brede vpon weate faces, Ꟶ so shalt thou fynde after many dayes.
11:2 Geue parte .vii. dayes, and also vpon the eyght, for thou knowest not what misery shall come vpon earth.
11:3 When the cloudes are full, they powre out rayne vpon the earth. And when the tre falleth (whether it be toward the South or North) in what place soeuer it fall, there it lyeth.
11:4 He that regardeth the winde, shall not sowe and he that hath respecte vnto the cloudes, shal not reape.
11:5 Now lyke as thou knowest not the waye of the spirite howe he entred into the body beinge yet in a mothers wombe: Euen so thou knowest not the worckes of God, whych is the worckemaster of all.
11:6 Cease not thou therfore with thy handes to sowe thy sede, whether it be in the morninge or in the euenynge: for thou knowest not whether this or that shal prospere, and yf they both take, it is the better.
11:7 The lyght is swete, Ꟶ a pleasaunt thynge is it for the eyes to loke vpon the Sunne.
11:8 If a man lyue many yeares, and be glad in them all, let him remembre the dayes of darckenesse, whych shalbe many: and that foloweth, all thinges shall be but vanyte.
11:9 Be glad then (O thou yonge man) in thy youth, and let thyne hert be mery in thy yong dayes, folowe the wayes of thyne awne herte, Ꟶ the lust of thine eyes but be thou sure, that God shall brynge the into iudgement for all these thynges.
11:10 PUt a waye displeasure out of thyne herte, Ꟶ remoue euell from thy body: for chyldehode Ꟶ youth is but vanyte.
12:1 Remembre thy maker the soner in thy youth, or euer the dayes of aduersytie come Ꟶ or the yeares drawe nye, when thou shalt saye: I haue not pleasure in them:
12:2 before the sunne the lyght, the moone Ꟶ starres be darckned, Ꟶ or the cloudes turne agayne after the rayne,
12:3 when the kepers of the house shall tremble, Ꟶ when the stronge men shall bowe them selues: when the myllers stande styll, because they be so fewe, Ꟶ when the syght of the wyndowes shall waxedymme,
12:4 when the dores in the stretes shalbe shutt, and when the voyce of the myller shalbe layed downe: when men shall ryse vp at the voyce of the byrde, and when all the daughters of musyke shalbe brought lowe:
12:5 when men shall feare in hye places, and be afrayed in the stretes: when the Almonde tree shall florishe and be laden with the greshopper, and when all lust shall passe (because man goeth to his longe home, and the mourners go aboute the stretes.)
12:6 Or euer the syluer lace be taken awaye, and or the golden well be broken. Or the pot be broken at the well, and the whele vpon the cysterne:
12:7 Then shall the dust be turned agayne vnto earth from whence it came, and the sprete shall returne vnto God, which gaue it.
12:8 All is but vanite (sayth the Preacher) all is but playne vanyte.
12:9 The Preacher was yet more wyse, and taught the people knowledge: he gaue good hede, sought out the grounde, and set forth many parables.
12:10 Hys diligence was to fynde out acceptable wordes, ryght scripture, and the wordes of trueth.
12:11 For the wordes of the wyse are lyke pryckes and nayles that goo thorow, wherwith the stuffe gathered is holden vp: for they are geuen of one shepherde onely.
12:12 Therfore beware (my sonne) of that doctrine that is besyde thys: for to make many bokes it is an endles worke: and to loude cryinge weryeth the bodye.
12:13 Let vs heare the conclusyon of all thynges: Feare God, and kepe hys commaundementes: For that toucheth all men.
12:14 For God shall iudge all worckes and secrete thynges, whether they be good or euell.