1:1 Paul an Apostle of Iesu Chryst by the wyll of God, and brother Timotheus.
1:2 To the saynctes which are at Colossa, and brethren that beleue in Chryst. Grace be vnto you and peace from God oure father, Ꟶ from the Lorde Iesu Christ.
1:3 We geue thankes to God the father of oure Lorde Iesus Christ alwayes for you in oure prayers.
1:4 For we haue hearde of your fayth in Christ Iesu, and of the loue which ye beare to all saynctes,
1:5 for the hopes sake which is layd vp in store for you in heauen, of which hope, ye herde before by the true worde of the Gospell,
1:6 which is come vnto you: euen as it, is frutefull as it is also amonge you, from the daye in the which ye hearde of it, and had experience in the grace of God thorowe the trueth,
1:7 as ye learned of Epaphra oure deare felowe seruaunt, which is for you a faythfull minister of Chryst,
1:8 which also declared vnto vs youre loue which ye haue in the sprete.
1:9 For this cause we also, sence that daye we herde of it, haue not ceasyd to praye for you, and to desyre, that ye myght be fulfylled with the knowledge of hys wyll, in all wysdome and spretuall vnderstandynge,
1:10 that ye myght walke worthy of the Lorde that in all thinges ye maye please beynge frutefull in all good workes, and encreasynge in the knowledge of God,
1:11 strengthed with all myght, thorowe hys glorious power, vnto all pacience and longe sufferynge with ioyfulnes
1:12 geuynge thankes vnto the father, which hath made vs mete to be partakers of the inheritaunce of saynctes in lyght,
1:13 Which hath delyuered vs from the power of derknes, and hath translated vs into the kyngdome of hys dere sone
1:14 by whom we haue redempcion thorowe his bloude euen the forgeuenes of sinnes
1:15 which is the ymage of the inuisyble God, fyrst begotten of all creatures.
1:16 For by him were all thynges created, that are in heuen, and that are in erth: visyble and inuisyble, whether they be maieste or lorde shyppe, ether rule or power. All thynges were creatyd by hym and for hym,
1:17 Ꟶ he is before all thynges, and by him all thynges haue theyr beynge.
1:18 And he is the heed of the body, euen of the congregacyon: he is the begynnynge and fyrst begotten of the deed, that in all thynges he myght haue the preeminence.
1:19 For it pleased the father, that in him shulde all fulnes dwell,
1:20 and by him to reconcyle all thinge vnto him selfe, and to set at peace by hym thorowe the bloude of hys crosse, both thynges in heauen and thinges in erth.
1:21 And you which were somtyme farre of and enemyes, because youre myndes were set in euyll worckes hath he nowe yet reconcyled
1:22 in the body of hys flesshe thorowe deeth, to make you holy, and vnblameable, Ꟶ without faut in hys awne syght,
1:23 yf ye contynue grounded and stablysshed in the fayth, and be not moued awaye from the hope of the Gospell, wherof ye haue herde, howe that it is preached amonge all creatures which are vnder heauen, wherof I Paul am made a mynyster.
1:24 Nowe ioye I in my sufferinges for you and fulfyll that which is behynde of the passyons of Christ in my flesshe, for hys bodies sake, which is the congregacyon:
1:25 wherof I am made a mynister, accordynge to the ordinaunce of God, which ordinaunce was geuen me vnto you warde to fullfyll the worde of God,
1:26 that mistery which hath bene hyd sence the worlde beganne, and sence the begynnynge of generacyons: but nowe is opened to his saynctes,
1:27 to whom God wolde make knowen what the gloryous ryches of thys mystery is amonge the Gentyls, which ryches is Chryst in you, the hope of glory,
1:28 whom we preache, warnynge all men, and teachynge all men in all wysdome, to make all men parfecte in Christ Iesu.
1:29 Wherin I also laboure and stryue, euen as farforth as his strength worketh in me myghtely.
2:1 For I wolde that ye knewe howe greate care that I haue for you and for them that are at Laodicia, and for as many as haue not sene my parson in the flessh,
2:2 that theyr hertes myght be comforted whan they are knet together in loue, and in all ryches of full vnderstandynge, for to knowe the mistery of God the father, and of Chryst,
2:3 in whom are hyd all the treasures of wysdome and knowledge.
2:4 Thys I saye, lest eny man shulde begyle you wt entysynge wordes.
2:5 For though I be absent in the flesshe, yet am I with you in the sprete, ioyinge and beholdynge youre order, and youre sted fast fayth in Chryst
2:6 As ye haue therfore receaued Christ Iesu the Lorde euen so walke ye in hym,
2:7 so that ye be rotyd and buylte in hym, and stablysshed thorow fayth, as ye haue learned: and therin be plenteous with geuynge thankes.
2:8 Beware, lest eny man spoyle you thorowe philosophy and disceatfull vanitie, after the tradicyon of men, and after the ordinaunces of the worlde, Ꟶ not after Christ.
2:9 For in hym dwelleth all the fulnes of the God heed bodely,
2:10 and ye are complete in him: which is the heed of all rule and power,
2:11 by whom also ye are circumcised with circumcisyon which is done with out handes, for asmoche as ye haue put of the synfull body of the flesshe thorowe the circumcisyon that is in Christ,
2:12 in that ye are buried with hym thorowe bapti me, in whom ye are also rysen agayne thorowe fayth, that is wrought by the operacyon of God which raysed him from deeth.
2:13 And ye whan ye weare deed thorowe synne and thorowe the vncircumcisyon of youre flesshe, hath he quyckned with him, and hath forgeuen vs all oure trespaces
2:14 and hath put out the hande wrytynge that was agaynst vs, contayned in the lawe written: and that hath he taken out of the waye, and hath fastened it to hys crosse,
2:15 and hath spoyled rule and power, and hath made a shewe of them openly, and hath triumphed ouer them in his awne person.
2:16 Let no man therfore trouble youre consience aboute meate and dryncke or for a pece of an holy daye, or of the newe mone, or of the Sabboth dayes,
2:17 which are shaddowes of thinges to come: but the body is in Chryst.
2:18 Let no man make you shote at a wronge marke, by the humblenes and holynes of angels, in the thynges which he neuer sawe, beynge causelesse puft vp with his flesshly mynde,
2:19 Ꟶ holdeth not the heed, wherof all the body by ioyntes and couples receaueth norisshment Ꟶ is knet together, and encreaseth with the increasynge that commeth of God.
2:20 Wherfore, yf ye be deed with Chryst from the ordinaunces of the worlde, why as though ye yet lyued in the worlde, are ye led with tradicions?
2:21 Touch not, tast not, handell not:
2:22 which all perisshe thorowe the very abuse: after the commaundmentes and doctrynes of men:
2:23 which thynges out wardly haue the similitude of wysdome by supersticion and humblenes of mynde, and by hurtynge of the body, and in that they do the flesshe no worshyppe vnto the nede therof.
3:1 If ye be then rysen agayne with Chryst, seke those thynges which are aboue, where Chryst sytteth on the ryght hande of God.
3:2 Set youre affeccyon on heauenly thynges, and not on erthye thynges.
3:3 For ye are deed, and youre lyfe is hyd with Chryst in God.
3:4 Whensoeuer Chryst (which is oure lyfe) shall shewe hym selfe, then shall ye also appeare with hym in glory.
3:5 Mortifye therfore youre erthy membres: fornicacyon, vnclennes, vnnaturall lust, euyll concupiscence, and coueteousnes, which is worshyppynge of ydoles:
3:6 for which thynges sake the wrath of God vseth to come on the disobedyent chyldren
3:7 amonge whom ye walked somtyme, when ye lyued in them.
3:8 But nowe put ye also awaye from you all soch thinges: wrath, fearnes, maliciousnes, cursed speakynge, fylthy communicacyon out of your mouth.
3:9 Lye not one to another, seing that ye haue put of the olde man with hys workes,
3:10 and haue put on the newe man which is renued into the knowledge Ꟶ ymage of him that made hym,
3:11 where is nether Gentyle nor Iewe, circumcisyon nor vncircumcisyon, Barbarous or Sythian, bonde or fre: but Christ is all in all thinges.
3:12 Therfore as electe of God, holy Ꟶ beloued, put on tender mercye, kyndnes, humblenes of mynde, mekenes, longe suffrynge,
3:13 for bearynge one another, Ꟶ forgeuynge one another, yf any man haue a quarell agaynst another: as Christ forgaue you, euen so do ye.
3:14 Aboue all these thinges put on loue which is the bonde of perfectnes.
3:15 And the peace of God rule in youre hertes: to the which peace ye are called in one body. And se that ye be thankfull.
3:16 Let the worde of Chryst dwell in you plenteously with all wysdome. Teache and exhorte youre awne selues, in Psalmes, and hymnes, and spirituall songes syngynge with grace in youre hertes to the Lorde
3:17 And whatsouer ye do (in worde or dede) do all in the name of the Lord Iesu, geuynge thankes to God the father by hym.
3:18 Ye wyues, submyt youre selues vnto youre awne husbandes, as it is comly in the Lorde:
3:19 Ye husbandes, loue youre wyues and be not bytter vnto them.
3:20 Ye chyldren, obey youre fathers and mothers in all thinges, for that is well pleasynge vnto the Lorde.
3:21 Ye fathers, prouoke not youre chyldren, lest they be of a desperate mynde.
3:22 Ye seruauntes be obedient vnto them that are youre bodyly masters in all thinges: not with eye seruice as men pleasers, but in synglenes of herte, fearynge God.
3:23 And whatsoeuer ye do, do it hertely, as, though ye dyd it to the Lord, and not vnto men:
3:24 knowynge, that of the Lord ye shall receaue the rewarde of inheritaunce, for ye serue the Lorde Christ.
3:25 But he that doth synne, shall receaue for hys synne. Nether is ther any respect of persones.
4:1 Masters, do vnto youre seruauntes that which is iust and equall knowynge, that ye also haue a master in heauen.
4:2 Continue in prayer, Ꟶ watch in the same with thankes geuynge,
4:3 prayenge also for vs that God maye open vnto vs the dore of vtteraunce, that we maye speake the mystery of Christ (wherfore I am also in bondes)
4:4 that I maye vtter it, as it becommeth me to speake.
4:5 Walke wysely towarde them that are without, and lose no oportunite.
4:6 Let youre speache be alwayes well sauored Ꟶ powdred with salt, that ye maye knowe, howe ye ought to answer euery man.
4:7 Of all my busynes shal ye be certified by Tichicus, the beloued brother and faythful mynyster and felowe seruaunt in the Lord,
4:8 whom I haue sent vnto you for the same purpose, that he myght knowe whath ye do, Ꟶ that he myght comfort youre hertes,
4:9 wyth one Onesymus a faythfull and beloued brother, which is one of you. They shall shewe you of all thynges, which area doinge here.
4:10 Aristarchus my preson felowe saluteth you, and Marcus Barnabas systers sonne: touchynge whom, ye receaued commaundementes. If he come vnto you, receaue hym:
4:11 and Iesus which is called Iustus, whych are of the circumcisyon. These only are my worke felowes vnto the kyngdome of God, which haue bene vnto my consolacyon.
4:12 Epaphras the seruaunt of Chryst, (which is one of you) saluteth you, and all wayes laboureth feruently for you in prayers, that ye maye stande perfect and full, in all the wyll of God.
4:13 For I beare hym recorde, that he hath a feruent mynde for you and them that are of Laodicia and them that are of Hierapolis.
4:14 Deare Lucas the Phisycion greteth you, and Demas.
4:15 Salute the brethren whych are of Laodicia, and salute Nymphas, and the congregacyon, whych is in hys house,
4:16 And when the Epystle is reed of you, make that it be reed also in the congregacyon of the Laodicians: and that ye lykewyse reade the Epistle of Laodicia.
4:17 And saye to Archyppus: take hede to the offyce that thou hast receaued in the Lord, that thou fulfill it.
4:18 The salutacion by the hande of me Paul Remember my bondes, the grace be wyth you. Amen.