1:1 Paul the presoner of Iesu christ and brother Timothe. Unto Philemon the beloued, and oure helper,
1:2 and to the beloued Appia, and to Aechippus oure felowe soudier and to the congregacyon that is of thy house.
1:3 Grace be vnto you and peace, from God oure father, Ꟶ from the Lorde Iesus Christ.
1:4 I thanke my God, makynge mencyon all wayes of the in my prayers,
1:5 when I heare of thy loue Ꟶ fayth, which thou hast to warde the Lorde. Iesu, and towarde all saynctes,
1:6 so that the fellishyppe of thy fayth is frutefull in the knowledge of euery good which is in, you towarde Iesus Christ.
1:7 For we haue great ioye and consolacyon in thy loue: because that by the (brother) the sayntes hertes are conforted.
1:8 Wherfore, though I myght be bold in Christ to commaunde the, that which was thy dewtye to do:
1:9 yet for loues sake I rather beseche the, though I be as I am, euen olde Paul, Ꟶ nowe a presoner of Iesu Christ.
1:10 I beseche the for my sonne Onesimus whom I haue begotten in my bondes,
1:11 (which in tyme passed was to the vnprofitable but nowe proffitable both to the Ꟶ to me)
1:12 whom I haue sent home agayne. Thou therfore receyue hym, that is to saye myne awne bowels,
1:13 whom I wolde fayne haue retayned with me, that in thy steade he myght haue minystred vnto me in the bondes of the Gospell.
1:14 Neuerthelesse, without thy mynde wolde I do nothinge, that the good whych thou doest, shulde not be as it were of necessite, but wyllyngly.
1:15 For happly he therfore departed for a season, that thou shuldest receaue hym for euer,
1:16 not nowe as a seruaunt: but aboue a seruaunt, euen a brother beloued, specially to me: but howe moche more vnto the, both in the flesshe, and also in the Lorde?
1:17 If thou count me therfore a felowe, receaue him as my selfe.
1:18 If he haue done the anye hurt, or oweth the ought, that laye to my charge.
1:19 (I Paul haue written it with myne awne hande) I wyll recompence it. So that I do not saye to the, howe that thou owest vnto me euen thyne awne selfe also.
1:20 Euen so brother, let me enioye the in the Lorde: Comforte my bowels in the Lorde.
1:21 Trustynge in thyne obedience, I wrote vnto the, knowynge, that thou wylt also do more then I saye.
1:22 Moreouer, prepare me lodginge for I trust that thorowe the helpe of youre prayers, I shalbe geuen vnto you.
1:23 Ther salute the, Epaphras my felowe presoner in Christ Iesu,
1:24 Marcus, Aristarcus, Demas, Lucas, my helpers.
1:25 The grace of oure Lorde Iesu Christ be with your sprete: Amen.