In the begynnynge God created heauen and earthe.
The earth was voyde and emptye: and darcknes was vpon the face of the depe: and the sprete of God moued vpon the face of the waters.
And God sayde: let there be made lyght, and there was light made.
And God sawe the light that it was good. And God made a diuision betwene the light and darknesse.
And God called the light, daye: and the darknesse called he, nyght. And the euenyng and the morning was made one daye.
And God sayde: let there be a firmament betwene the waters: and let it make a diuision betwene waters and waters.
And God made the firmament, and set a diuision betwene the waters which were vnder the firmament and the waters that were aboue the firmament. And it was so.
And God called the firmament, Heauen. The euenynge also and the mornyng was made the second daye.
And God sayde: let the waters vnder heauen be gathered together into one place, that the drye lande maye be sene. And so it came to passe.
And God called the drye lande Earth: and the gatheryng together of waters called he the sees. And God sawe that it was good.
And God sayde: let the earth bring forth grene herbe, which maye engendre seed: and frutefull tre, yeldyng frute after hys kynde, whose seed maye be in it self vpon the earth. And it came to passe.
And the earth brought forth grene herbe, makynge seede after hys kynde: and tree yeldynge frute, whose seed was in it selfe after hys kynde. And God sawe that it was good.
The euenynge also and the mornynge was made the thyrde daye.
And God sayde: let there be made lyghtes in the firmament of heauen: and let them make a difference betwene the daye and the nyght, and let them be vnto signes, and vnto appoynted seasons, and vnto dayes, and vnto yeares.
And let them be vnto lyghtes in the firmament of heauen, that they maye geue lyght vpon the earthe. And so it came to passe.
And God made two greate lyghtes: a greater lyght to rule the daye, Ꟶ a lesse lyght to rule the night (And he made) sterres also.
And God set them in the firmament of heauen, that they myght geue lyght vpon the earth,
and that they might rule the daye and the night: and to make a difference betwene the lyght and the darknes. And God sawe that it was good.
The euenyng also and the mornyng was made the fourth daye.
And God sayde: let the waters bryng forth mouynge creature that hath lyfe, and foule that maye flye vpon the earth in the face of the firmament of heauen.
And God created great whalles and euery lyuing and mouyng creature, which the waters brought forth after their kynde: and euery fethered foule after their kynde. And God sawe that it was good.
And God blessed them, sayinge: Growe Ꟶ increace and fyll the waters of the see: and let fethred foules be multiplyed in the earth.
The euenynge also and the mornyng was made the fyfth daye.
And God sayde: let the earth bring forth lyuing creature after his kynde: catell, worme and beast of the erth after his kynde: and so it came to passe.
And God made the beast of the earth after his kynde, and catell after their kynde: and euery thynge that crepeth vpon the earth after his kynde. And God sawe that it was good.
And God sayde: let vs make man in oure ymage after oure lycknes, and let them haue rule of the fysh of the see: and foule of the ayre and catell, and all the earth, and of euery crepyng thyng that crepeth vpon the erth.
And so God created man in his awne ymage: in the ymage of God created he hym, male and female created he them.
And God blessed them, and God sayd vnto them: Growe and increace and replenyshe the erth, and subdue it: and haue dominion of the fish of the see, and foule of the aire: and of euery lyuing thyng that moueth vpon the earth.
And God sayde: Beholde, I haue geuen you euery herbe sowynge seed, which is in the vpper face of all the earth: and euery tre in the which is the frute of tree, and that soweth seed, that they maye be meate vnto you.
To euery beast of the earth also, and to euery byrde of the ayre, and to euery suche thinge as crepeth vpon the earth (wherin is a lyuing soule) I haue geuen all grenenes of herbe to be meat. And it came so to passe.
And God sawe euery thyng that he had made, and beholde, it was exceading good. The euenyng also and the mornynge was made the syxth daye.
The heauens also and the erth were fynished, and all the hoost of them.
And in the seuenth daye God ended his worcke which he had made. In the seuenth daye also, he rested from all hys worke which he had made.
And God blessed the seuenth daye, and sanctifyed it, because that in it he had rested from all his worke, which God ordeyned to make.
These are the generacions of the heauens and of the earth when they were created, in the daye, when the Lorde God made the earth and the heauens
and euery plant of the felde, before it was in the earth: and euery herbe of the felde, before it grewe. For the Lord God had not caused it to raygne vpon the earth, nether was there a man to tyll the grounde.
And there went vp a myste from of the earth, and watred the whole face of the grounde.
The Lorde God also shope man, euen dust from of the grounde, and brethed into his nastrels the breth of lyfe: and Adam was made a lyuing soule.
And the Lorde God planted a garden eastwarde from Eden, and there he put man whom he had made.
Moreouer, out of the grounde made the Lorde God to growe, euery tre that was pleasaunt to the sight, and commodious for meate. The tre of lyfe also and the tre of knowledge of good and of euyll was in the myddes of the garden.
And out of Eden, there went forth a riuer to water the garden. And from thence it was deuyded, and became into foure heades.
The name of one is Pison. The same is it that compasseth the whole lande of Hauilah,
where there is golde. And the golde of that lande is good. There is also Bdelliun, and the onix stone.
The name of the second ryuer is, Gihon: the same is it that compasseth the whole lande of Ethiopia.
The name of the third ryuer is Hidekel, Ꟶ it goth towarde the eastsyde of Assiria. And the fourth ryuer is Euphrates.
The Lord God also toke Adam, and put him into the garden of Eden, that he myght dresse and kepe it.
And the Lorde God commaunded Adam, saying: Eating, thou shalt eate of euery tre of the garden.
But as touchynge the tre of knowledge of good and euell, thou shalt not eate of it. Els, in what daye soeuer thou eatest therof, thou shalt dye the death.
And agayne, the Lord God sayd: It is not good that Adam shulde be alone I will make him an helpe, which maye be present wt him.
And so out of the grounde shope the Lorde God euery beast of the felde, and euery foule of the ayre, and brought it vnto man, that he myght se howe he wolde call it. For likewyse as man hym selfe named euery liuyng thyng, euen so was the name therof.
Man him selfe therfore named the names vnto all catell, and foule of the ayre, and to euery beast of the felde. And for man founde he not an helpe that myght be present with him.
The Lorde God also caused a slomber to fall vpon Adam, and he slept. And he toke one of hys ribbes, Ꟶ closed vp the flesh in stead therof.
And the rybbe which the Lorde God had taken from man, made he a woman, and brought her vnto man.
And man sayde: This is nowe bone of my bones, and fleshe of my fleshe. She shalbe called woman, because she was taken out of man.
For this cause shall a man leaue hys father and hys mother, Ꟶ shalbe ioyned with hys wyfe, and they shall become one flesh:
and they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.
But the serpent was sotyller then euery beast of the felde, which the Lorde God made. And he sayde vnto the woman: yee, hath the Lorde God sayde: ye shall not eat of euery tre of the garden?
And the woman sayde vnto the serpent: we eate of the frute of the tre of the garden:
but as for the frute of the tre which is in the middes of the garden, God hath sayde: ye shall not eate of it, nether shal ye touche it, lest happly ye dye.
And the serpent sayde vnto the woman: ye shall not dye the death:
but God doth knowe, that the same daye that ye eat therof, your eyes shalbe opened, Ꟶ ye shalbe euen as goddes, knowing good and euyll.
And so the woman (seyng that the same tre was good to eate, and lusty to the eyes, Ꟶ that the same tre was pleasaunt to get wisdome) toke of the frute therof, and dyd eate: and gaue vnto her husband beynge with her, which dyd eate also.
And the eyes of them both were opened: and they knewe that they were naked, Ꟶ they sowed fygge leaues together, and made them selues aperns.
And they heard the voyce of the Lord God walkynge in the garden in the coole of the daye. And Adam Ꟶ his wyfe hyd them selues from the presence of the Lorde God among the trees of the garden.
And the Lorde God called Adam, and sayd vnto hym: where art thou?
which sayde: I hearde thy voyce in the garden, Ꟶ was afrayed, because I was naked, Ꟶ hyd my selfe.
And he sayde: Who tolde the, that thou wast naked? hast thou not eaten of the same tre, concernynge the which I commaunded the, that thou shuldest not eate of it?
And Adam sayd: The woman, whom thou gauest to be wyth me, she gaue me of the tree, and I dyd eate.
And the Lorde God sayde vnto the woman: Why hast thou done this? And the woman sayde: yonder serpent begyled me, and I dyd eate.
And the Lorde God sayde vnto the serpent: because thou hast done this, thou art curssed aboue all catell, and aboue euery beast of the felde. Upon thy belly shalt thou go, Ꟶ dust shalt thou eate all the dayes, of thy lyfe.
I will also put enemytie betwene the Ꟶ the woman, betwene thy sede and hyr sede: The same shall treade downe thy head, and thou shalt treade vpon hys hele.
But vnto the woman he sayde: In multiplienge wyll I multiplye thy sorowe Ꟶ thy conceyuynge: In sorowe shalt thou brynge furth chyldren, Ꟶ thy lust shall pertayne to thy husbande, Ꟶ he shall haue the rule of the.
Unto Adam he sayde: Because thou hast herkened vnto the voyce of thy wyfe, Ꟶ hast eaten of the tree (concernynge the which I commaunded the, sayinge: Thou shalt not eate of it) cursed is the ground for thy sake. In sorowe shalt thou eate of it all the dayes of thy lyfe.
Thorne also Ꟶ thystle shall it cause to growe vnto the, Ꟶ thou shalt eate the herbe of the felde.
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eate bread, tyll thou be turned agayne into the grounde, for out of it was thou taken, in asmuch as thou art dust, Ꟶ into dust shalt thou be turned agayne.
And Adam called his wyues name Heua, because she was the mother of all lyuinge.
Unto the same Adam also Ꟶ to hys wyfe dyd the Lorde God make lethren garmentes, Ꟶ clothed them.
And the Lorde God sayde: Beholde, yonder man hath bene euen as one of vs, that he myght knowe good and euell. And nowe lest happly he put furth hys hande, and take also of the tree of lyfe, and eate, Ꟶ lyue for euer.
And the Lorde God sent them furth from the garden of Eden, to dresse the grounde that he was taken out of.
And so he droue out man, Ꟶ at the east syde of the garden of Eden, he set Cherubins, Ꟶ the glysterynge flame of a shakynge swerde, to kepe the waye of the tre of lyfe.
Adam knewe Heua his wife: Who conceauynge, bare Cain, sayinge: I haue gotten a man of the Lorde.
And she proceadynge furth, brought furth hys brother Habel, and Habel was a keper of shepe. But Cain was a tyller of the grounde.
And in processe of dayes it came to passe, that Cain brought of the frute of the grounde an oblacyon vnto the Lorde.
Habel also brought of the fyrstlynges of hys shepe, and of the fat therof. And the Lorde had respecte vnto Habel, Ꟶ to hys oblacyon.
But vnto Cain and to hys offrynge he had no respecte. For the whych cause Cain was exceadyng wrothe, and hys countenaunce abated.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Cain: Why art thou wrothe, Ꟶ why is thy countenaunce abated? yf thou do well, shall there not be a promocion.
And yf thou dost not well, lyeth not thy synne in the dores? Unto the also pertayneth the lust therof, and thou shalt haue dominion ouer it.
And Cain spake vnto Habel hys brother. And it fortuned whan they were in the felde, Cain rose vp agaynst Habel hys brother, and slue him.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Cain: Where is Habel thy brother? Whych sayd: I wote not. Am I my brothers keper?
And he sayde: What hast thou done? The voyce of thy brothers bloude crieth vnto me out of the grounde.
And nowe art thou curssed from of the erth, whych hath opened hyr mouth, to receaue thy brothers bloude from thy hande.
If thou tyll the grounde, she shall not proceade to yelde vnto the hyr strength. Fugityue, and vagabounde shalt thou be in the erth.
And Cain sayde vnto the Lorde: Myne iniquite is more, then that it maye be forgeuen.
Beholde, thou hast cast me out this daye from the vpper face of the erth, and from thy face shall I be hyd: Fugityue also and a vagabounde shall I be in the erth. And it shall come to passe: euery one that fyndeth me, shall slaye me.
And the Lorde sayde vnto him: yee, but whosoeuer slayeth Cain, it shalbe auenged seuen folde. And the Lorde set a marke vpon Cain, lest any man fyndynge him, shulde kyll hym.
And Cain wente out from the presence of the Lorde, Ꟶ dwelt in the londe of Nod eastward from Eden.
Cain also knewe his wife, whych conceaued Ꟶ bare Henoch: Ꟶ buyldinge a cyte, he called the name of the same cyte after the name of hys sonne Henoch.
Unto the same Henoch was borne Irad. Irad bedat Mehuiael, Ꟶ Mehuiael begat Methuschael. Methuschael begat Lamech.
And Lamech toke vnto hym two wyues: The name of the one was Ada, Ꟶ the name of the other was zilla.
And Ada begat Iabal, whych was the father of such as dwell in tentes, Ꟶ of suche as haue catell.
His brothers name was Thubal, whych was the father of such as handle harpe Ꟶ organe.
And zilla also begat Thubal Cain, which wrought connyngly euery craft of brasse Ꟶ of yron. The syster of Thubal Cain, was Naema.
And Lamech sayde vnto his wyues Ada and zilla: Heare my voyce ye wyues of Lamech, herken vnto my speche: I haue not slayne a man to the woundynge of my selfe, Ꟶ a yonge man to myne owne punyshment.
If Cain shalbe auenged seuenfolde, truly Lamech seuentye tymes and seuen tymes.
Adam knewe his wife agayne, Ꟶ she bare a sonne, and called his name Seth: For God (sayde she) hath appoynted me another sede in steade of Habel, whom Cain slew.
And vnto the same Seth also there was borne a sonne, Ꟶ he called his name Enos. Then began they to make inuocacyon in the name of the Lorde.
This is the boke of the generacyons of Adam. In the daye that God created man, in the lyknesse of God made he him.
Male and female created he them, Ꟶ blessed them, and called theyr name Adam in the daye of theyr creacyon.
And Adam lyued an hundreth Ꟶ thyrtye yeres, Ꟶ begat (a sonne) in hys owne lyknesse after his ymage, Ꟶ called his name Seth.
All the dayes of Adam (after he had begotten Seth) were eyght hundreth yeres, Ꟶ he begat sonnes and daughters.
And all the dayes that Adam lyued, were nyne hundreth and thyrtye yeares, and he dyed.
Seth lyued an hundred Ꟶ fyue yeares, and begat Enos.
And Seth lyued (after he begat Enos) eyght hundreth yeares Ꟶ seuen yeres, Ꟶ begat sonnes Ꟶ daughters.
And all the dayes of Seth were, nyne hundreth Ꟶ twelue yeares. And he dyed.
Enos lyued nyntye yeares Ꟶ begat kenan.
And Enos lyued (after he begat kenan) eight hundreth, and fyftene yeares, Ꟶ begat sonnes Ꟶ daughters.
And all the dayes of Enos were nyne hundreth Ꟶ fyue yeres. And he dyed.
Kenan lyued seuentye yeres, Ꟶ begat Mahelael.
And kenan lyued (after he begat Mahelael) eyght hundreth yeares and fortye yeres, and begat sonnes Ꟶ daughters.
And all the dayes of kenan were nyne hundreth yeares and ten yeares, and he dyed.
Mahelael lyued syxtye yeares Ꟶ fyue yeares,
Ꟶ begat Iared. And agayne, Mahelael lyued (after he begat Iared) eyght hundreth Ꟶ thirtye yeres, Ꟶ begat sonnes Ꟶ daughters.
And all the dayes of Mahelael were eyght hundreth nynetye Ꟶ fyue yeares. And he dyed.
Iared lyued an hundred Ꟶ syxtye and two yeares, Ꟶ begat Henoch.
And Iared lyued (after he begat Henoch) eyght hundreth yeares, Ꟶ begat sonnes and daughters.
And all the dayes of Iared were nyne hundreth and syxtye and two yeares. And he dyed.
Henoch lyued syxtie Ꟶ fyue yeares, Ꟶ begat Methuselah.
And Henoch walked wyth God after he begat Methuselah, thre hundreth yeres, Ꟶ begat sonnes Ꟶ daughters.
And all the dayes of Henoch were thre hundreth syxtie Ꟶ fyue yeres.
And Henoch walked with God, Ꟶ he (was no more sene,) for God toke hym awaye.
Methuselah also lyued an hundreth yeares, Ꟶ eyghtye Ꟶ seuen yeres, Ꟶ begat Lamech.
And agayne Methuselah lyued (after he begat Lamech,) seuen hundreth yeares, and eyghtye, Ꟶ two yeres, and begat sonnes and daughters.
And all the dayes of Methuselah were nyne hundreth yeares and syxtye Ꟶ nyne yeares. And he dyed.
Lamech lyued an hundreth yeres Ꟶ eyghtye Ꟶ two yeres, Ꟶ begat a sonne,
Ꟶ called his name Noah, sayenge: This same shall comforte vs as concernynge oure worke Ꟶ sorowe of oure handes, from of the erth, which God curssed.
And Lamech lyued (after he begat Noah) fyue hundreth yeres Ꟶ nynety Ꟶ fyue yeares, Ꟶ begat sonnes Ꟶ daughters.
And all the dayes of Lamech were seuen hundreth yeares, and seuentye and seuen yeares, and he dyed.
Noah was fyue hundreth yeare olde. And Noah begat Sem, Ham, and Iapheth.
And it came to passe, that man beganne to be multiplied in the vpper face of the erth, and there were daughters borne vnto them.
The sonnes of God also sawe the daughters of men that they were fayre, and they toke them wyues from amonge all that they had chosen.
And the Lorde sayde: My sprete shall not allwaye, stryue in man, because he is flesh, and hys dayes shalbe an hundreth Ꟶ twentye yeares.
But there were gyauntes in the erth in those dayes: yee and after that the sonnes of God came vnto the daughters of men, and they had gendred vnto them, the same became myghtye men of the worlde, and men of renowne.
But God sawe that the malyce of man was greate in the erth, and all the ymaginacyon of the thoughtes of hys hert was onely euell euery daye.
And it repented the Lorde, that he had made man in the erth, Ꟶ he was touched with sorow in his harte.
And the Lorde sayde: I wyll (from the vpper face of the earth) destroye man, whom I haue created: both man, catel, worme, Ꟶ foule of the ayre, for it repenteth me that I haue made them.
But Noah founde grace in the eyes of the Lorde:
These are the generacyons of Noah Noah was iust Ꟶ perfect in his generacions, and walked wt God.
Noah begat thre sonnes: Sem, Ham, Ꟶ Iapheth.
The earth also was corrupte before God, Ꟶ the same earthe was fylled wt crueltye.
And God loked vpon the erth, and beholde it was corrupt: For al fleshe had corrupt his waye vpon earth.
And God sayde vnto Noah: The ende of all fleshe is come before me, for the earthe is fylled with crueltye from the face of them. And beholde, I wyll destroy them with the erth,
Make the an Arke of pyne trees. Habitacyons shalt thou make in the Arke, and shalt pytch it within Ꟶ without with pytch.
And of this fasshyon shalt thou make it. The lengthe of the Arke shalbe thre hundreth cubytes: The bredth of it, fyftye cubites, Ꟶ the heygth of it thyrtye cubytes.
A wyndowe shalt thou make in the Arke, and in a cubite shalt thou fynyshe it aboue, but the dore of the Arke shalte thou set in the syde therof. With thre loftes one aboue an other shalte thou make it.
And behode, I, euen I, do bring a floude of waters vpon the earthe, that I maye destroye al flesshe wherin is the breth of lyfe vnder heauen: And euery thynge that is in the earth, shall dye.
With the also wyll I make my couenaunt, Ꟶ thou shalte come into the Arke: thou Ꟶ thy sonnes, thy wife Ꟶ thy sonnes wyues wt the.
And euery lyuing thinge, and of all flesshe, a payre of euery one shalt thou brynge into the Arke, to kepe them alyue wt the. They shalbe male Ꟶ female.
Of fethered foules also after theyr kynde, Ꟶ of catell after theyr kynde, of euery worme of the earth after his kynde: two of euery one shall come vnto the, that thou mayst kepe them alyue.
And take thou with the of all meate that is eaten, and thou shalt laye it vp with the, that it maye be meate for the Ꟶ them.
Noah therfore dyd accordyng vnto all that God commaunded hym: euen so dyd he.
And the lord sayd vnto Noah: Come thou and al thy house into the Arke for the haue I sene ryghtuous before me in thys generacyon.
Of euery cleane beaste thou shalte take with the seuen and seuen: The male and hys female: But of vncleane catell, two, the male and his female.
Of foules also of the ayre, seuen and seuen, the male Ꟶ the female, to kepe sede aliue vpon the face of al the whole erth.
For yet after seuen dayes I wyl rayne vpon the erth fortye dayes Ꟶ fortye nyghtes. And all substaunce that I haue made, wyll I destroye from of the vpper face of the earth.
Noah therfore dyd accordynge vnto all that God commaunded hym.
And Noah was syxe hundreth yeres, Ꟶ the floude of waters was vpon the earth.
And Noah came (and his sonnes, Ꟶ his wyfe, Ꟶ his sonnes wiues with hym) vnto the Arke, because of the waters of the floude.
Of cleane catell, Ꟶ of vncleane catell, Ꟶ of flyenge foules, and of euery suche as crepeth vpon the erth,
there came two and two vnto Noah into the Arke, the male and the female, as God had commaunded Noah.
It fortuned also after seuen dayes, and the waters of the floude were vpon the earth.
In the syxe hundrethe yere of Noes lyfe in the seconde Moneth, the seuenth daye of the moneth. In the same daye were all the fountaynes of the greate depe broken vp, and the wyndowes of heauen were opened.
And the rayne was vpon the earthe fortye dayes and fortye nyghtes.
In the selfe same daye entred Noah, Sem, Ham, Ꟶ Iapheth, the sonnes of Noah, Ꟶ Noahs wyfe, and the thre wiues of his sonnes with them into the Arke:
They, Ꟶ euery beast after hys kynde, and all catell after theyr kynde, yee Ꟶ euery worme that crepeth vpon the earthe after his kynde, and euery byrde after his kynde, and euery flieng Ꟶ fethered foule.
And they came vnto Noah into the Arke two and two, of all flesh wherin is the breth of lyfe.
And they entryng in, came male and female of all fleshe, as God had commaunded hym. And God shut hym in rounde aboute.
And the floude came fortye dayes vpon the earth, Ꟶ the waters were increaced, and bare vp the Arke, whiche was lyfte vp aboue the erth.
The waters also preuayled, Ꟶ were increased exceadyngly vpon the earthe, and the Arke went on the vpper face of the waters.
And the waters preuailed exceadingly vpon the earth, Ꟶ al the hye hylles that are vnder the whole heauen, were couered.
Fiftene cubytes vpwarde dyd the waters preuayle, so that the mountaynes were couered.
And all fleshe dyed that moued vpon the earth, in foule, in catel, in beast, and in euery worme that crepeth vpon the earth: yee and euery man also.
What soeuer was (in whose nostrels the breth of lyfe dyd brethe, all these in the drye lande dyed.)
And euery thyng was destroyed, that remayned, Ꟶ that was in the vpper parte of the grounde (both man and catell, and worme, and foule of the ayre) they were euen destroyed from of the earth. And Noah onely remayned alyue, and they that were with hym in the Arke.
But the waters preuayled vpon the earth an hundreth and fyftye dayes.
And God remembred Noah, and euery beaste, and all the catell that was with him in the Arke. And god made a wind to passe vpon the earth, and the waters ceassed.
The fountaynes also of the depe and the windowes of heauen were stopped,
and the rayne from heauen was restrayned. And the waters from the erth were returned, goyng and commynge agayne. And after the ende of the hundreth and fyftieth daye, the waters were abated.
And in the seuenth moneth in the seuententh daye of the moneth, the Arke rested vpon the mountaines of Armenia.
And the waters truely were goynge and decreacyng vntyl the tenth moneth: For in the tenth moneth, Ꟶ in the fyrst daie of the same moneth were the toppes of the mountaynes sene.
And after the ende of the fortieth daye, it happened that Noah opened the wyndowe of the Arke which he had made.
And he sent forth a rauen, whiche went out goyng forth and returnynge agayne, vntyll the waters were dryed vp vpon the earth.
And agayne he sent forth a doue from hym, that he myghte se yf the waters were abated from the vpper face of the grounde.
And the doue founde no rest for the sole of her fote, Ꟶ she returned vnto hym agayne into the Arke: for the waters were in the vpper face of the whole erth. And he, whan he had put forth his hande, toke her, and pulled her into hym into the Arke.
And he abode yet other seuen dayes, and proceadynge further, he sent forthe the doue out of the Arke.
And the doue came to hym in the euen tyde, and lo, in her mouthe was an oliue leaf that she had pluct, wherby Noah did knowe, that the waters were abated vpon the earth.
And he abode yet other seuen daies and sent forthe the doue, whiche proceaded not to returne vnto hym any more.
And it came to passe in the syxe hundreth Ꟶ one yere, in the fyrst moneth, Ꟶ in the fyrst daye of the moneth, the waters were dryed vp from the earthe. And Noah remoued the coueryng of the Arke, Ꟶ loked, Ꟶ beholde, the vpper face of the grounde was dryed vp.
And in the seconde moneth, in the seuen Ꟶ twentye daye of the moneth, was the earth dryed.
And God spake vnto Noah sayeng:
Go forth of the Arke, thou Ꟶ thy wyfe, thy sonnes, Ꟶ thy sonnes wyues wt the.
And brynge forth with the, euery beaste that is with the: of all flesshe (both foule Ꟶ catel, Ꟶ euery worme that crepeth vpon the earthe) that they maye gendre in the earth, Ꟶ bryng forth frute, and increase vpon erth.
And so Noah came forth and hys sonnes, hys wyfe, Ꟶ hys sonnes wyues with hym.
Euery beast also and euery worme, euery foule, and whatsoeuer crepeth vpon the earth (after theyr kyndes) went out of the Arke.
And Noah buylded an altare vnto the lorde, and toke of euery cleane beast, and of euery cleane foule, Ꟶ offred sacrifyces in the altare.
And the Lorde smelled a swete (or quyete) sauoure. And the Lorde sayde in his herte: I wyll not proceade to curse the grounde any more for mannes sake, for the ymagynacyon of mans hert is euel euen from hys youth. Neyther wyl I adde to smite any more euery thynge liuynge, as I haue done,
yet therfore shall not sowyng tyme, Ꟶ haruest, colde and heate, Sommer Ꟶ wynter, daye Ꟶ nyght, ceasse, all the dayes of the earth.
And God blessed Noah Ꟶ his sonnes, and sayde vnto them: brynge ye forth frute and multiplye, and replenyshe the earth.
The feare of you and the drede of you shalbe vpon euery beast of the erth, and vpon euery foule of the ayre, in all such as the earth bryngeth forth, and in all the fyshes of the see. Into your hande are they delyuered.
Euery thynge that moueth it selfe, and that lyueth, shalbe meate for you: Euen as the grene herbe haue I geuen you all thinges.
But flesshe in the lyfe therof, and in the bloude therof shall ye not eate.
Els your bloude of your lyues wyll I requyre. From the hande of euery beaste wyll I requyre it, and from the hande of man: From the hande of mans brother wyll I requyre the lyfe of man.
Who so sheddeth mannes bloude, by man shall hys bloude be shedde: For in the ymage of God, dyd God make man.
But brynge you forth frute, and multiplye: Gendre ye in the earth, and increase therin.
God spake also vnto Noah Ꟶ to his sonnes with hym sayeng:
Beholde I set vp my couenaunt with you, Ꟶ with your sede after you,
and with euery liuing creature that is with you, both in foule and in catell, and in euery beast of the earth which is with you of all that go oute of the Arke, according vnto euery liuyng thing of the earth.
But my couenaunt wyl I make wt you that from henceforth euery flesshe be not roted out with the waters of a floude, neyther shall there be a floude to destroye the earth any more.
And God sayde: This is the token of the couenaunt which I geue betwene me Ꟶ you, and euery lyuynge creature that is with you in to perpetuall generacyons.
I haue set my bowe in the cloude, and it shalbe for a token betwene me Ꟶ the erth.
And it shall come to passe, that whan I brynge a cloude vpon the erth, the bowe also shall be sene in the same cloude.
And I wyll thynke vpon my couenaunt whych is betwene me Ꟶ you, Ꟶ euery lyuynge creature in all fleshe: Ꟶ it shall nomore come to passe, that waters make a floude to destroye all fleshe.
But the bowe shalbe in the same cloude, Ꟶ I wyll loke vpon it, that I maye thynke vpon the euerlastynge couenaunt betwene God and euery lyuinge creature, in all flesh that is vpon erth.
And God sayde vnto Noah. This is the token of the couenaunt which I haue made betwene me and all flesh that is vpon erthe.
The sonnes of Noah goynge furth of the Arke, were: Sem, Ham, and Iapheth. And Ham truly is the father of Chanaan.
These are the thre sonnes of Noah, Ꟶ of them was the whole erth ouerspred.
Noah also beganne to be an husbande man, and planted a vyneyarde.
And he drynkynge of the wyne, was dronken, and vncouered wythin hys tent.
And Ham the father of Chanaan seynge the nakednesse of hys father, tolde hys two brethren wythout.
And Sem and Iapheth, they two, takynge a garment, layed it vpon their shulders: Ꟶ comminge bakwarde, couered the naked preuityes of their father: namely, theyr faces beynge turned awaye, lest they shulde se theyr fathers preuities.
And Noah awoke from hys wyne, and knewe what his yonger sonne had done vnto hym.
And he sayde: Curssed be Chanaan, a seruaunt of seruauntes shall he be vnto hys brethren.
He sayde moreouer: Blessed be the Lorde God of Sem, Ꟶ Chanaan shalbe hys seruaunt.
God shall enlarge Iapheth, and he shall dwell in the tentes of Sem, Ꟶ Chanaan shalbe their seruaunt.
Noah lyued after the floude thre hundreth and fyftye yeares.
And all the dayes of Noah were nyne hundreth Ꟶ fyftye yeares. And he dyed.
These are the generacions of the sonnes of Noah, Sem, Ham and Iapheth: And vnto them were chyldren borne after the floude.
The chyldren of Iapheth: Gomer and Magog, and Madai, and Iauan, and Thubal, Mesech and Theras.
The chyldren of Gomer: Askenas and Riphath and Thogarma.
The chyldren of Iauan: Elisa and Tharsis, Kitthim, and Dodanim.
Of these were the Iles of the Gentiles deuyded in their landes, euery man after hys tonge, Ꟶ after hys kynreds in their nacyons.
The children of Ham: Cusch Ꟶ Mizraiim, and Phut and Chanaan.
And the chyldren of Cusch: Seba and Hauilah and Sabtha, and Rahma, and Sabthecha. The chyldren of Rahma: Scheba and Dedan.
Cusch also begat Nimrod. The same beganne to be myghtye in the erth.
For he was a myghtye hunter before the Lorde. Wherfore it is sayde: Euen as Nimrod the myghtie hunter before the Lorde.
The begynning of his kyngdome was Babel and Erech and Accad, and Calne, in the londe of Sinhar.
Out of that londe came Assur, and buylded Niniue, and the stretes of the citie Ꟶ Calah.
Resen also betwene Niniue and Calah, and it is a greate cite.
Mizraiim begat Ludym, Ꟶ Enamim, Ꟶ Lehabim, and Nephtuhim.
Pathrusim also and Casluhim, out of whom came Philistiim and Capthorim.
Chanaan begat at zidon his fyrst borne sonne, and Heth,
Ꟶ Iebusi, and Emori, Ꟶ Girgosi.
Hahiui also and Haarki and Hassini,
and Haaruadi, and Hazmari, and Hahemathi: And afterwarde were the kynreds of the Cananites spred abrode.
The border of the Cananites was from zidon, as thou commest to Gerar vntill Gazan, and as thou goest vnto Sodoma, and Gomora, and Adama, and zeboiim, euen vnto Lesa.
These are the chyldren of Ham in their kynreds, in theyr tonges, countrees and in theyr nacyons.
Unto Sem also the father of all the children of Eber (and elder brother of Iapheth) there were chyldren borne.
The chyldren of Sem: Elam and Assur, Arphachsad, and Lud and Aram.
The children of Aram: Uz and Hul, Gether Ꟶ Mas
Arphachsad begat Selah, Ꟶ Selah begat Eber.
Unto Eber also were borne two sonnes: The name of the one was Peleg, for in hys dayes was the erth deuyded. And hys brothers name was Iaketan.
Iaketan begat Almodad and Saleph Hazarmaueth and Ierah,
and Hodoran Ꟶ Uzal and Dickla,
Obal also Ꟶ Abimael and Scheba,
and Ophir, and Hauila, and Iobab. All these were the chyldren of Iaketan.
And their dwellinge was from Mesa, as thou goest vnto Sephar a mount of the east.
These are the children of Sem after their kynreds and tonges in their londes and nacyons.
And so these are the kynreds of the chyldren of Noah, after their generacions in their peoples, and of these were the nacions deuyded in the erth after the floude.
Al the whole erth was of one language Ꟶ lyke speche.
And it happened whan they wente furth from the east, they founde a playne in the londe of Sinhar, Ꟶ there they abode.
And they sayd euery one to his neyghboure: Come, let vs prepare brycke, Ꟶ burne them in the fyre. And they had brycke for stone, Ꟶ slyme had they in steade of morter.
And they sayde: Go to, let vs buylde vs a citie Ꟶ a tower, whose toppe maye reach vnto heauen: Ꟶ let vs make vs a name, lest haply we be scatred abrode in to the vpper face of the whole erth.
But the Lord came downe, to se the cytie and tower whych the chyldren of men buylded.
And the Lorde sayde: Beholde, the people is one, and they haue all one language, Ꟶ thys they begynne to do, neyther wyll it be restrayned from them, whatsoeuer they haue ymagined to do.
Come on, let vs go downe, and confounde theyr language, that euery one perceaue not hys neyghbours speche.
And so the Lorde scatred them from that place into the vpper face of all the erth. And they left of to buylde the cytie.
And therfore is the name of it called Babel, because the Lorde dyd there confounde the language of all the erth. And from thence dyd the Lorde scater them abrode vpon the face of all the erth.
These are the generacyons of Sem: Sem was an hundreth yeare olde, and begat Arphachsad two yeare after the floude.
And Sem lyued (after he begat Arphachsad) fyue hundreth yeares, and begat sonnes and daughters.
Arphachsad lyued fyue and thyrtye yeares, Ꟶ begat Selah.
And Arphachsad lyued (after he begat Selah) foure hundreth Ꟶ thre yeares, and begat sonnes Ꟶ daughters.
Selah lyued thyrtye yeares, Ꟶ begat Eber.
And Selah lyued (after he begat Eber) foure hundreth and thre yeares, and begat sonnes and daughters.
Eber lyued foure and thyrtye yeares, and begat Peleg.
And Eber lyued (after he begat Peleg) foure hundreth and thyrtye yeares, Ꟶ begat sonnes and daughters.
Peleg lyued thyrtye yeares, Ꟶ begat Reu.
And Peleg lyued (after he begat Reu) two hundreth and nyne yeares, and begat sonnes and daughters.
Reu lyued two and thyrtye yeares, and begat Serug.
And Reu lyued (after he begat Serug) two hundreth and seuen yeares, and begat sonnes and daughters.
Serug lyued thyrtye yeares, Ꟶ begat Nahor.
And Serug lyued (after he begat Nahor) two hundreth yeares, and begat sonnes and daughters.
And Nahor lyued nyne Ꟶ twentye yeares, and begat Terah.
And Nahor lyued (after he begat Terah) an hundreth and nynetene yeares, and begat sonnes and daughters.
Terah lyued seuentye yeares, and begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran.
These are the generacyons of Terah: Terah begat Abram, Nahor Ꟶ Haran. Haran begat Lot.
And Haran dyed in the presence of Terah hys father, in the londe of hys natyuitye, euen in Ur of the Caldees.
Abram and Nahor toke them wyues: The name of Abrams wyfe was Sarai, Ꟶ the name of Nahors wyfe was Milca, the daughter of Haran the father of Milca Ꟶ the father of Iisca.
But Sarai was baren, Ꟶ had no chylde.
And Terah toke Abram his sonne, and Lot the sonne of Haran, hys sonnes sonne, Ꟶ Sara hys daughter in lawe, hys sonne Abrams wyfe. And they departed together from Ur of the Caldees, that they myght go into the londe of Chanaan, Ꟶ they came vnto Charan, Ꟶ dwelt there.
And the dayes of Terah were two hundreth and fyue yeares, and Terah dyed in Haran.
And the Lorde sayd vnto Abram: Get the out of thy countrey, Ꟶ out of thy nacyon, and from thy fathers house, vnto a londe that I wyll shewe the.
And I wyll make of the a greate people, and wyll blesse the, Ꟶ make thy name greate, that thou mayest be euen a blessynge.
I wyll also blesse them that blesse the, Ꟶ cursse suche as curseth the, Ꟶ in the shall all the kynreds of the erth be blessed.
And so Abram departed euen as the Lorde spake vnto him, Ꟶ Lot wente wyth hym. And Abram was seuentye Ꟶ fyue yeares olde, whan he departed out of Haram.
And Abram toke Sarai his wife Ꟶ Lot his brothers sonne, Ꟶ all theyr substaunce that they had in possessyon, Ꟶ the soules that they had begotten in Haran. And they departed, that they myght come in to the londe of Chanaan,
and in to the londe of Chanaan they came. Abram passed thorowe the londe vnto the place of Sichem, Ꟶ vnto the playne of Moreh: And the Cananite was then in the londe.
And the Lorde apearynge vnto Abram: sayd: Unto thy sede wyll I geue this londe. And there buylded he an altare vnto the lorde, euen where he had appeared vnto hym.
And remouynge thence vnto a mountayne that was eastwarde from bethel, he pitched his tent, hauynge Bethel on the west syde, Ꟶ Hai on the east. And he buyldynge an altare vnto the Lorde, dyd call on the name of the Lorde.
And Abram wente furth goinge and departynge towarde the south.
But there was a derth in that londe, and therfore wente Abram downe in to Egypte, that he myght soiourne there, for there was a sore derth in the londe.
And it happened whan he was come nere to entre in to Egypte, he sayde vnto Sarai hys wyfe: Beholde, I knowe, that thou art a fayre woman to loke vpon.
Therfore shall it come to passe that whan the Egypcyans se the, they shall saye: She is hys wyfe. And they shall kyll me, but they shall saue the alyue.
Saye (I praye the) that thou art my syster, that I maye fare well for thy sake, and that my soule maye lyue thorowe thy occasyon.
And so it happened, whan Abram was come in to Egypte, the Egyptians behelde the woman, for she was very fayre.
The prynces also of Pharao sawe her, and commended her before Pharao, and the woman was taken into Pharaos house.
And he truly intreated Abram well for her sake, and he had shepe Ꟶ oxen and he asses, men seruauntes and mayde seruauntes, she asses Ꟶ camels.
And the Lorde smote Pharao and hys house with greate plages because of Sarai Abrams wyfe.
And Pharao callinge Abram, sayde Why hast thou done thys vnto me? Why dyddest thou not tell me, that she was thy wyfe?
Nowe therfore beholde, there is thy wyfe, take her, and go thy waye:
And Pharao gaue the men commaundement concernynge him and they conuayed him furth, and his wyfe, and all that he had.
And so Abram gat him vp out of Egypte, he Ꟶ his wyfe, Ꟶ all that he had, Ꟶ Lot wyth hym, towarde the south.
And Abram was very ryche, in catell in syluer Ꟶ golde.
And he wente furth on hys iourney from the south towarde Bethel, vnto the place where hys tent had bene at the begynnynge, betwene Bethel Ꟶ Hai:
Euen vnto the place of the altare which he had made there at the fyrst, and there Abram called on the name of the Lorde.
Lot also whych went with Abram had shepe, cattell Ꟶ tentes:
Ꟶ the lande was not able to receaue them that they myght dwell together, for the substaunce of their ryches was greate, Ꟶ they coulde not dwell to gether.
And there fell a stryfe betwene the herdmen of Abrams catell, Ꟶ the herdmen of Lots catell. Moreouer the Cananytes and the Pheresytes dwelled at that tyme in the lande.
Then sayde Abram vnto Lot: Let there be no stryfe (I praye the) betwene the and me Ꟶ betwene my herdmen and thyne, for we be brethren.
Is not all the hole lande before the? Departe I praye the fro me. If thou wilt take the lefte hande, I will go to the ryght: or yf thou departe to the ryght hande I will go to the left.
And so Lot lyftynge vp hys eyes, beholde all the contre of Iordane, which was a plenteous contre of water euery where, before the Lord destroyed Sodome Ꟶ Gomorra, euen as the garden of the Lorde, lyke the lande of Egypte as thou commest vnto zoar.
Than Lot chose all the playne countrey of Iordane Ꟶ toke hys iourney from the east. And so departed the one brother from the other.
Abram dwelled in the lande of Canaan: and Lot abode in the cyties of the playne, Ꟶ tented vntyll Sodome.
But the men of Sodome were wicked, and exceadynge synners before the Lorde.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Abram, after that Lot was departed from him. Lyfte vp thyne eyes nowe, Ꟶ loke from the place where thou art, northwarde, southwarde, estwarde Ꟶ westwarde,
for all the lande whyche thou seeste wyll I geue vnto the and to thy seed for euer.
And I wyll make thy seed, as the dust of the erth: so that yf a man can nombre the dust of the erth, than shall thy seed also be nombred.
Aryse and walke about in the lande, after the length of it Ꟶ after the bredth therof, for I wyll geue it vnto the.
And Abram takynge downe hys tente, came and dwelled in the okegroue of Mamre, namely in Ebron, and buylded there an alter vnto the Lorde.
And it chaunsed in the dayes of Amraphael kynge of Synhar, Arioch kinge of Ellasar, kedorlaomor kynge of Elam, Ꟶ Thydeall kynge of the nacions,
and they made warre wyth Bera kynge of Sodome, Ꟶ wyth Birsa kynge of Gomorra, and with Sineab kynge of Adama, and with Semeabar kynge of zeboim, and with the kynge of Bela. The same is zoar.
All these were ioyned together in the vale of Siddim where the salt see is.
For twelue yeare wert they subiecte to kynge kedorlaomor, and in the .xiij. yere rebelled.
But in the .xiiij. yere came kedorlaomor and the kynges that were wyth hym, and smote the Gyauntes in Astaroth karnaim and the Susyms in Ham, Ꟶ the Emyms in the playne of kariathim,
and the Horyms in mounte Seir vnto the playne of Pharan, whiche bordreth vpon the wildernesse.
And they returnynge, came to En Mispat which is Cades, Ꟶ smote all the countre of the Amalechytes, and also the Amorites that dwelt in Hazezon Thamar.
And there went out the kynge of Sodome, Ꟶ the kynge of Gomorra, and the kynge of Adama and the kynge of zeboijm, and the kynge of Bela which is zoar. And they stroke battell with them in the vale of Syddym, that is to saye,
with kedorlaomor the kynge of Elam and wyth Thydeal kynge of the Nacyons, and wyth Amraphael kynge of Synhar. And with Arioch kynge of Ellasar: foure kynges agaynste fyue.
And the vale of Syddym was full of slyme pyttes. And the kynge of Sodome and Gomorra fled, and fell there. And they that remayned, fled to the mountayne.
And they takynge all the goodes of Sodome and Gomorre and all their vytalles, went their waye.
And they caryed awaye Lot also Abrams brothers sonne and hys good (for he dwelled at Sodome) Ꟶ departed.
And there came one that had escaped, and tolde Abram the Hebrewe whiche dwelled in the okegroue of Mamre the Amoryte, brother of Eschol, and brother of Aner, which were confederate wt Abram.
When Abram hearde that hys brother was taken, he harnessed hys freshe younge men borne in hys owne house thre hundred and eyghtene, and folowed on them vntyll Dan:
And he was sett in Aray vpon them by nyght, he and his seruauntes, and smote them and pursued them vnto Hoba: which lyeth on the lefte hande of Damascos,
and recouered all the goodes, and also brought agayne hys brother Lot, and his goodes, the women also and the people.
After that he returned agayne from the slaughter of kedorlaomor Ꟶ of the kynges that were with him, came the kynge of Sodome forth to mete him in the playne valeye, which is kynges dale.
And Melchisedech kynge of Salem brought forth bread Ꟶ wyne. For he was the Preste of the most hyghest God
Ꟶ blessed hym sayinge: Blessed be Abram vnto the hyghe God possessor of heauen and erth.
And blessed be the hye God which hath delyuered thyne enemyes in to thy hande. And Abram gaue him tythes of all.
And the kynge of Sodome sayde vnto Abram: Gyue me the soules, and take the goodes to thy selfe.
And Abram answered the kynge of Sodome: I haue lyfte vp my hande vnto the Lorde the hye God possessor of heauen and erth,
that I wyll not take of all that is thyne so moche as a thred or shoulachet, lest thou shuldest saye, I haue made Abram ryche.
Saue only that whyche the yonge men haue eaten and the partes of the men which went with me, Aner, Eschol, and Mamre which shall take their partes.
After these thynges were done, the worde of the Lorde came vnto Abram in a vysyon sayinge, Feare not Abram, I am thy defence, and thy rewarde shall be exceadynge great.
And Abram sayde: Lorde God what wilt thou geue me whan I go chyldlesse, and the chylde of the stewardship of my house is thys Eleazar of Damasco?
And Abram sayde: Se, to me hast thou geuen no seed: lo, a lad borne in my house is myne heyre.
And beholde, the worde of the Lorde came vnto hym sayinge: He shall not be thyne heyre, but one that shall come out of thyne awne body shalbe thyne heyre.
And he brought him out Ꟶ sayde: loke vp vnto heauen, and tell the starres, yf thou be able to nombre them. And he sayde vnto him Euen so shall thy seed be.
And Abram beleued the Lorde, and that counted he to hym for ryghtewesnes.
And agayne he sayde vnto hym: I am the Lorde that brought the out of Ur of the Caldees to geue the thys lande, and that thou myghtest possesse it.
And he sayde: Lorde God, wherby shall I knowe that I shall possesse it?
He answered vnto hym: Take an heyffer of thre yere olde, and a she goate of thre yere olde, and a thre yere olde ram, a turtyll doue also and a yonge pigeon.
He toke therfore all these vnto him, Ꟶ deuyded them in the myddes, and layde euery pece, one agaynst another. But the foules deuyded he not.
And whan the byrdes fell on the carcases, Abram droue them awaye.
And when the sunne was downe, ther fell a slomber vpon Abram. And loo, a darke and great feare fell vpon hym.
And he sayde vnto Abram: knowe thys of a suertye, that thy seed shalbe a straunger in a lande that perteyneth not vnto them. And shall serue them, Ꟶ they shall entreate them euell .iiij. hundred yeares.
But the nacyon whom they shall serue, wyll I iudge. And afterwarde shall they come out with great substaunce.
And thou shalt goo vnto thy fathers in peace, and shalt be buryed in a good olde age:
But in the fourth generacyon they shall come hyther againe, for the wickednesse of the Amorites ys not yet full.
And it came to passe that whan the sonne went downe, there was a dark cloude: beholde, ther was a smoking furnesse, Ꟶ a fyre brande goinge betwene the sayde peces.
In that same daye the Lorde made a couenaunte wt Abram sayinge: vnto thy seed haue I geuen thys lande, from the ryuer of Egypt, euen vnto the great ryuer the ryuer of Euphrates,
the kenytes, the kenyzites, and the Cadmonites,
the Hethites, and the Pherezites, and the gyauntes,
the Amorytes also, Ꟶ the Canaanites, the Gergesytes and the Iebusytes.
Sarai Abrams wyfe bare hym no Chyldren. But she had an hande mayde an Egypcyan, Hagar by name.
And Sarai sayde vnto Abram Beholde the Lorde hath restrayned me, that I can not bere. I praye the go in vnto my mayde, perauenture I maye be edifyed by her. And Abram obeyed the voyce of Sarai
And Sarai Abrams wyfe toke Hagar hyr mayde the Egyptian (after Abram had dwelled .x. yere in the lande of Canaan) and gaue her to hyr husbande Abram to be hys wyfe.
Which whan he wente in vnto Agar, she conceaued. And when she sawe that she had conceyued, hyr mastresse was despysed in hyr eyes.
And Sarai sayde vnto Abram: Thou dost me wronge: I haue geuen my mayde into thy bosome. Whych seynge that she hath conceaued, I am despysed in hyr eyes, the Lorde iudge betwene the and me.
But Abram sayde to Sarai: beholde, thy mayde is in thy hande, do with hyr as it pleaseth the. And whan Sarai fared foule wyth her, she fled from the face of her.
And the Angell of the Lorde founde her besyde a fountayne of water in the wyldernes: euen by the well that is in the waye to Sur.
And he sayde: Hagar Sarais mayde, whence camest thou and whether wilt thou goo? She sayde: I flee from the face of my mastresse Sarai.
And the angell of the Lorde sayde vnto her: returne to thy mastresse againe, Ꟶ submytte thy selfe vnder her handes.
And agayne, the angell of the Lorde sayde vnto her: In encreasinge I wyll encrease thy seed and it shall not be nombred for multitude.
And the Lordes angell sayde vnto her, se, thou art with chylde and shalt bere a sonne, and shalt call hys name Ismael: because the Lorde hath herde thy tribulacyon.
He also will be a wylde man, and hys hande will be agaynst euery man, and euery mans hande agaynst him. And he shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren.
And she called the name of the Lorde that spake vnto her: thou God lokest on me, for she sayde: haue I not sene here the backe partes of hym that seeth me?
Wherfore the well was called, the well of him that lyueth Ꟶ seeth me. And it is betwene Cades and Bared.
And Hagar bare Abram a sonne, and Abram called his sonnes name which Hagar bare vnto him. Ismael
And Abram was .lxxxvj. yere olde, when Hagar bare him Ismael.
Abram was nynetye yere olde Ꟶ .ix. Ꟶ the Lorde apeared to Abram Ꟶ sayde vnto hym: I am the almyghtie God: walke before me and be thou perfecte.
And I will make my bonde betwene me and the, and will multiplye the excedingly.
And Abram fell on hys face. And God talked with him sayinge:
Beholde, I am, and my testament is with the, Ꟶ thou shalt be a father of many nacyons.
Neyther shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shalbe Abraham: for a father of many nacyons haue I made the,
I will make the to growe excedyngly, and will make nacions of the: ye Ꟶ kynges shall sprynge out of the.
Moreouer I will make my bonde betwene me and the, and thy seed after the in theyr generacyons, by an euerlastynge testament, that I maye be God vnto the and to thy seed after the.
And I wyll geue vnto the and to thy seed after the, the lande where in thou art a straunger: Euen all the lande of Canaan, for an euerlastynge possessyon, and wyll be their God.
And God sayde agayne vnto Abraham: Se thou also kepe my testamente therfore both thou and thy seed after the in their generacyons.
This is my testamente which ye shall kepe betwene me Ꟶ you Ꟶ thy seed after the. Euery manchylde amonge you shalbe circumcysed.
ye shall circumcyse the fleshe of your foreskyne, and it shall be a token of the bonde betwyxte me and you.
And euery manchylde of .viij. dayes olde shall be circumcysed amonge you, Ꟶ suche as be in youre generacyons, and borne at home and he that is boughte wyth money of any straunger whych is not of thy seed. He that is borne in thy house, Ꟶ he also that is bought wyth money, must nedes be circumcysed.
And my testament shall be in youre fleshe, for an euerlastinge bonde.
And the vncircumcysed manchylde, in whose fleshe the forskynne is not circumcysed, that soule shall peryshe, from his people: because he hath broken my testament.
And God sayde vnto Abraham: Sarai thy wyfe shalt thou not call Sarai: but Sara shall her name be.
And I will blesse her Ꟶ haue geuen the a sonne of her, Ꟶ wyll blesse her: people also, ye and kynges of people shall sprynge of her.
But Abraham fell vpon his face and laughed, and sayde in hys harte: shall a chylde be borne vnto him that is an hundred yere olde, and shall Sara that is nynetie yere olde, bere?
And Abraham sayde vnto God: O that Ismael myghte lyue in thy syghte.
Unto whom God sayde: Sara thy wyfe shall bere the a sonne in dede, Ꟶ thou shalt call his name Isahac. And I wyll make my bonde with him, for an euerlastynge bonde and with his seed after him.
And as concernynge Ismael also, I haue herde the: for I haue blessed him, Ꟶ wyll make him to encrease, Ꟶ will multiplye him excedyngly. Twelue princes shal he begette, Ꟶ I will make a great nacyon of him.
But my bonde will I make with Isahac, which Sara shall bere vnto the: euen this tyme twelue moneth.
And he left of talkynge with hym, Ꟶ departed vp from Abraham.
Abraham toke Ismael his sonne and all suche as were borne in his house, and all that was bought wt money as many as were men chyldren which were amonge the men of Abrahams house, Ꟶ circumcysed the flesshe of their foreskynne, euen in that selfe same daye, as God had sayde vnto him.
Abraham also him selfe was nynetye yere olde Ꟶ nyne, when the fleshe of his floreskynne was circumcysed.
Ismaell his sonne was .xiij. yere olde when he was circumcysed in the fleshe of his foreskynne.
The selfe same daye was Abraham circumcysed, and Ismaell hys sonne.
And all the men of hys house, borne in his house or bought with money (of straungers) were circumcysed with him.
And the Lorde apeared vnto hym in the playne of Mamre and he sat in his tent dore in the heate of the daye.
And he lifte vp his eyes and looked: Ꟶ lo, thre men stode by him. And when he sawe them, he ran to mete them from the tent dore, and fell to the ground
and sayde: Lorde (I beseche the) yf I haue founde fauoure in thy syght: goo not (I praye the) from thy seruaunte.
Let a lytle water be fett, and washe youre fete, and refreshe youre selues vnder the tree.
And I wyll fett a morsell of breed, to comforte youre hartes withall. And than shall ye goo youre wayes, for euen therfore are ye come to youre seruaunte. And they sayde: Do euen so as thou hast sayde:
And Abraham went a pase in to his tent vnto Sara, Ꟶ sayde: make redy attonce thre peckes of fyne meale, kneade it, Ꟶ make cakes.
And Abraham rennynge vnto his beastes, fett a calfe tendre and good, Ꟶ gaue it vnto a yonge man, Ꟶ he hasted to make it redy attonce.
And he toke butter Ꟶ mylcke Ꟶ the calfe whych he had prepared, Ꟶ set it before them, and stode hym selfe by them vnder the tree whan they dyd eate.
And they sayde vnto him: Where is Sara thy wyfe? he answered: beholde, she is in the tent.
And he sayde in returnynge, I will come agayne vnto the, accordynge to the tyme of lyfe. And loo Sara thy wyfe shall haue a sonne. That hearde Sara, in the tent doore which was behinde him
(Abraham and Sara were both olde Ꟶ well stryken in age, Ꟶ it ceased to be with Sara after the maner as it is wyth wemen)
Therfore Sara laughed with in hyr selfe sayinge: Nowe I am waxed olde, shall I geue my selfe to lust, Ꟶ my Lorde olde also?
And God sayde vnto Abraham: wherfore dyd Sara laughe sayinge: shall I of a suertye bere a chylde which am olde?
is any thynge wonderfull to God? Acordynge to the tyme appoynted will I returne vnto the, euen acordynge to the tyme of lyfe, Ꟶ Sara shall haue a sonne.
Than Sara denyed it sayinge: I laughed not, for she was afrayde. And he sayde: It is not so, but thou laughedst.
And the men stondinge vp from thence, loked towarde Sodome. And Abraham went with them to brynge them on the waye.
And the Lorde sayde: Shall I hyde from Abraham that thynge which I do?
seynge that Abraham shall be a great and a myghtie people, and all the nacyons of the erth shalbe blessed in him?
I knowe this also, that he will commaunde his chyldren and hys houshold after him, that they kepe the waye of the Lorde, and do after ryghte and conscyence, that the Lorde maye bringe vpon Abraham all that he hath spoken vnto him.
And the Lorde sayde The crye of: Sodome and Gomorra is great, and theyr synne is excedynge greuous.
I wyll go downe nowe and see whether they haue done all together accordynge to that crye which is come vnto me or not, that I maye knowe.
And the men departed thence and went to Sodome warde. But Abraham stode yet before the Lorde,
and Abraham drewe nere Ꟶ sayde: Wylt thou also destroye the ryghtwes with the wicked?
parauenture there be .l. ryghtwes within the cytie, wylt thou destroye and not spare the place for the sake of .l. ryghtwes that are therin?
That be farre from the, that thou shuldest do after thys sayinge, Ꟶ sley the ryghtwes with the wicked, Ꟶ that the ryghtwes shulde be as the wicked, that be farre from the. Shall not the iudge of all the worlde do accordynge to ryghte?
And the Lorde sayde: If I fynde in Sodome .l. ryghtwes wythin the cytie, I will spare all the place for their sakes.
And Abraham answerynge: sayde, Beholde, I haue taken vpon me to speake vnto the Lorde, which am but dust and asshes.
perauenture there shall lacke fyue of fyftye ryghteous: wylt thou destroye all the cytie for lacke of fyue? And he sayde: yf I fynde there fourtye Ꟶ fyue, I will not destroye them.
And he proceaded to speake vnto hym agayne, Ꟶ sayde, peraduenture there shalbe fourtye founde there. He answered: I will not do it for forties sake.
He sayde vnto him agayne: O let not my Lord be angry that I speake: peraduenture there shall thyrtye be founde there. And he sayde: I will do nothynge yf I fynde thirtye there.
He sayde agayne: O se, I haue taken vpon me to speake nowe also vnto my Lorde: peraduenture ther shalbe twentye founde there. He answered: I wyll not destroye them for twenties sake.
And be sayde: O let not my Lorde he angry, Ꟶ I wyll speake yet but this once. Perauenture there shall ten be founde there. He answered: I wyll not destroye them for tens sake.
And the Lorde went his waye as soone as he had lefte commoninge with Abraham. And Abraham also returned vnto his place.
And there came .ij. angels to Sodome at euen. And Lot sat at the gate of Sodome. And Lot seinge them, rose vp to mete them, and he bowed him selfe to the grounde wt his face.
And he sayde: my Lordes, turne in I praye you in to youre seruauntes house Ꟶ tary all nyghte Ꟶ washe youre fete Ꟶ ye shall ryse vp early to go on youre wayes. Whych sayde: nay, but we wyll byde in the streates all nyghte.
And he in maner dyd euen compelle them violently. And they turnynge in vnto him entred in to his house, Ꟶ he made them a feaste Ꟶ did bake swete bred, Ꟶ they did eat
And before they went to rest, the men of the cytie (euen the men of Sodome) compassed the house rounde aboute both olde Ꟶ yonge, all the people from all quarters.
And they callynge vnto Lot, sayde vnto him: where are the men which came into the thys nyght? brynge them out vnto vs Ꟶ we will knowe them.
And Lot went out at the doores vnto them and shut the dore after hym
and sayde: naye for goddes sake brethren, do not so wyckedly.
Beholde I haue two daughters which haue knowne no man, them will I brynge out nowe vnto you: Ꟶ do with them as it semeth good in your eyes. Only vnto these men do nothinge, for therfore came they in vnder the shadowe of my rofe.
And they sayde: stonde back. And they sayde: he came in as one to sciourne, Ꟶ wyll he be nowe a iudge? we wyll suerly deale worse with the than with them. And they preased sore vpon the man, euen Lot: Ꟶ came to breake vp the doore,
but the men put forth their hande Ꟶ pulled Lot in to the house to them and shut to the doore.
And the men that were at the doore of the house, they smote with blyndnesse both small Ꟶ greate: so that they faynted and coulde not fynde the doore.
And the men sayde vnto Lot: If thou haue yet here any sonne in lawe or sonnes or daughters or what soeuer thou hast in the cytie, brynge it out of this place:
for we must destroye this place, because the crye of them is great before the face of God: for the Lorde hath sent vs to destroye it.
And Lot went out and spake vnto hys sonnes in lawe which maried his daughters sayinge: stonde vp: get yowe out of this place, for the Lorde will ouerthrowe this cytie. But he semed as though he had mocked, vnto his sonnes in lawe.
And whan the morninge arose, the angels caused Lot to spede him sayinge: Stonde vp, take thy wyfe and thy two daughters at hande, lest thou peryshe in the synne of the cytie.
And as he prolonged the tyme, the men caught both him, his wyfe Ꟶ his two daughters by the handes, the Lorde beynge mercyfull vnto him, and they brought hym forth and sette hym without the cytie.
It fortuned whan they had brought them out, he sayde: Saue thy lyfe, and loke not behynde the, neyther tary thou in all thys playne countre. Saue thy selfe in the mountayne, lest thou peryshe.
And Lot sayde vnto them. Oh nay Lorde:
beholde, thy seruaunt hath fownde grace in thy syghte, and thou hast magnifyed thy mercye which thou hast shewed vnto me in sauynge my lyfe. Beholde, I can not be saued in the mountayne, lest some misfortune fall vpon me and I dye.
Beholde, here is a cytie by, to flee vnto, euen yonder lytle one: Oh let me be saued there: is it not a lytle one, and my soule shall lyue?
And he sayde to hym: se I haue receaued thy request as concernynge this thynge, that I wyll not ouerthrowe thys cytie for the which thou hast spoken.
Haste the, Ꟶ be saued there, for I can do nothynge tyll thou become thyther. And therfore the name of the cyte is called zoar.
And the sonne was nowe rysen vpon the erth, when Lot was entred into zoar.
Than the Lorde rayned vpon Sodome Ꟶ Gomorra, brymston Ꟶ fyre from the Lorde out of heauen,
Ꟶ ouerthrewe those cyties Ꟶ all the regyon, and all that dwelled in the cyties, and that that grewe vpon the erth.
But Lotes wyfe loked behynde her, Ꟶ was turned in to a pyllar of salte.
Abraham rysinge vp early, got him to the place where he stode before the presence of God,
Ꟶ lokynge towarde Sodome Ꟶ Gomorra Ꟶ towarde all the londe of that contre he loked: and beholde, the smoke of the contrye arose as the smoke of a fornace.
And it happened that when God destroyed the cyties of that regyon, he thought vpon Abraham, Ꟶ sent Lot out from the myddes of the ouerthrowenge, when he ouerthrewe the cyties where Lot dwelled.
And Lot departed out of zoar Ꟶ dwelled in the mountayns wt his .ij. daughters, for he feared to tary in zoar, but dwelled in a caue, he Ꟶ his .ij. daughters.
And the elder sayde vnto the yonger: oure father is olde, and there is not a man in the erth to come in vnto vs after the maner of all the worlde.
Come, we will make oure father droncken with wyne, Ꟶ lye with him, that we maye saue sede of oure father.
And so they made their father droncken wyth wyne that nyght. And the elder daughter went Ꟶ laye with her father. And he perceaued it not, nether when she laye doune, nether when she rose vp.
And on the morowe it happened that the elder sayde vnto the yonger: beholde, yesternyght laye I with my father. Let vs make him droncke with wyne this nyght also, Ꟶ go thou Ꟶ lye with him, that we maye rayse vp seed of oure father.
And they made their father droncke with wyne that nyght also. And the yonger arose Ꟶ laye with him. And he perceaued it not: nether when she laye downe, nether when she rose vp.
Thus were both the daughters of Lot wt chylde by their father.
And the elder bare a sonne, and called hys name Moab. The same is the father of the Moabytes vnto thys daye.
And the yonger bare a sonne also and called hys name Ben Ammi, The same is the father of the chyldren of Ammon vnto this daye.
And Abraham departed thence towarde the south contrey, and dwelled betwene Cades Ꟶ Sur, and soiorned in Gerar.
And Abraham sayde of Sara hys wyfe: she is my syster. And Abimelech kynge of Gerar sent Ꟶ fett Sara awaye.
But God came to Abimelech in a dreame in the nyght and sayde to hym: Se, thou shalt dye for the womans sake which thou hast taken awaye, for she is a mans wyfe.
But Abimelech had not yet come nye her, Ꟶ he sayde: Lorde wylt thou sley ryghtewes people?
sayde not he vnto me, she is my syster? yee, Ꟶ sayde not she herselfe: he is my brother? with a pure herte and innocent handes haue I done this.
And God sayde vnto him by a dreame: I wot it well that thou dydest it in the purenesse of thy herte. I kepte the also that thou shuldest not sinne agaynst me, Ꟶ therfore suffred I the not to touch her.
Nowe therfore delyuer the man his wyfe agayne, for he is a prophete. And he shall praye for the that thou mayst lyue. But and yf thou delyuer her not agayne, be sure that thou shalt dye the deth, both thou, and all that thou hast.
Therfore Abimelech rysynge vp betymes in the mornynge called all his seruauntes, Ꟶ tolde all these sayinges in their eares, and the men were sore afrayde.
And Abimelech called Abraham Ꟶ sayde vnto hym: What hast thou done vnto vs Ꟶ what haue I offended the that thou hast brought on me and on my kyngdome so great a synne? thou hast done dedes vnto me that ought not to be done.
And Abimelech sayde vnto Abraham: What sawest thou that thou hast done this thynge?
Abraham answered. For I sayde: surely the feare of God is not in thys place, Ꟶ they shall sley me for my wyfes sake:
yet in very dede she is my syster, for she is the daughter of my father: though she be not the daughter of my mother: and she became my wyfe.
And after, God caused me to wandre, out of my fathers house, I sayde vnto her: Thys kyndnesse shalt thou shewe vnto me in all places where we come, that thou saye of me, he is my brother.
Than toke Abimelech shepe and oxen, men seruauntes Ꟶ wemen seruauntes Ꟶ gaue them vnto Abraham, and delyuered hym Sara his wyfe agayne.
And Abimelech sayde: beholde, my lande lyeth before the, dwell where it pleaseth the best.
But vnto Sara he sayde: Se, I haue geuen thy brother a thousande peces of syluer, beholde, it shall be a couerynge of thyne eyes vnto all that are wt the Ꟶ thus with all was she reproued.
And so Abraham prayed vnto God, and God healed Abimelech and his wyfe and his maydens, Ꟶ they bare chyldren.
For the Lorde had closed to, all the matryces of the house of Abymelech: because of Abrahams wyfe.
The Lorde visyted Sara as he had sayde and dyd vnto her accordynge as he had promysed.
For Sara was wyth chylde and bare Abraham a sonne in his olde age, euen the same season which the Lorde had appoynted him.
And Abraham called his sonnes name that was borne vnto hym which Sara bare him, Isahac:
Ꟶ Abraham circumcysed Isahac his sonne when he was .viii. dayes olde: as God commaunded hym.
And Abraham was an hundred yere olde: when his sonne Isahac was borne vnto hym.
But Sara sayde: God hath made me a laughynge stocke: so that all that heare: wyll laugh at me.
She sayde also: who wolde haue sayd vnto Abraham: that Sara shulde haue geuen chyldren sucke? for I haue borne him a sonne in hys olde age.
The chylde grewe: and was wened: and Abraham made a great feast: the same daye that Isahac was wened.
Sara sawe also the sonne of Hagar the Egyptian (whyche she had borne vnto Abraham) to be a mocker.
Wherfore she sayde vnto Abraham: put awaye this bondemayde Ꟶ hyr sonne: for the sonne of thys bonde woman shall not be heyre with my sonne Isahac:
Ꟶ thys sayinge was very greauous in Abrahams syght because of hys sonne.
And God sayde vnto Abraham: let it not be greauous in thy syght, because of the ladd and of thy bondmayde. All that Sara hath sayde vnto the, heare hyr voyce, for in Isahac shall thy seed be called.
Moreouer of the sonne of the bondewoman wyll I make a nacyon: because he is thy seed.
And so Abraham rose vp early in the morninge, and toke bread and a bottell of water, and gaue it vnto Hagar, puttynge it on hyr shulders with the ladd also, Ꟶ sent her awaye. who departynge, wandred vp and doune in the wyldernes of Beer Seba.
And the water was spent in the bottell, and she cast the lad vnder a bush
and went and satt on the other syde a greate waye, as it were a bowshote of: for she sayde: I will not se the death of the chylde. And she syttynge doune on the other syde, lyfte vp hyr voyce and wepte.
And God herde the voyce of the chylde. And the angell of God called Hagar oute of heauen and sayde vnto her: what ayleth the Hagar? Feare not, for God hath herde the voyce of the childe where he lyeth.
Aryse, and lyfte vp the ladd, and take hym in thy hande, for I wyll make of hym a greate people.
And God opened hyr eyes: and she sawe a well of water. And she went and fylled the bottell with water, and gaue the boye drynke.
And God was wyth the ladd, and he grewe and dwelt in the wyldernesse, and became an archer.
And he dwelt in the wyldernesse of Pharan. And hys mother gatt hym a wyfe out of the lande of Egypte.
And it chaunced the same season, that Abimelech and Phicoll hys chefe captayne spake vnto Abraham sayinge: God is wyth the in all that thou doest.
And nowe therfore swere vnto me euen here by God, that thou wylt not hurt me nor my chyldren, nor my chyldrens chyldren. But that thou shalt deale with me and the contre where thou hast bene a straunger, accordynge vnto the kyndnesse that I haue shewed the.
And Abraham sayd. I wyll swere.
And Abraham rebuked Abimelech for a well of water, which Abimelechs seruauntes had violently taken a waye.
And Abimelech sayde: I wote not who hath done thys thinge. Also thou toldest me not: nether herde I of it, but thys daye.
And Abraham toke shepe and oxen, and gaue them vnto Abimelech. And they made both of them a bonde together.
And Abraham set .vii. ewe lambes by them selues.
And Abimelech sayd vnto Abraham: what meane these .vii. ewe lambes which thou hast set by them selues?
He answered: For these .vii. lambes shalt thou take of my hande, that they maye be a wytnesse vnto me, that I haue dygged thys well.
Wherfore the place is called Beer Seba, because that there they sware both of them.
Thus made they a bonde to gether at Beer Seba. And Abimelech Ꟶ Phicol his chefe Captayne rose vp, and turned agayne vnto the lande of the Philistines.
And Abraham planted a wodd in Beer Seba, and called there on the name of the Lorde, the euerlastyng God:
and sogeourned in the Philistins lande a longe season.
After these sayinges it happened that God dyd proue Abraham and sayde vnto hym: Abraham. Whych answered: here am I.
And he sayde take thy only sonne Isahac whom thou louest, Ꟶ get the vnto the lande Moria, and sacrifyce hym there for a sacrifyce vpon one of the mountayns, whych I wyll shewe the:
Than Abraham rose vp early in the mornyng, Ꟶ sadled his asse, and toke two of hys yonge men wyth hym, and Isahac hys sonne: and cloue wodd for the sacrifyce, and rose vp and gott hym to the place whyche God had appoynted hym.
The thyrde daye Abraham lyfte vp hys eyes, and sawe the place a farre of
and sayde vnto his yonge men: byde here with the asse. I and the lad wyll goo yonder and worshyppe, Ꟶ come agayne vnto you.
And Abraham toke the wodd of the sacrifyce and layde it vpon Isahac his sonne, but he him selfe toke fyre in his hande and a knyfe. And they went both of them together.
Than spake Isahac vnto Abraham hys father and sayde: My father? And he answered: here am I my sonne. He sayd: Se here is fyre and wodd, but where is the shepe for sacrifyce?
Abraham answered: my sonne, God wyll prouyde him a shepe for sacrifyce. And so they wente both together.
And when they came vnto the place which God had shewed hym, Abraham made an aulter there, Ꟶ dressed the wodd, and bownde Isahac his sonne, Ꟶ layde him on the aulter, aboue vpon the wodd.
And Abraham stretchynge forth his hande, toke the knyfe to haue kylled hys sonne.
And the angell of the Lorde called vnto him from heauen, saying: Abraham Abraham? And he sayde: here am I.
And he sayde: laye not thy hande vpon the chylde, nether do any thinge at all vnto him, for now I knowe that thou fearest God, and hast for my sake not spared thyne onely sonne.
And Abraham lyftynge vp his eyes, loked aboute: and beholde, there was a ram caught by the hornes in a thyckette. And he went Ꟶ toke the ram and offred hym vp for a sacrifyce in the steade of hys sonne.
And Abraham called the name of the place, the Lorde wyll see. As it is sayde thys daye: in the mounte wyll the Lorde be sene.
And the Angell of the Lorde cryed vnto Abraham from heauen the seconde tyme,
and sayde: by my selfe haue I sworne (sayth the Lorde) because thou hast done thys thynge and hast not spared thy onely sonne:
that in blessynge I wyll blesse the, and in multiplienge I wyll multiplie thy seed as the starres of heauen Ꟶ as the sande which is vpon the see syde. And thy seed shall possesse the gate of hys enemies.
And in thy seed shall all the nacions of the erth be blessed, because thou hast herde my voyce.
So turned Abraham agayne vnto hys yonge men, and they rose vp and went together to Beer Seba. And Abraham dwelt at Beer Seba.
And it chaunsed after these thinges, that one tolde Abraham sayinge: Beholde, Milcha, she hath also borne chyldren vnto thy brother Nachor.
Hus hys eldest sonne, and Bus hys brother, and Kemuell the father of the Syrians,
and ceased, Ꟶ Haso, and Pyldas, Ꟶ Iedlaph, Ꟶ Bethuel.
And Bethuel begat Rebecca. These eyght dyd Milcha bere to Nachor Abrahams brother:
And hys concubyne called Rhuma she bare also Tebah, Ꟶ Gaham, Thaas Ꟶ Maacha.
Sara was an hundred and .xxvii. yere olde (so longe lyued she)
Ꟶ Sara dyed in kyriat Arba. The same is Hebron in the lande of Canaan. And Abraham came to morne Sara, and to wepe for her.
And Abraham stode vp from the syght of hys coorse, and talked wyth the sonnes of Heth sayinge:
I am a straunger Ꟶ a foryner amonge you, geue me a possessyon to burye in wyth you, that I maye bury my coarse out of my syght.
And the chyldren of Heth answered Abraham, saying vnto him:
Heare vs Lorde, thou art a prynce of God amonge vs. In the chefest of oure sepulchres bury thy dead: None of vs also shall forbyd the hys sepulchre, but thou mayest bury thy dead therin:
Abraham stode vp and bowed him selfe before the people of the lande the children of Heth.
And he comoned wyth them sayinge: If it be youre mynde that I shall bury my dead out of my syght, heare me, and speke for me to Ephron the sonne of zoar:
that he maye geue me the dubbyll caue which he hath, and that is in the ende of hys felde: but for as moche money, as it is worth shall he geue it me in the presence of you, for a possessyon to burye in.
For Ephron dwelled amonge the chyldren of Heth. And Ephron the Hethite answered Abraham in the audience of the children of Heth and of all that went in at the gates of hys cyte, sayinge:
Not so my Lorde, heare me. The felde geue I the, and the caue that therin is geue I the also: and euen in the presence of the sonnes of my people geue I it the, bury thy dead.
And Abraham bowed hym selfe before the people of the lande,
Ꟶ spake vnto Ephron in the audience of the people of the contre saying: I praye the heare me yf it please the: I wyll geue siluer for the felde, take it Ꟶ I will bury my deed there.
Ephron answered Abraham sayinge vnto hym:
My Lorde, herken vnto me. The lande is worth .iiij. hundred sycles of syluer: what is that betwyxte the and me? bury therfore thy deed.
And Abraham harkened vnto Ephron Ꟶ weyed hym the syluer whych he had sayde, in the audience of the sonnes of Heth. Euen .iiii. hundred syluersycles of currant money amonge marchauntes.
And the felde of Ephron with the dubbyll caue whyche was before Mamre: euen the felde and the caue that was therin and all the trees that were in the felde, Ꟶ that were in all the borders rounde aboute, was made sur
vnto Abraham for a possession, in the syght of the children of Heth, before all that went in at the gates of the cyte.
After thys dyd Abraham burye Sara hys wyfe in the double caue of the felde that lyeth before Mamre. The same is Hebron in the lande of Chanaan.
And so both the felde and the caue that is therin, was made vnto Abraham a sure possessyon to bury in, of the sonnes of Heth.
Abraham was olde and stryken in dayes, and the Lorde had blessed hym in all thynges.
And Abraham sayde vnto his eldest seruaunte of his house whych had the rule ouer all that he had: Put thy hande vnder my thygh,
Ꟶ I wyll make the swere by the Lorde God of heauen and God of the erth, that thou shalt not take a wyfe vnto my sonne, of the daughters of Chanaan, amonge whych I dwell.
But thou shalt goo vnto my contrey and to my natyue londe, and take a wyfe vnto my sonne Isahac.
But the seruaunte sayde vnto hym: peraduenture the woman wyll not agree to come wyth me vnto thys lande, shall I bringe thy sonne agayne vnto the lande whych thou cammest out of?
To whom Abraham answered: be ware, that thou brynge not my sonne thyther agayne.
The Lorde God of heauen whych toke me from my fathers house and from the lande where I was borne, and whych spake vnto me and that sware vnto me, sayinge: vnto thy seed wyll I geue thys lande, he shall sende hys angell before the, and thou shalt take a wyfe vnto my sonne from thence.
Neuerthelesse yf the woman wyll not agree to folowe the, than shalt thou be wyth out daunger of thys my ooth. Onely brynge not my sonne thyther agayne.
And the seruaunt put hys hande vnder the thygh of Abraham his master, and sware to hym as concernynge that matter.
And the seruaunt toke .x. camels of the cameles of hys master and departed, and had of all maner goodes of hys master wyth hym, and stode vp and went to Mesopotamya, vnto the cytie of Nahor.
And made hys camels to lye downe wythout the cytie by a wels syde of water, at euen: aboute the tyme that women come out to drawe water,
and he sayde. Lorde God of my master Abraham, sende me good spede this daye, and shewe mercy vnto my master Abraham.
Lo I stonde here by the well of water, and the daughters of the men of thys cytye come out to drawe water:
Nowe the damsell to whome I saye, stompe downe thy pytcher I praye the that I maye dryncke. If she saye also: Dryncke, and I wyll geue thy camels drincke: the same is she that thou hast ordeyned for thy seruaunte Isahac: yee, and therby shall I knowe that thou hast shewed mercy on my master.
And it came to passe yer he had left speakynge, beholde, Rebecca came out, the daughter of Bethuell, sonne to Milca the wyfe of Nahor Abrahams brother, and hyr pytcher vpon hyr shoulder:
The damsell was very fayre to loke vpon, and yet a mayde and vnknowen of man. And she went downe to the well, and fylled hyr pytcher and came vp.
And the seruaunte rennynge vnto her, sayde: let me suppe a lytle water of thy pytcher.
And she sayde: drincke my Lorde. And she hasted and lett downe her pytcher vpon hyr arme, and gaue hym dryncke.
And when she had gyuen hym dryncke, she sayde: I wyll drawe water for thy camels also, vntyll they haue droncke ynough.
And she powred out hyr pytcher in to the trough hastely, and ranne agayne vnto the well to fett water: and drewe for all hys camels.
And the man wondred at her: but helde his peace, to wete whether the Lorde had made hys iourney prosperous or not.
And it fortuned as the camelles had lefte drynkynge, the man toke a golden earynge of halfe a sicle waight, and two bracellettes for hyr handes, of .x. sycles weyght of golde,
and sayde: Whose daughter art thou? tell me I praye the, is there rowme in thy fathers house for vs to lodge in?
She answered him: I am the daughter of Bathuel the sonne of Milca which she bare vnto Nahor:
and sayde moreouer vnto hym: we haue litter and prouonder ynough, and also rowme to lodge i
And the man bowed him selfe, Ꟶ worshypped the Lorde,
and sayde: blessed be the Lorde God of my master Abraham, whych ceasseth not to deale mercyfully and truly wyth my master, and hath brought me the waye to my masters brothers house.
And the damsell ranne and tolde them of her mothers house these thynges.
And Rebecca had a brother called Laban. And he ranne out vnto the man, euen to the well:
for as sone as he had sene the earynges and the bracelettes in hys systers handes (and hearde the wordes of Rebecca hys syster sayinge: thus sayde the man vnto me) he went out vnto the man. And loo, he stode wyth the camels by the well syde.
And he sayde: come in thou blessed of the Lorde. Wherfore stondest thou wythout? I haue dressed the house, and made rowme for the camels.
And than the man came into the house: and he vnbrydled the camels. and (Laban) brought lytter and prouonder for the camels, and water to washe hys fete and the mennes fete that were wt hym,
Ꟶ set meate before hym to eate. But he sayde: I wyll not eate, vntyll I haue sayde myne arande. And he sayde: saye on.
And he sayd: I am Abrahams seruaunt,
Ꟶ God hath blessed my master out of measure, that he is become greate, and hath geuen hym shepe, and oxen, syluer and golde, men seruauntes, and mayde seruauntes, camels and asses.
And Sara my masters wyfe bare hym a sonne, when she was olde: and vnto hym hath he geuen all that he hath.
And my master made me swere sayinge: thou shalt not take a wyfe to my sonne amonge the daughters of the Cananites in whose lande I dwell:
But thou shalt go vnto my fathers house Ꟶ to my kynred, and take a wife vnto my sonne.
And I sayde vnto my master: peraduenture the wyfe wyll not folowe me?
And he answered me: The Lorde, before whome I walke, wyll sende hys angell wyth the, and prospere thy iourney and thou shalt take a wyfe for my sonne, of my kynred and of my fathers house.
Them shalt thou be gyltlesse of my curse, whan thou commest to my kynred. And yf they geue the not one, thou shalt be giltlesse of my curse.
And so I came thys daye vnto the well and sayde: O Lorde, the God of my master Abraham, yf it be so nowe that thou makest my iourney whych I go, prosperous:
beholde I stonde by thys well of water, and when a vyrgyn cometh forth to drawe water, and I saye to her: geue me (I praye the) a lytle water of thy pytcher to drincke,
and she saye to me: dryncke thou, and I wyll also drawe for thy camels: that same is the wyfe whom the Lorde hath prepared for my masters sonne.
And before I had made an ende of speakynge in myne harte: beholde Rebecca came forth, and hyr pytcher on hyr shulder, and she went downe vnto the well Ꟶ drewe water. And I sayde vnto her: geue me dryncke I praye the.
And she made hast, Ꟶ toke downe hyr pitcher from of hyr, and sayde dryncke, and I wyll geue thy camels dryncke also.
And I drancke, Ꟶ she gaue the camels dryncke also. And I asked her, sayinge: whose daughter art thou? She answered: the daughter of Bathuel Nahors sonne whom Milca bare vnto hym. And I put the earing vpon hyr face, and the bracelettes vpon hyr handes.
And I bowed my selfe, and worshypped the Lorde, Ꟶ blessed the Lorde God of my master Abraham whych had brought me the ryght waye, to take my masters brothers daughter vnto hys sonne.
Nowe also yf ye wyll deale mercyfully and truly wyth my master, tell me: and yf not, tell me also: that I maye turne me to the ryght hande or to the lefte.
Than answered Laban and Bathuel, sayinge. This sayenge is proceded euen out of the Lorde, we can not therfore saye vnto the, ether good or bad:
beholde, Rebecca is before the, take her and goo, that she maye be thy masters sonnes wyfe, euen as God hath sayde.
And when Abrahams seruaunt hearde theyr wordes, he worshypped the Lorde, flatt vpon the erth.
And the seruaunt toke forth iewelles of syluer and iewelles of golde and rayment, and gaue them to Rebecca. And vnto hyr brother and to hyr mother, he gaue gyftes.
And they dyd eate Ꟶ dryncke, both he and the men that were with him, and taryed all nyght. And whan they rose vp in the mornynge. He sayde: let me departe vnto my master.
Hyr brother Ꟶ hyr mother answered: let the damsell abyde wyth vs a whyle, and it be but euen .x. dayes, and than shall she go.
He sayde vnto them: hynder me not, beholde, the Lorde hath prospered my iourney. Sende me awaye therfore, that I maye goo vnto my master.
And they sayde: we wyll call the damsell, and enquere at hyr mouth.
And they called forth Rebecca, and sayde vnto her: wylt thou goo with this man? And she answered, I wyll goo.
So they let Rebecca theyr syster go and her norse Ꟶ Abrahams seruaunte, Ꟶ hys men.
And they blessed Rebecca, and sayde vnto her: Thou art oure syster, growe into thousande thousandes and thy seed possesse the gate of theyr enemyes.
And Rebecca arose and hyr damsels, and satt them vp vpon the camels, and went theyr waye after the man. And the seruaunt toke Rebecca, and went hys waye.
And Isahac was a commynge from the waye of the well of the lyuinge and seynge me, for he dwelt in the south contreye,
Ꟶ Isahac was gone out to praye in the felde at the euen tyde. And he lyft vp hys eyes and sawe the camels commyng.
And Rebecca lyft vp hyr eyes, and when she sawe Isahac, she lyghted of the camell,
and sayd vnto the seruaunt: what man is thys that commeth walkynge agaynst vs in the felde? And the seruaunt sayde: it is my master. Therfore she toke hyr cloke, and put it about her.
And the seruaunt tolde Isahac all thynges that he had done.
And Isahac broughte her in to his mother Saraes tente, and toke Rebecca, and she became hys wyfe, and he loued her: and so Isahac receaued conforte after hys mother
Abraham proceaded further and toke him a wyfe called Ketura,
whyche bare hym Simram, and Iecksan, and Medan, and Midian, and Iesback and Suah.
Iecksan begat Seba Ꟶ Dedan. And the sonnes of Dedan were: Assurim. Letusim and Leumim.
And the sonnes of Midian: Epha, and Epher, Hanoch, and Abida Ꟶ Elda. All these were the chyldren of ketura.
And Abraham gaue all hys goodes vnto Isahac.
But vnto the sonnes of the concubynes whych Abraham had, he gaue gyftes, and sent them awaye from Isahac hys sonne (whyle he yet lyued) eastwarde, vnto the lande of kedes.
And these are the dayes of the yeares of Abrahams lyfe whych he lyued: an hundred and .lxxv. yeare,
and than fell sycke and dyed in a lustye age (when he had lyued ynough) and was put vnto hys people.
And hys sonnes Isahac and Ismahel buryed hym in the double caue in the felde of Ephron sonne of zoar the Hethyte besyde the playne of Mamre.
Whych felde Abraham bought of the sonnes of Heth: There was Abraham buryed Ꟶ Sara hys wyfe.
It fortuned after the deeth of Abraham that God blessed Isahac his sonne, and Isahac dwelled by the well of the lyuynge and seynge me.
These are the generacions of Ismael Abrahams sonne, whych Hagar the Egypcyan Saras handmayde bare vnto Abraham.
And these are the names of the sonnes of Ismael, in their names accordinge to theyr kynreddes. The eldest sonne of Ismael: Nebaioth, and Cedar: and Adbeel, and Mibsam,
and Misma, Duma, and Masa,
Ꟶ Hadar, Thema, Ietur, Naphis Ꟶ kedma:
These are the sonnes of Ismael, Ꟶ these are, theyr names, by theyr townes and castels .xij. princes of their housholdes.
And these are the yeares of the lyfe of Ismael, an hundred and .xxxvij. yeare, and he fell sycke, Ꟶ dyed, Ꟶ was layde vnto hys people.
And they dwelled from Heuilah vnto Sur that is by the border of Egypte, as thou goest towarde the Assirians. And he dyed in the presence of all hys brethren.
And these are the generacions of Isahac Abrahams sonne: Abraham begat Isahac.
And Isahac was .xl. yeare olde when he toke Rebecca to wyfe, the daughter of Bathuel the Sirian of Mesopotamia and syster to Laban the Sirien.
And Isahac made intercessyon vnto the Lorde for hys wyfe: because she was baren: and the Lorde was intreated of hym, and Rebecca his wyfe conceaued:
and the chyldren stroue to gether wythin her. Therfore she sayd: yf it shulde goo so to passe, what helpeth it that I am wyth chylde? Wherfore, she went to aske the Lorde.
And the Lorde sayde vnto her: there are two maner of people in thy wombe, Ꟶ two nacyons shalbe deuyded out of thy bowels, and the one nacyon shalbe myghtyer than the other, and the elder shalbe seruaunte vnto the yonger.
Therfore when hyr tyme was come to be delyuered: beholde, there were two twynnes in hyr wombe.
And he that came out fyrst was redd, and he was all ouer as it were a rough garment, Ꟶ they called his name Esau.
And after hym, came hys brother out, Ꟶ hys hande holdynge Esau by the hele. And his name was called Iacob. And Isahac was .lx. yeare olde when they were borne:
and the boyes grewe, and Esau became a connynge hunter Ꟶ a tyller of the erth. But Iacob was a perfecte man, Ꟶ dwelled in the tentes.
Isahac loued Esau, because he dyd eate of hys venyson, but Rebecca loued Iacob.
Iacob sod potage, and Esau came from the felde and was fayntie,
and Esau sayd to Iacob: fede me I praye the wyth that redde potage, for I am fayntie. And therfore was hys name called Edom.
And Iacob sayde: sell me thys daye thy byrthryghte.
Esau sayde: Loo I am at the poynte to dye, and what profyte shall thys byrthryghte do me?
Iacob answered swere to me then thys daye. And he sware to hym, Ꟶ solde hys byrthryghte vnto Iacob.
Than Iacob gaue Esau brede and potage of rysse. And he dyd eate and dryncke and rose vp, Ꟶ went hys waye. And Esau regarded not hys byrthryght.
And there came a derth in the lande, passynge the fyrst derth that was in the dayes of Abraham. And Isahac went vnto Abimelech kynge of the Philistyans vnto Gerar.
And the Lorde apeared vnto him, and sayde: Go not downe into Egypte, but byde in the lande whych I shall shewe vnto the:
soiourne in thys lande, and I wyll be wyth the, and wyll blesse the: for vnto the and vnto thy sede I wyll geue all these contreys. And I wyll performe the oothe which I swore vnto Abraham thy father,
and wyll multiplye thy seed as the starres of heauen, and wyll geue vnto thy seed all these contreys. And in thy seed shall all the nacyons of the erth be blessed,
because that Abraham harkened vnto my voyce and kepte myne ordinaunces, my commaundementes, my statutes, and my lawes.
And Isahac dwelled in Gerar.
And the men of the place asked hym of hys wyfe, and he sayde: she is my syster: for he feared to saye: She is my wyfe, lest the men of the place shulde haue kylled him because of Rebecca whych was bewtyfull to the eye.
And it happened after he had bene there longe tyme, that Abimelech kynge of the Philistyans loked out at a wyndowe, and sawe Isahac sportynge with Rebecca hys wyfe.
And Abimelech called Isahac, and sayde: she is of a suertye thy wyfe, Ꟶ why saydest thou: She is my syster? To whom Isahac answered: I thought that I myght peraduenture haue dyed for hyr sake.
Abimelech sayd: why hast thou done thys vnto vs? one of the people myght lyghtely haue lyne by thy wyfe, and so shuldest thou haue brought synne vpon vs.
And so Abimelech charged all hys people, sayinge: he that toucheth this man or hys wyfe, shall dye the death.
Isahac sowed in that lande, and founde in that same yere an .C. busshels: Ꟶ the Lorde blessed hym,
Ꟶ the man waxed myghtye, and went forth and grewe tyll he was exceadinge great,
for he had possessyon of shepe, of oxen and a myghtye housholde, and therfore the Philistians had enuy at hym:
for the Philystines stopped Ꟶ fylled vp wyth erth all the welles which his fathers seruauntes dygged in hys father Abrahams tyme.
And Abimelech sayde vnto Isahac: get the from vs, for thou art myghtyer then we a great deale.
Therfore Isahac departed thense, and abode in the valley of Gerar, and dwelt there.
And Isahac returnynge, digged agayne the welles of water whych they dygged in the dayes of Abraham hys father, which the Philistyans had stopped after the deth of Abraham, and gaue them the same names whych hys father gaue them.
Isahacs seruauntes dygged in the valey, and founde a well of lyuing water.
And the herdmen of Gerar dyd stryue wyth Isahacs herdmen, sayinge: the water is oures. Than called he the well Eseck, because they stroue wyth hym.
And they dygged another well, and stroue for that also. And he called the name of it Sitena.
And than he departed thense, and dygged another well for the which they stroue not: therfore called he it Rehoboth, sayinge: the Lorde hath nowe made vs rowme, that we maye encrease vpon the erth.
And he went vp thence, to Beer Seba.
And the Lorde appeared vnto hym the same nyght, and sayde: I am the God of Abraham thy father, feare not, for I am wyth the, Ꟶ wyll blesse the, and multiplye thy seed for my seruaunt Abrahams sake.
And he buylded an aulter there, and called vpon the name of the Lorde, and pytched hys tente. And there Isahacs seruauntes dygged a well.
Than came Abimelech to hym from Gerar, and Ahusath hys frende, and Phicol his chefe captayne.
And Isahac sayde vnto them: wherfore come ye to me, seinge ye hate me Ꟶ haue put me awaye from you?
Whych answered: In seinge, we sawe that the Lorde was with the, Ꟶ we sayde: let there be nowe an oothe betwyxte vs euen betwixte vs and the, and let vs make a bonde wyth the,
that thou shuldest do vs no hurte, as we haue not touched the, and as we haue done vnto the nothynge but good, and sent the awaye in peace: for thou art nowe the blessed of the Lorde.
And he made them a feast, Ꟶ they dyd eate Ꟶ drincke.
And they rose vp by tymes in the mornynge, and sware one to a nother. And Isahac sent them awaye. And they departed from hym in peace.
And that same daye it happened, that Isahacs seruauntes came Ꟶ tolde hym of a well whych they had dygged: and sayde vnto hym, we haue founde water.
And he called it Seba. And the name of the cyte is called Beer Seba vnto thys daye.
Esau was .xl. yeare olde and he toke a wyfe called Iudith, the daughter of Bery an Hethyte, Ꟶ Basinath the daughter of Elon an Hethyte also,
which were disobedient vnto Isahac and Rebecca.
And it came to passe that whan Isahac wexed olde and hys eyes were dymme (so that he coulde not see) He called Esau his eldest sonne and sayd vnto hym: my sonne. And he sayde vnto hym: here am I.
And he sayde: beholde, I am nowe olde, and knowe not the daye of my deth:
and nowe therfore take thy weapens, thy quyuer and thy bowe, Ꟶ get the to the feldes, that thou mayest take me some venyson,
and make me meate soche as I loue, and brynge it me, that I maye eate, and that my soule may blesse the before that I dye.
But Rebecca hearde when Isahac spake to Esau hys sonne. And Esau wente into the felde, to catche venyson, and to brynge it.
And Rebecca sayd vnto Iacob hyr sonne sayinge? Beholde I haue herde thy father talkynge wyth Esau thy brother and sayinge:
brynge me venyson and make me meate, that I maye eate and blesse the before the Lorde, afore my death.
Nowe therfore my sonne heare my voyce in that whych I commaunde the:
gett the to the flocke, and brynge me thence two good kyddes, that I maye make meate of them for thy father, soche as he loueth.
And thou shalt brynge it to thy father, that he maye eate Ꟶ that he maye blesse the before hys deth.
Then sayde Iacob to Rebecca hys mother: beholde, Esau my brother is a rough man, and I am smooth.
My father shall peraduenture fele me, and I shall seme vnto him as though I went aboute to begyle hym, Ꟶ so shall he brynge a curse vpon me, and not a blessynge:
and hys mother sayde vnto hym: Upon me be thy curse my sonne, only heare my voyce, and go and fetch me them.
And Iacob went and fet them, and brought them to hys mother. And hys mother made meate such as she knewe his father loued.
And Rebecca fett goodly rayment of hyr eldest sonnes Esau, whych was in the house wyth hyr, Ꟶ put yt vpon Iacob hyr youngest sonne,
Ꟶ she put the skynnes of gotys vpon hys handes and vpon the smooth of hys necke.
And she put the meate Ꟶ brede whych she had prepared in the hande of hyr sonne Iacob.
Whan he came to hys father, he sayde: my father? And he answered: here am I, who art thou my sonne?
And Iacob sayde vnto hys father: I am Esau thy eldest sonne, I haue done accordynge as thou baddest me: vp and syt and eate of my venyson, that thy soule maye blesse me.
And Isahac sayde vnto hys sonne: howe commeth it that thou hast founde it so quyckly my sonne? He answered: The Lorde thy God brought it to my hande.
Than sayde Isahac vnto Iacob, come nere and let me fele the my sonne, whether thou be my sonne Esau or not.
Than went Iacob to Isahac hys father, and he felt hym and sayd: the voyce is Iacobs voyce, but the handes are the handes of Esau.
And he knewe hym not, because hys handes were rough as hys brother Esaus handes: and so he blessed hym.
And he axed hym: art thou my sonne Esau? And he sayde, that I am.
Than sayde he: brynge me Ꟶ let me eate of my sonnes venyson, that my soule maye blesse the. And he brought hym and he eate. And he brought hym wyne also, and he drancke.
And hys father Isahac sayde vnto hym, come nere, and kysse me my sonne.
And he went vnto hym and kyssed hym. And he smelled the sauoure of hys rayment, and blessed hym, and sayde, See, the smelle of my sonne is as the smell of a felde whych the Lorde had blessed.
God geue the of the dewe of heauen, and of the fatnesse of the erth, and plentye of corne and wyne.
People be thy seruauntes, and nacyons bowe vnto the. Be Lorde ouer thy brethren, and thy mothers chyldren stowpe vnto the. Curssed be he that cursseth the, and blessed be he that blesseth the.
It happened that assoone as Isahac had made an ende of blessynge and Iacob was skace gone out from the presence of Isahac his father, then came Esau his brother from his huntyng
and had made also meate, and brought it vnto hys father, and sayde vnto his father: let my father aryse and eate of his sonnes venyson, that thy soule maye blesse me.
Than hys father Isahac sayde vnto hym: who art thou? he answered: I am thy eldest sonne Esau.
And Isahac was greatly astonyed out of mesure, and sayde: whych is he Ꟶ where is he then that hath hunted venyson and brought it me? and I haue eaten of all before thou camest, and haue blessed hym, Ꟶ he shall be blessed.
When Esau herde the wordes of hys father, he cryed out greatly and bytterly, aboue mesure, and sayde vnto hys father: blesse me also my father.
Who answered: thy brother came wyth subtilte, Ꟶ hath taken awaye thy blessyng.
And he sayd agayne: He maye well be called Iacob, for he hath vndermyned me now two tymes, fyrst he toke awaye my byrthryght: and se, nowe hath he taken awaye my blessynge also. And he sayde: hast thou kept neuer a blessynge for me?
Isahac answered and sayde vnto Esau: beholde I haue made hym thy Lord, and all hys mothers chyldren haue I made hys seruauntes. Moreouer wyth corne Ꟶ wyne haue I stablysshed hym, what can I do vnto the nowe my sonne?
And Esau sayde vnto hys father: hast thou but that one blessynge my father? blesse me also my father: so lyfted vp Esau his voyce and wepte.
Than Isahac hys father answered Ꟶ sayde vnto hym: beholde, thy dwellinge place shall be the fatnesse of the erth, and of the dewe of heauen from aboue.
And wyth thy swerde shalt thou lyue, and shalt be thy brothers seruaunt. And it wyll come to passe, that when thou shalt gett the mastrye, thou shalt lowse hys yocke from of thy necke.
And Esau hated Iacob, because of the blessynge that hys father blessed hym wyth. all. And Esau sayde in his harte: The dayes of my fathers sorowe are at hande, and I wyll sley my brother Iacob.
And these wordes of Esau hyr eldest sonne were tolde to Rebecca. And she sent and called Iacob hyr yongest sonne, and sayde vnto hym: beholde thy brother Esau threatneth to kyll the:
nowe therfore my sonne heare my voyce, make the redy, Ꟶ flee to Laban my brother at Haran:
Ꟶ tarye wyth him a whyle vntyll thy brothers fearsnes be swaged,
Ꟶ vntyll thy brothers wrath turne awaye from the, Ꟶ he forget the thynges whych thou hast done to him. Than wyll I sende and fet the awaye from thence. Why shulde I be desolate of you bothe in one daye?
Ꟶ Rebecca spake to Isahac, I am wery of my lyfe, for feare of the daughters of Heth. If Iacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, soche one as these are, or of the daughters of the lande, what good shall my lyfe do me?
And so Isahac called Iacob and blessed hym, Ꟶ charged hym, Ꟶ sayde vnto him: se thou take not a wyfe of the daughters of Chanaan,
but aryse Ꟶ gett the to Mesopotamia to the house of Bethuel thy mothers father: and there take the a wyfe of the daughters of Laban thy mothers brother.
And God almyghtye blesse the, Ꟶ make the to increase, and multyplye the that thou mayst be a nombre of people,
and geue the the blessynge of Abraham: to the and to thy seed wyth the, that thou mayst possesse the lande (wherin thou art a straunger) whyche God gaue vnto Abraham.
Thus Isahac sent forth Iacob. And he went to Mesopotamia vnto Laban, sonne of Bethuel the Sirien, and brother to Rebecca Iacob and Esaus mother.
When Esau sawe that Isahac had blessed Iacob, and sent him to Mesopotamia, to fet him a wyfe thence, and that as he blessed hym he gaue him a charge, sayinge: thou shalt not take a wyfe of the daughters of Chanaan:
and that Iacob had obeyed hys father and mother, Ꟶ was gone vnto Mesopotamia:
Ꟶ Esau seynge also that the daughters of Chanaan pleased not Isahac hys father:
then went he vnto Ismael, and toke vnto the wyues whych he had, Mahala the daughter of Ismael Abrahams sonne, the syster of Nabaioth to be his wyfe.
Iacob departed from Beer Seba, to come vnto Haran,
and came vnto a place by chaunce, and taryed there all nyghte, because the sonne was downe. And toke a stone of the place, and put it vnder hys heade, and layde hym downe in the same place a slepe.
And he dreamed: and beholde, there stode a ladder vpon the erth, and the topp of it reached vp to heauen. And se, the angels of God went vp and downe vpon it,
yce and God stode vpon it, and sayde. I am the Lorde God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isahac: The lande whyche thou slepest vpon wyll I geue the and thy seed.
And thy seed shall be as the dust of the erth: and thou shalt spreade abrode to the west, to the east, to the north and to the south. And thorowe the and in thy seed shall all the kynredes of the erth be blessed.
And se I am wyth the, and wylbe thy keper in all places whether thou goest, and wyll brynge the agayne in to thys lande: nether wyll I leaue the vntyll I haue made good all that I haue promysed the.
When Iacob was awaked out of hys slepe, he sayde: surely the Lord is in this place, and I was not aware.
And he was afrayed Ꟶ sayde: howe fearfull is this place? it is none other, but euen the house of God and the gate of heauen.
And Iacob stode vp early in the mornynge, Ꟶ toke the stone that he had layde vnder hys head, and pitched it vp an ende and poured oyle on the topp of it.
And he called the name of that place Bethell, but the name of the cytie was called Lus before tyme.
And Iacob vowed a vowe, sayinge: If God wyll be wyth me, and wyll kepe me in thys iourney which I goo, and will geue me bread to eate, and clothes to put on,
so that I come agayne vnto my fathers house in saftye: then shall the Lorde be my God,
and thys stone which I haue set vp an ende, shalbe goddes house: and of all that thou shalt geue me, wyll I geue the tenth vnto the.
Then Iacob lyfte vp hys fete, Ꟶ came into the east countrey.
And as he loked aboute, beholde there was a well in the felde, and .iij. flockes of shepe laye therby (for at that well were the flockes watered) and there was a great stone vpon the well mouth.
And thyther were all the flockes brought, and they rolled the stone from the welles mouth, and watred the shepe, Ꟶ put the stone agayne vpon the welles mouth vnto hys place.
And Iacob sayd vnto them: brethren whence be ye? And they sayde: of Haran are we.
And he sayd vnto them: knowe ye Laban the sonne of Nahor? They sayd: we knowe hym.
And he sayde vnto them, is he in good health? And they sayde, he his in good health, and beholde, hys daughter Rahel commeth with the shepe.
And he sayde, lo, it is yet but hye daye, nether is it tyme that the catell shulde be gathered together, water ye the shepe and go and fede them.
And they sayde, we maye not, vntyll all the flockes he brought to gether, and tyll they roll the stone from the welles mouth, and so we water oure shepe.
Whyle he yet talked wyth them, Rahel came wyth hyr fathers shepe, for she kepte them.
As soone as Iacob sawe Rahel, the daughter of Laban his mothers brother, and the shepe of Laban hys mothers brother, he went and rowled the stone from the wells mouth, and watered the flocke of Laban his mothers brother.
And Iacob kyssed Rahel, and lyfte vp hys voyce and wepte:
and Iacob tolde Rahel, that he was hyr fathers brother Ꟶ Rebeccas sonne. Therfore ranne she and tolde hyr father.
And it happened when Laban hearde tell of Iacob his systers sonne, he ranne to mete him, Ꟶ embraced him Ꟶ kissed him, Ꟶ brought him to his house. And he tolde Laban all the matter.
To whom Laban sayde: well, thou art my bone Ꟶ my fleshe. And he abode wyth him the space of a moneth.
And Laban sayde vnto Iacob: Though thou be my brother, shuldest thou therfore serue me for naught? tell me, what shall thy wages be?
Laban had .ij. daughters, the eldest called Lea Ꟶ the yongest Rahel.
Lea was tender eyed, but Rahel was bewtyfull Ꟶ well fauored.
And Iacob loued Rahel, and sayde: I wyll serue the .vij. yeare for Rahel thy yongest daughter.
Laban answered: it is better that I geue her the, than to another man: byde wyth me.
And Iacob serued .vij. yeares for Rahel and they semed vnto him but a fewe dayes, for the loue he had to her.
And Iacob sayde vnto Laban: geue me my wyfe, that I maye lye with hir. For my dayes are fulfilled:
Than Laban gathered together all the men of that place, Ꟶ made a feast.
And when euen was come he toke Lea hys daughter Ꟶ brought her to hym: and he went in vnto hyr.
And Laban gaue vnto hys daughter Lea, zilpha hys mayde, to be hyr seruaunte.
And when the mornynge was come, beholde it was Lea. Than sayde he to Laban wherfore hast thou played thus wt me? dyd not I serue the for Rahel? wherfore than hast thou begyled me?
Laban answered: it is not the maner of thys place, to marye the yongest before the eldest.
Passe out thys weke, and than shall thys also be geuen the for the seruyce whych thou shalt serue me yet .vij. yeres more.
And Iacob dyd euen so, and passed out that weke, and than he gaue him Rahel hys daughter to wyfe also.
And Laban gaue to Rahel hys daughter, Bilha hys handmayde to be hyr seruaunte.
So laye he by Rahel also, and loued Rahel more than Lea and serued hym yet .vij. yeares more.
When the Lorde sawe that Lea was despised, he made her frutefull. And Rahel remayned baren.
And Lea conceaued and bare a sonne, and called hys name Ruben, for she sayde: the Lorde hath loked vpon my tribulacyon. Nowe therfore my husband wyll loue me.
And she conceaued agayne and bare a sonne, and sayde: the Lorde hath herde that I am despysed, and hath therfore geuen me thys sonne also, and she called hys name Simeon.
And she conceaued yet, Ꟶ bare a sonne, and sayde: nowe thys once wyll my husbande kepe me company, because I haue borne hym .iii. sonnes: and therfore was hys name called Leui.
And she conceaued yet agayne, and bare a sonne, sayinge: nowe wyll I prayse the Lorde: therfore she called hys name Iuda, and left bearynge.
Rahel whan she sawe that she bare Iacob no chyldren, she enuyed hyr syster, and sayde vnto Iacob: Geue me children, or els I am but deed.
And Iacob was wrooth wt Rahel sayig: Am I in Goddes stead, which kepeth from the the frute of thy wombe?
Then she sayd: here is my mayde Bilha, go in vnto her, Ꟶ she shall beare vpon my lappe, that I maye be encreased by her.
And she gaue hym Bilha hyr handmayde to wyfe.
And Iacob went in vnto her, and Bilha conceaued Ꟶ bare Iacob a sonne.
Than sayde Rahel. God hath geuen sentence on my syde, and hath also hearde my voyce, and hath geuen me a sonne. Therfore called she hym Dan.
And Bilha Rahels mayde conceaued agayne, and bare Iacob another sonne.
And Rahel sayde: wyth Godly wrestlynges haue I wrestled wyth my syster, and haue gotten the vpper hande. And she called hys name: Nepthali.
When Lea sawe that she had left bearinge, she toke Silpha hyr mayde, and gaue her Iacob to wyfe.
And Silpha Leas mayde bare Iacob a sonne.
Than sayde Lea: Good lucke: and called hys name Gad.
And Silpha Leas mayd bare Iacob another sonne.
Than sayde Lea: happy am I, for the daughters wyll call me blessed. And called hys name Asser.
And Ruben went out in the dayes of the whet haruest and founde mandragoras in the feldes, and brought them vnto hys mother Lea. Than sayd Rahel to Lea: geue me of thy sonnes mandragoras.
To whom Lea answered: Is it not ynough that thou hast taken awaye my housbande, but woldest take awaye my sonnes mandragoras also? Than sayde Rahel: well, let hym slepe wt the thys nyghte, for thy sonnes mandragoras.
And Iacob came from the feldes at euen, and Lea went out to mete hym, and sayde: come into me, for I haue bought the wyth my sonnes mandragoras. And he slepte wyth her that nyghte.
And God herde Lea, that she conceaued Ꟶ bare vnto Iacob the .v. sonne.
Than sayde Lea. God hath geuen me a rewarde, because I gaue my mayden to my housbande, Ꟶ she called hym Isachar.
And Lea conceaued yet agayne, Ꟶ bare Iacob the .vi. sonne.
And Lea sayd: God hath endewed me wt a good dowrye. Nowe wyll my husbande dwell wyth me, because I haue borne hym .vi. sonnes: Ꟶ called his name zabulon.
After that she bare a daughter, and called hyr name Dina.
And God remembred Rahel, hearde her, and made her frutefull:
so that she conceaued Ꟶ bare a sonne, Ꟶ sayd: God hath taken awaye my rebuke.
And she called hys name Ioseph, sayinge: The Lorde geue me yet a nother sonne.
As soone as Rahel had borne Ioseph, Iacob sayde to Laban: Sende me awaye that I maye go vnto my awne place and contrey,
geue me my wyues and my children for whom I haue serued the, and let me goo: for thou knowest what seruyce I haue done the.
To whom Laban answered: yf I haue founde fauoure in thy syght (for I suppose that the Lord hath blessed me for thy sake)
appoynte what thy rewarde shall be, and I wyll geue it the.
But he sayde vnto hym: thou knowest what seruyce I haue done the, and in what takynge thy catell haue bene vnder me:
For it was but lytle that thou haddest before I came, and nowe it is encreased into a multitude, and the Lorde hath blessed the for my sake. But nowe when shall I make prouisyon for myne awne house also?
And he sayde: what shall I then geue the? And Iacob answered: thou shalt geue me nothynge at all, yf thou wylt do thys one thynge for me: and then wyll I turne agayne, and fede thy shepe and kepe them.
I wyll go aboute all thy shepe thys daye, and separate from them all the shepe that are spotted and of dyuers coloures, and all blacke shepe amonge the lambes, Ꟶ the partye, and the spotted amonge the kyddes: and the same shalbe my rewarde.
So shall my ryghtwesnes answere for me to morowe, and shall come for my rewarde before thy face, and euery one that is not speckled and partye amonge the goates and blacke amonge the shepe, the same shalbe theft wyth me.
And Laban sayde: Go to, wolde God it myght be accordynge to thy sayeng.
Therfore he toke out that same daie the he goates that were partye and of dyuerse coloures, and all the she gootes that were spotted and partye coloured, and all that had whyte in them, and all the blacke amonge the shepe, and put them in the kepynge of hys sonnes,
Ꟶ set thre dayes iourney betwyxte hym selfe and Iacob. And so Iacob kepte the rest of Labans shepe.
Iacob toke roddes of grene popular, hasell Ꟶ of chestnut trees, Ꟶ pylled whyte strakes in them, Ꟶ made the whyte apere in the roddes.
And put the roddes whyche he had pylled, euen before the shepe, in the gutters Ꟶ watrynge troughes when the shepe came to dryncke: that they shulde conceaue when they came to dryncke.
And the shepe conceaued before the roddes, Ꟶ brought forth lambes straked, spotted and partye.
And Iacob parted the lambes Ꟶ turned the faces of the shepe towarde spotted thynges, and towarde all maner of blacke, that was amonge the shepe of Laban: Namely, puttynge hys awne flockes by them selfe, Ꟶ not puttynge them wyth Labans shepe.
And it fortuned that in euery rammynge tyme of the stronger shepe, Iacob layed the roddes before the eyes of the shepe in the gutters: namely, that he myght make them conceaue before the roddes.
But when the shepe were feble, he put them not in. And so the febler were Labans, and the stronger Iacobs.
And the man increaced exceadyngly, and had a great flocke, mayde seruauntes and man seruauntes, camels and asses.
But he hearde the wordes of Labans sonnes sayenge: Iacob hath taken awaye all that was oure fathers, and of oure fathers goodes hath he gotten all thys honoure.
And Iacob behelde the countenaunce of Laban, Ꟶ beholde. it was not as yesterdaye and yeryesterdaye.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Iacob: turne agayne in to the lande of thy fathers and to thy kynred, Ꟶ I wyll be wyth the.
Therfore Iacob sent and called Rahel and Lea to the felde vnto hys flocke,
Ꟶ sayde vnto them: I se youre fathers countenaunce that it is not towarde me as yesterdaye Ꟶ yeryesterdaye. But the God of my father hath bene wyth me.
And ye knowe howe that I haue serued youre father with all my myght.
But youre father hath disceaued me, and chaunged my wages .x. tymes: but God suffred hym not to hurte me.
When he sayde, the spotted shall be thy wages, than all the shepe bare spotted. And whan he sayde: the straked shall be thy rewarde, than bare all the shepe straked:
thus hath God taken awaye youre fathers shepe, and geuen them me.
But in rammynge tyme it happened, that I lyfted vp myne eyes Ꟶ sawe in a dreame, Ꟶ beholde the rammes leaped vpon the shepe that were straked, spotted Ꟶ partye.
And the angell of God spake vnto me in a dreame, saying: Iacob? And I answered: here am I.
And he sayde: lyfte vp nowe thyne eyes Ꟶ se all the rammes leapinge vpon the shepe that are straked, spotted Ꟶ partye: for I haue sene all that Laban doth vnto the,
I am the God of Bethel, where thou anoyntedst the stone, and where thou vowedst a vowe vnto me. Now therfore aryse Ꟶ get the out of this countre, and returne vnto the lande wher thou wast borne.
Than answered Rahel, and Lea, Ꟶ sayde vnto hym haue we a porcion Ꟶ inheritaunce in our fathers house?
Doth not he count vs euen as straungers? for he hath solde vs, and hath euen eaten vp oure monye.
But all the riches whych God hath taken from oure father, that is ours Ꟶ oure childrens. And now what soeuer God hath sayde vnto the, that do.
Than Iacob rose vp, Ꟶ set his sonnes and wyues vp vpon camels,
Ꟶ caried awaye all hys flockes Ꟶ all hys substaunce which he had procured, hys riches and possessions which he had gotten in Mesopotamia, for to go to Isahac hys father vnto the land of Canaan.
But Laban was gone to shere hys shepe, Ꟶ Rahel had stolen hyr fathers ymages.
And Iacob stale awaye the herte of Laban the Syrian, in that he tolde hym not that he fled.
So fled he Ꟶ all that he had, and made hym selfe redy, Ꟶ passed ouer the ryuer, Ꟶ set hys face streyght toward the mount Gilead.
Upon the thyrde day after, was it told Laban that Iacob fled.
Than he toke his brethren with hym and folowed after him .vii. dayes iourney, Ꟶ ouer toke hym at the mounte Gilead.
And God came to Laban the Syrian in a dreame by night, Ꟶ sayd vnto hym: take hede, that thou speake not to Iacob ought saue good.
And Laban ouertoke Iacob: and Iacob had pitched hys tente in the mounte. And Laban with hys brethren pitched their tente also vpon the mounte Gilead:
And Laban sayde, to Iacob: Why hast thou thys done to steale awaye my herte, and carye awaye my doughters as though they had bene taken captyue wyth the swerde?
Wherfore wentest thou awaye secretely vnknowen to me, Ꟶ didest not tell me, that I myght haue brought the on the waye wyth myrth, syngyng, tymrel Ꟶ harpe,
and hast not suffred me to kisse my chyldren and my daughters? Thou wast a sole now to do it,
for I am able to do you euyll. But the God of your father spake vnto me yesterdaye, saying take hede that thou speake not to Iacob ought saue good.
And now though thou wentest thy waye, because thou longest after thy fathers house, yet wherfore hast thou stolen my goddes?
Iacob answered and sayde to Laban because I was afrayed, Ꟶ thought that thou woldest haue taken awaye thy doughters from me.
But whyth whome soeuer thou fyndest thy goddes, let hym dye, here before oure brethren. Seke that thyne is by me, Ꟶ take it to the. But Iacob wyst not that Rahel had stolen them.
Than went Laban into Iacobs tente, and into Leas tente, Ꟶ into the .ii. maydens tentes: but founde them not: Than went he out of leas tente, and entred into Rahels tente.
And Rahel had taken the ymages Ꟶ put them in the camels strawe, Ꟶ sate downe vpon them. And Laban serched all the tente: but founde them not.
Than sayde she to hyr father: my lord, be not angry that I can not ryse vp before the for the custome of women is come vpon me. So searched he but founde not those ydols.
And Iacob was wrooth, and chode with Laban. Iacob also answered Ꟶ sayde to hym: what haue I trespaced or what haue I offended, that thou folowedest so after me?
Thou hast searched all my stuffe, Ꟶ what hast thou founde of all thy housholde stuffe? put it here before thy brethren Ꟶ myne that they maye iudge betwyxte vs both.
Beholde: Thys .xx. yere haue I bene wyth the, thy shepe Ꟶ thy goates haue not bene baren, Ꟶ the rammes of thy flocke haue I not eaten.
Whatsoeuer was torne of beastes I brought it not vnto the, but made it good my selfe: of my hande dydest thou requyre it, euen as it that was stollen by daye or nyght.
By daye the hete consumed me, and the frost by nyght, and my slepe departed fro myne eyes.
Thus haue I bene .xx. yere in thy house, Ꟶ serued the .xiiii. yeres for thy .ii. doughters, Ꟶ .vi. yeres for thy shepe, and thou hast chaunged my rewarde .x. tymes.
And excepte the God of my father, the God of Abraham Ꟶ the feare of Isahac had bene wyth me: surely thou haddest sent me awaye now all emptie. But God behelde my trybulacyon, and the laboure of my handes, and rebuked the yesterdaye.
Laban answered and sayde vnto Iacob: these daughters are my daughters, and these chyldren are my chyldren, and these shepe are my shepe, and all that thou seyst, is myne. And what can I do thys daye vnto these my daughters, or vnto theyr chyldren whych they haue borne?
Now therfore come on Ꟶ let vs make a bonde, I Ꟶ thou, whych maye be a witnesse betwene the and me.
Than toke Iacob a stone and set it vp an ende,
Ꟶ Iacob sayde vnto hys brethren: gather stones. And they toke stones, and made an heape, Ꟶ they did eate there vpon the heape.
And Laban called it Iegar Sahadutha, but Iacob called it Gilead.
Than sayde Laban: thys heape is wytnesse betwene the Ꟶ me thys daye: therfore is it called Gilead
Ꟶ Mizaph: For he sayd: The Lorde loke betwene me Ꟶ the when we are departed one from another:
If thou shalt vexe my daughters or shalt take other wyues beside my daughters. Here is no man with vs: beholde, God be witnesse betwixte the and me.
And Laban sayde moreouer to Iacob: beholde, thys heape and thys marke whych I haue set there, betwixte me and the:
thys heape be wytnesse and also thys marke that I will not come ouer thys heape to the, and thou shalt not come ouer thys heape and thys marke vnto me: to do any harme.
The God of Abraham, the God of Nahor, Ꟶ the God of theyr fathers be iudge betwyxte vs. And Iacob sware by the feare of hys father Isahac.
Then Iacob dyd sacrifyce vpon the mounte, Ꟶ called his brethren to eate breed. And they dyd eate breed Ꟶ taryed all nyght in the hyll.
And early in the mornynge Laban rose vp and kyssed kys children and hys daughters, and blessed them: and Laban departynge, went vnto hys place agayne.
But Iacob went forth on his iourney. And the Angels of God came, Ꟶ met hym.
And when Iacob sawe them, he said thys is Goddes hoost: Ꟶ called the name of that same place Mahanaim.
And Iacob sente messengers before him to Esau his brother, vnto the land of Seir Ꟶ the felde of Edom.
And he commaunded them sayinge. Thus shall ye speake to my Lord Esau: thy seruaunte Iacob sayth thus: I haue sogeorned Ꟶ bene a straunger wyth Laban vnto thys tym
and haue oxen, asses Ꟶ shepe men seruauntes and wemenseruauntes, and haue sent to shewe it my Lorde, that I may fynde grace in thy syghte.
And the messengers came agayne to Iacob saying: we came vnto thy brother Esau, and he commeth agaynst the Ꟶ hath .iiii. hundreth men wt hym.
But Iacob was greatly afrayed, and wyst not whych waye to turne hym selfe, and deuyded the people that was wyth hym Ꟶ the shepe, Ꟶ oxen Ꟶ camels, into .ii. companyes:
Ꟶ sayd: If Esau come to the one parte Ꟶ smyte it, the other shall saue it selfe.
And Iacob sayde agayne: O God of my father Abraham; Ꟶ God of my father Isahac: Lorde whych saydest vnto me returne vnto thy countre and to thy kynred, Ꟶ I wyll do all well wyth the.
I am not worthy of the leaste of all the mercyes and truthe whych thou hast shewed vnto thy seruaunte. For wyth my staf came I ouer thys Iordane, Ꟶ now haue I gotten .ii. droues.
Delyuer me from the handes of my brother Esau: for I feare hym: lest he wyll come and smyte the mother wyth the chyldren.
Thou saydest: I wyll surely do the good, Ꟶ make thy seed as the sande of the see, which can not be nombred for multytude.
And he taryed there that same nyghte, Ꟶ toke of that whych came to hande, a present, for Esau hys brother
.ii. hundred she goates Ꟶ .xx. he goates .ii. hundred shepe and .xx. rammes:
thyrtye mylch camels wyth theyr coltes .xl. kyne, Ꟶ .x. bulles .xx. she asses Ꟶ ten foles:
and delyuered them into the hande of hys seruaunes euery droue by them selues, and sayde vnto hys seruauntes: go forth before me, and put a space betwyxte, droue, Ꟶ droue.
And he commaunded the formost sayinge. If Esau my brother mete the and aske the sayinge: whose art thou, and whyther goest thou: Ꟶ whose are these that goo before the?
thou shalt saye, they be thy seruaunte Iacobs, and it is a present sent vnto my Lord Esau, and beholde, he hym selfe commeth after vs:
And so commaunded he the seconde, and the thyrde, and all that folowed the droues sayinge of thys maner se that ye speake vnto Esau when ye mete hym
and saye moreouer: thy seruaunte Iacob also commeth after vs, for he sayde: I wyll pease his wrath with the present that goeth before me, and afterward I wyll see hym my selfe, yf peraduenture he wyll receaue me to grace:
So went the present before hym and he taryed all that nyght in the company, and rose vp the same nyghte,
and toke hys two wyues and hys two maydens, and hys eleuen sonnes, and went ouer the foorde Iabok
And he toke them and sent them ouer the ryuer, and sent ouer that he had,
and taried behinde hym selfe alone. And there wrastled a man wyth hym vnto the breakynge of the daye.
And when he sawe that he coulde not preuayle against hym, he smote hym vnder the thye, and the senowe of Iacobs thye shranke, as he wrastled wyth hym.
And he sayde: let me goo, for the daye breaketh. Which answered: I wyll not let the goo, excepte thou blesse me.
And he sayde vnto hym: what is thy name? He answered: Iacob.
He sayde: thou shalt be called Iacob nomore, but Israell. For as a prynce hast thou wrastled wyth God: and wyth man, and hast preuayled.
And Iacob asked hym sayinge: tell me thy name. And he sayde, wherfore dost thou so aske after my name? and he blessed hym there.
And Iacob called the name of the place Pheniel, for I haue sene God face to face, Ꟶ my lyfe is preserued.
And as he went ouer Pheniel, the sonne rose vpon hym, and he halted vpon hys thye.
And therfore is it that the chyldren of Israell eate not of the senow that shranke in that place of the thye, vnto thys daye: because that he touched the place of Iacobs thye in the senow that shroncke.
Iacob lyftynge vp his eyes, loked, and beholde, Esau came, hauynge with him .iiij. hundred men. And he deuyded the children vnto Lea and vnto Rahel and vnto the .ij. maydens.
And he put the maydens and their chyldren formost, and Lea and hyr chyldren after, and Rahel and Ioseph hyndermost.
And he went before them and fell on the grownde .vij. tymes vntill he came vnto his brother.
Esau came to mete hym and enbraced hym and fell on hys necke and kyssed hym, and they wepte.
And he lyfte vp hys eyes Ꟶ sawe the wemen, and the chyldren, and sayde: whence hast thou these? And he answered: they are the chyldren whych God hath geuen thy seruaunte.
Than came the maydens forth, Ꟶ their chyldren, and dyd theyr obeysaunce.
Lea also with hyr chyldren came Ꟶ dyd theyr obeysaunce. And last of all came Ioseph Ꟶ Rahel, Ꟶ dyd theyr obeysaunce.
And he sayde: what is all the droue whych I mett? He answered: that I maye fynde grace in the syghte of my Lorde.
And Esau sayde: I haue ynough my brother, kepe that thou hast vnto thy selfe.
To whom Iacob answered, oh nay, but yf I haue founde grace in thy syghte, receaue my present of my hande: for I haue sene thy face as though I had sene the face of God: And thou hast had a good wyll towarde me.
Oh take my blessynge that is brought the, for God hath had mercy on me. And I haue ynough. And so he compelled hym, and he toke it.
And he sayde: let vs take oure iourney and goo, I wyll goo before the.
Iacob answered him: my Lorde, Thou knowest, that the chyldren are tendre, Ꟶ the ewes Ꟶ kyne wyth yonge vnder myne hande, which yf men shulde ouerdryue but euen one daye all the shepe wyll dye.
Oh let my Lorde goo before hys seruaunte, and I wyll dryue fayre and softly, accordynge as the catell that goeth before me and the chyldren be able to endure: vntyll I come to my Lorde vnto Seir.
And Esau sayde: let me yet leaue some of my folke with the. And he answered, what neadeth it? let me fynde grace in the syghte of my Lord.
So Esau went hys waye agayne that same daye vnto Seir.
And Iacob toke hys iourney towarde Sucoth, and buylt hym an house, and made boothes for his catell. And therfore is it, that the name of the place is called Sucoth.
And Iacob came to Salem a cytie of Sichem which is in the lande of Canaan, after that he was come from Mesopotamia, and pytched before the cytie,
and bought a parcell of grounde (were he pytched hys tent) of the chyldren of Hemor Sichems father for an hundred peces of money.
And he made there an aulter, Ꟶ called vpon the myghtie God of Israel.
Dina the daughter of Lea which she bare vnto Iacob, went out to se the daughters of the lande.
Whom whan Sichem the sonne of Hemor the Heuite Lorde of the countrey sawe, he toke her, and laye with her, and forced her:
and hys harte laye vnto Dina the daughter of Iacob. And he loued that damsell and spake kyndly vnto her,
and Sichem spake vnto hys father Hemor sayinge, gett me thys mayden vnto my wyfe.
And Iacob hearde that he had defyled Dina hys daughter, hys sonnes beinge with theyr catell in the felde, and he helde hys peace, vntyll they were come.
And Hemor the father of Sichem went out vnto Iacob, to comen with hym.
And whan the sonnes of Iacob commynge out of the felde herde it, it greued them, Ꟶ they were not a lytle wrooth because he had wrought folye in Israel, in that he had lyen wyth Iacobs daughter, which thinge ought not to be done.
And Hemor commened with them sayinge: the soule of my sonne Sichem longeth for youre daughter: geue her hym to wyfe,
and make mariages with vs: and geue youre daughters vnto vs, and take oure daughters vnto you,
Ꟶ ye shall dwell wyth vs, and the lande shall be before you, dwell and do youre busynes and haue youre possessyons there in.
And Sichem sayde vnto hyr father and hyr brethren, let me fynde grace in youre eyes, and what soeuer ye apoynte me, that wyll I geue.
Axe frely of me both the dowry and giftes, and I wyll geue accordynge as ye saye vnto me, so that ye geue me the Damsell to wyfe.
But the sonnes of Iacob answered to Sichem Ꟶ Hemor hys father talkynge amonge them selues deceytefully, because he had defyled Dina theyr syster.
And they sayde vnto them, we can not do thys thynge that we shulde geue oure syster to one that is vncircumcysed, for that were a shame vnto vs.
But in thys wyll we consent vnto you? If ye wylbe as we be and all the men chyldren amonge you be circumcysed,
then wyll we geue oure daughters to you and take youre daughters to vs, and wyll dwell wyth you and be one people.
But and yf ye wyll not harken vnto vs to be circumcysed, than will we take oure daughter Ꟶ goo oure wayes.
Their wordes pleased Hemor: and Sichem hys sonne.
And the yonge man deferde not for to do the thynge, because he had a lust to Iacobs daughter: he was also most sett by of all that were in hys fathers house.
Than Hemor Ꟶ Sychem hys sonne went vnto the gate of their cytie, and comened with the men of their cytie, sayinge:
these men are vnfayned towarde vs, and dwell in the lande and do their occupacyon therin. And in the lande is rowme ynough for them, we wyll take their daughters to wyues, and geue them oure daughters:
only here in wyll they consent vnto vs for to dwell wyth vs Ꟶ to be one people: yf all the men chyldren that are amonge vs be circumcysed as they are.
Shall not their goodes and their substance and all theyr catell be oures, only yf we consente vnto them? For they wyll dwell with vs.
And vnto Hemor and Sichem his sonne harkened all that went out at the gate of hys cytie. And all the men chyldren were circumcised whatsoeuer went out at the gates of his cytie.
And it happened the thyrde daye (when it was paynefull to them) .ij. of the sonnes of Iacob Symeon and Leui Dinas brethren, toke ether of them his swerde and went in to the cytie boldly, and slewe all that was male,
and slewe also Hemor and Sichem hys sonne with the edge of the swerde, and toke Dina out of Sichems house, and went their waye.
And the sonnes of Iacob commynge vpon the deed, spoyled the cytie, because they had defyled their syster:
Ꟶ toke their shepe, oxen, and their asses and whatsoeuer was in the cytie and also in the feldes.
And all their goodes Ꟶ all their chyldren, and theyr wyues toke they captiue and made hauouck of all that was in the house.
But Iacob sayde to Simeon and Leui: ye haue troubled me and made me styncke before the inhabitours of the lande, before the Canaanyte and the Pherezite. And I beynge fewe in nombre, they shall gather them selues together agaynst me Ꟶ sley me, and so shall I and my house be destroyed.
And they answered: shulde they deale with oure syster as with an whoore.
And God sayde vnto Iacob, aryse and get the vp to Bethel, and dwell there. And make there an aulter vnto God that apeared vnto the, when thou fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother.
Than sayde Iacob vnto hys housholde and to all that were wyth hym: put awaye the straunge goddes that are amonge you and be cleane, and chaunge youre garmentes,
for we wyll aryse and goo vp to Bethell and I wyll make an aulter there, vnto God, which herde me in the daye of my tribulacyon, and was with me in the waye which I went.
And they gaue vnto Iacob all the straunge goddes which they had in their hande, and all their earinges which were in their eares, Ꟶ Iacob hyd them vnder an ooke whych was by Sichem.
And whan they departed, the feare of God fell vpon the cyties that were rounde aboute them. And they dyd not folowe after the sonnes of Iacob.
So came Iacob to Lus which is in the lande of Canaan. The same is Bethell, he Ꟶ all the people that was with him.
And he buylded there an aulter, and called the place: The God of Bethell, because that God appered vnto hym there, when he fled from the face of his brother.
But Debora Rebeccas norse, dyed, Ꟶ was buryed beneth Bethell vnder an ooke. And the name of it was called: the ooke of lamentacyon.
And God appeared vnto Iacob agayne after he came out of Mesopotamia and blessed hym,
and God sayde vnto him: thy name is Iacob. Notwythstondinge thou shalt be no more called Iacob, but Israel shalbe thy name. And he called hys name Israel.
And God sayde vnto him: I am God allmyghtye, growe and multiplye, people and a multitude of people shall sprynge of the, yee and kynges shall come out of thy loynes.
And the lande whych I gaue Abraham and Isahac, will I geue vnto the, and vnto thy seed after the will I geue that lande also:
And so God departed vp from hym in the place where he had talked wyth hym.
And Iacob set vp a marke in the place where he talked with hym: euen a marke of stone and powred dryncke offrynge theron, Ꟶ powred also oyle theron,
and Iacob called the name of the place where God spake with hym Bethell.
And they departed from Bethel, and when he was but a felde bredth from Ephrath, Rahel began to trauell, and in trauelynge she was in parell.
And it happened as she was in paynes of hyr laboure, the mydwyfe sayde vnto her, feare not, for thys sonne is thyne also.
Then as hyr soule was a departynge, that she must dye, she called his name. Ben Oni. But hys father called hym Ben Iamin.
And thus dyed Rahel and was buryed in the waye to Ephrath, which is Bethlehem.
And Iacob sett vp a stone vpon hir graue, which is called Rahels graue stone vnto thys daye.
And Israel went thence, Ꟶ pytched vp hys tent beyonde the toure of Eder.
And it chaunced as Israel dwelt in the lande, that Ruben went and laye wyth Bilha hys fathers concubyne, and it came to Israels eare. The sonnes of Iacob were .xij. in nombre.
The sonnes of Lea. Ruben Iacobs eldest sonne, and Simeon, Leui, Iuda, Isachar, and zabulon.
The sonnes of Rahel: Ioseph and Ben Iamin.
The sonnes of Bilha Rahels mayde: Dan and Neptali.
The sonnes of zilpha Leaes mayde, Gad and Aser. These are the sonnes of Iacob whych were borne hym in Mesopotamia.
And so Iacob came vnto Isahar hys father to Mamre vnto kyriath Arba which is Hebron: where Abraham Ꟶ Isahac soiourned as straungers.
And the dayes of Isahac were an hundred and .lxxx. yeres:
Ꟶ Isahac fell sycke and dyed, and was put vnto hys people, beynge olde and full of dayes. And his sonnes Esau and Iacob buryed him.
These are the generacyons of Esau. The same is Edom.
Esau toke his wyues of the daughters of Canaan. Ada the daughter of Elon an Hethite, Ꟶ Ahalibama the daughter of Ana, the daughter of zibeon an Heuyte,
and Basmath Ismaels daughter Ꟶ sister of Nebaioth.
And Ada bare vnto Esau, Eliphas: and Basmath bare Reguel:
And Ahalibama bare Ieus and Iaelan and Korah. These are the sonnes of Esau whych were borne him in the lande of Canaan.
And Esau toke his wyues and hys sonnes and daughters and all the soules of hys house: hys goodes and all hys cattell and all hys substance whych he had gott in the lande of Canaan, and went into a countre awaye from the face of hys brother Iacob:
for their ryches was moche, and they coulde not dwell together, and the lande where in they were straungers, coulde not receaue them: because of their possession.
Thus dwelt Esau in mounte Seir. The same Esau is Edom.
These are the generacyons of Esau father of the Edomites in mounte Seir,
and these are the names of Esaus sonnes: Eliphas the sonne of Ada the wyfe of Esau, and Reguel the sonne of Basmath the wyfe of Esau.
And the sonnes of Eliphas were: Theman, Omar, zepho, Gaethom and Kenas.
And Thimna was concubyne to Eliphas Esaus sonne, and bare vnto Eliphas Amalech. And these be the sonnes of Ada Esaus wyfe.
And these are the sonnes of Reguel: Nahath, Serah, Samma and Misa, these were the sonnes of Basmath Esaus wyfe.
And these were the sonnes of Ahalibama the daughter of Ana daughter of zebion Esaus wyfe, and she bare vnto Esau: Ieus, Iealam and Korah.
These were dukes of the sonnes of Esau. The chyldren of Eliphas the fyrst sonne of Esau, were these: duke theman, duke Omar, duke zepho, duke Kenas,
and duke Korah, duke Gaetham and duke Amalech. These are the dukes that came of Eliphas in the lande of Edom, and these were the sonnes of Ada.
These also are the chyldren of Reguel Esaus sonne: duke Nahath, duke Serah, duke Samma, duke Misa. These are the dukes that came of Reguel in the lande of Edom, Ꟶ these are the sonnes of Basmath Esaus wyfe.
These were the chyldren of Ahalibama Esaus wyfe: duke Ieus, duke Gaelan, duke Korah, these dukes came of Ahalibama the daughter of Ana Esaus wyfe.
These are the chyldren of Esau, and these are the dukes of them which Esau is Edom.
These are the chyldren of Seir the Horite, the inhabitoure of the lande: Lothan, Sobal, zibeon, and Ana,
and Dison, Esar and Disan. These also are the dukes of the Horites the chyldren of Seir in the lande of Edom.
And the chyldren of Lothan were: Hori and Heman. And Lothaus syster was called Thymna.
The chyldren of Sobal were these: Aluan, Manahath and Ebal, Sepho Ꟶ Onan.
These are the chyldren of zibeon. Aia and Ana, thys was that Ana that founde mules in the wyldernes, as he fed hys father zibeons asses.
The chyldren of Ana were these. Dison and Ahalibama the daughter of Ana.
These are the chyldren of Dison, Hemdan and Esban, Iethran and Cheran.
The chyldren of Ezer are these: Bilhan, Seauan and Akan.
The chyldren of Disan also are these: Uz and Iran.
These are the dukes that came of Hori: duke Lothan, duke Sobal, duke zibeon, duke Ana,
duke Dison, duke Ezer, duke Disan. These be the dukes that came of Hory after their duke domes in the lande of Seir.
These are the kynges that reygned in the lande of Edom before there raygned any kynge vpon the chyldren of Israel.
Bela the sonne of Beor reygned in Edomea, Ꟶ the name of hys cytie was Dinhaba.
And when Bela dyed, Iobab the sonne of Serah out of Bozra, reygned in hys steade.
When Iobab also was dead, Husam of the lande of Themany reygned in his steade.
And after the deth of Husam, Hadad the sonne of Bedad which slewe the Madianytes in the felde of the Moabytes, reygned in hys steade, and the name of hys cytie was Auith.
When Hadad was dead, Samla of Masteka reygned in his steade.
When Samla was dead, Saul of the ryuer Reboboth reygned in hys steade.
When Saul was dead, Baal Hanan the sonne of Achbor reygned in his steade.
And after the deth of Baal Hanan the sonne of Achbor, Hadad reygned in his steade, and the name of his cytie was Pahu. And hys wyfes name Mehetabeel the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mesaab.
These are the names of the dukes that came of Esau, in the .xij. kynredes, places and names: duke Thymma, duke Alua, duke Ietheth,
duke Ahalibama, duke Ela, duke Pinon,
duke Kenas, duke Theman, duke Mibzar,
duke Magdiel, duke Iram. These be the dukes of Edomea accordynge to theyr habitacyons, in the lande of theyr possessions. Thys Esau is the father of the Edomytes.
Iacob dwelt in the lande where in his father was a straunger, euen in the lande of Chanaan.
These are the generacyons of Iacob. when Ioseph was .xvij. yere olde, he kepte shepe wyth hys brethren, and the lad was with the sonnes of Bilha and with the sonnes of zilpha his fathers wyues. And he brought vnto their father an euyll sayinge of them.
But Israel loued Ioseph more than all hys chyldren, because he begat him in hys olde age, and he made hym a coote of many coloures.
And when hys brethren sawe that theyr father loued him more than all his brethren, they hated hym Ꟶ coulde not speke peaceably vnto hym.
Moreouer whan Ioseph had dreamed a dreame, he tolde it his brethren whych hated hym yet the more.
And he sayde vnto them: heare I praye yowe thys dreame which I haue dreamed:
Beholde we were byndinge sheues in the felde: Ꟶ lo, my sheffe arose, and stode vp ryght, and youres stode rounde aboute and made obeysaunce to my sheffe.
To whom hys brethren sayde: shalt thou be oure kynge in dede? or shalt thou in dede haue dominyon ouer vs? And they hated hym yet the more, because of hys dreames, and of his wordes.
And he dreamed yet another dreame and tolde it his brethren sayinge: beholde, I haue had one dreame more: me thought the sonne and the moone Ꟶ .xj. starres made obeysaunce to me.
And when he had tolde it vnto his father and hys brethren, hys father rebuked him Ꟶ sayde vnto him: what is thys dreame which thou hast dreamed: shall I Ꟶ thy mother and thy brethren come to fall on the grounde before the?
And hys brethren hated him, but hys father noted the sayinge.
Hys brethren also went to kepe their fathers shepe in Sichem,
and Israel sayde vnto Ioseph: do not thy brethren kepe in Sichem? come, and I wyll sende the to them. He answered here am I.
And he sayde vnto him: goo and see whether it be well with thy brethren and the shepe, and brynge me worde agayne. And so he sent him out of the vale of Hebron and he went to Sichem.
And a certayne man founde hym, and beholde he was wandrynge out of hys waye in the felde, and the man asked him: what sekest thou?
He answered: I seke my brethren, tell me I praye the where they kepe shepe.
And the man sayde, they are departed hence, for I herde them saye: let vs goo vnto Dothan. Thus went Ioseph after his brethren, and founde them in Dothan.
And when they sawe him a farre of before he came at them, they toke councell agaynst him, for to sley hym.
For one sayde to another: Beholde this dreamer commeth:
come nowe therfore and let vs sley hym and cast hym in to some pytt, and we wyll saye a wycked beast hath deuoured hym, and we shall se what wyll come of hys dreames.
When Ruben hearde that, he ryd him out of their handes and sayde, we wyll not kyll hym.
And Ruben sayde moreouer vnto them, shede not his bloude, but cast him into thys pytt that is in the wyldernes, and laye no hande vpon him: Namely, that he myght rydd him out of their handes Ꟶ delyuer him to hys father agayne.
And it happened that whan Ioseph was come vnto hys brethren, they strypte him out of his coot, hys party coloured coote that was vpon hym,
and they toke hym and cast hym into an emptye pytt: Wherin was no water.
And they satt them downe to eate brede. And as they lyft vp their eyes and loked aboute, there came a companye of Ismaelytes from Gilead, and their camels laden with spicery, baulme, and myrre, and were goynge downe to cary it into Egypte.
And Iuda sayde vnto his brethren: what auayleth it yf we sley oure brother, and kepe hys bloude secrett?
come on and let vs sell hym to the Ismaelytes, and let not oure hande be vpon hym: for he is oure brother and oure fleshe. And hys brethren were content.
Than as the Madianites marchaunt men passed by, they drewe and lyft Ioseph out of the pytt and solde him vnto the Ismaelytes for .xx. peces of syluer. And they brought him into Egypte.
And when Ruben came agayne vnto the pytt Ꟶ founde not Ioseph there, he rent his cloothes
and went agayne vnto his brethren sayinge: the lad is not yonder, and whether shall I goo?
And they toke Iosephs coote and kylled a goote, Ꟶ dypped the coote in the bloude.
And they sent that partye coloured coote, and brought it vnto their father and sayde: Thys haue we founde: se whether it be thy sonnes coote or no.
And he knewe it sayinge, it is my sonnes coote, a wycked beast hath deuoured hym, Ioseph is rent in peces.
And Iacob rent hys cloothes, and put sacke clothe aboute his loynes, and sorowed for his sonne a longe season.
But all his sonnes and all hys doughters rose vp to comforte him. Neuertheles he wolde not be comforted, but sayde: I wyll go downe into the graue vnto my sonne, mourninge. And thus hys father wepte for hym.
And the Madianytes solde hym in Egypte vnto Putiphar a Lord of Pharaos, and his chefe Stewarde.
It fortuned at that tyme, that Iudas went downe from his brethren, and gatt hym to a man called Hira of Odollam,
and there he sawe the daughter of a man called Sua a Canaanyte: And he toke her and went in to her.
And she conceaued Ꟶ bare a sonne and called hys name Er.
And she conceaued agayne, and bare a sonne and called him Onan.
And she conceaued agayne, Ꟶ bare yet a sonne, whom she called Sela: and he was at Chesyb when she bare him.
And Iudas gaue Er hys Eldest sonne a wyfe, whose name was Thamar.
And Er Iudas eldest sonne was wycked in the syghte of the Lorde, Ꟶ the Lorde slewe hym.
And Iudas sayde vnto Onan: goo into thy brothers wyfe and marye her, that thou mayest styrre vp seed vnto thy brother.
And when Onan perceaued that the seed shulde not be his, therfore when he went into his brothers wyfe, he spylled it on the grounde, and gaue not seed vnto hys brother.
And the thynge whych he dyd, displeased the Lorde, wherfore he slewe him also.
Than sayde Iudas to Thamar hys daughter in lawe: remayne a wydowe at thy fathers house, tyll Sela my sonne be growne: for he sayde: Lest peraduenture he dye also, as hys brethren dyd. And Thamar wente and dwelt in her fathers house.
And in processe of tyme, the daughter of Sua Iudas wyfe dyed. Then Iudas when he had left mournynge, went vnto his shepe sherers to Thymnath he and his frende Hira of Odollam.
And one tolde Thamar sayinge: beholde, thy father in lawe goeth vp to Thymnath, to shere hys shepe.
And she put hyr wydows garmentes of from her Ꟶ couered her wyth a clooke, and disgysed her selfe: And satt her downe in a comon place which is by the hye wayes syde to Thimnath, for because she sawe that Sela was growne, and she was not geuen vnto him to wyfe.
When Iuda sawe her, he thought it had bene an whoore, because she had couered hyr face.
And he turned to her vnto the waye, Ꟶ sayde, come I praye the, let me lye with the, for he knewe not that it was hys daughter in lawe. And she answered: what wilt thou gyue me, for to lye with me?
Than sayde he, I wyll sende the a kydd from the flocke. She sayde, Than geue me a pledge tyll thou sende it.
He sayde, what pledge shall I geue the? She answered: thy sygnett, thy bracelet, and thy staffe that is in thy hande. And he gaue it her and lay by her and she was with chylde by hym.
And she gatt here vp and went and put her mantell from her, and put on hyr wydowes rayment.
And Iudas sent the kydd by hys frende of Odollam, for to receaue hys pledge agayne from the wyfes hande. But he founde her not,
Than asked he the men of the same place sayinge, where is the whoore that satt openly by the waye syde? They answered, There was no whoore here.
He came therfore to Iuda agayne Ꟶ sayde vnto him: I can not finde her, and also the men of the place sayde, that there was no whoore there.
And Iuda sayde, let her take it to her, lest we be shamed. Beholde I sente the kydd and thou hast not founde her.
And it came to passe that after .iij. monethes, one tolde Iuda sayinge: Thamar thy daughter in lawe hath played the whoore, and wyth playinge the whoore is become great with chylde. And Iuda sayde, brynge her forth, that she maye be brente.
And when they brought her forth; she sent to her father in lawe sayinge: by the man vnto whome these thynges pertayne, am I with chylde. And sayde also, loke whose are thys seale, bracelet, and thys staffe.
And Iuda knewe them and sayde, she hath bene more ryghtwes than I, because I gaue her not to Sela my sonne. And he laye with her nomore.
It fortuned when tyme was come that she shulde be delyuered, beholde there was .ij. twynnes in hyr wombe.
And it fortuned, that whan she traueled, the one put out hys hande and the mydwyfe toke and bownde a reed threde aboute it sayinge, thys is come out fyrst.
And it chaunced, that he plucked hys hande backe agayne, and beholde hys brother came out. And she sayde, wherfore hast thou rent a rent vpon the? Ꟶ called his name, Pharez.
Afterwarde came out his brother that had the redd threde about hys hande, and his name was called zarah.
Ioseph was brought vnto Egypte, and Putiphar a Lorde of Pharaos (Ꟶ his chefe stewarde an Egyptian) bought him of the Ismaelytes which had brought him thyther.
And God was with Ioseph, Ꟶ he became a luckye man, continuynge in the house of his master the Egyptian.
And his master sawe that God was with him, Ꟶ that God made all that he dyd to prosper in his hande.
And Ioseph founde grace in hys masters syghte, and serued him. And made hym rular of hys house, and put all that he had in his hande.
And it fortuned from the tyme that he had made him rular ouer hys house and ouer all that he had, the Lorde blessed the Egyptyans house for Iosephs sake, and the blessynge of the Lorde was vpon all that he had: in the house, and in the felde.
And therfore he left all that he had in Iosephs hande, and loked vpon nothynge that was wt hym, saue only on the bread whych he dyd eate. And Iosep was a goodly persone Ꟶ a well fauored.
And it fortuned after thys, that his masters wyfe cast hyr eyes vpon Ioseph and sayde: come lye with me.
But he refused, and sayde to hys masters wyfe: Beholde, my master woteth not what he hath in the house with me, and hath commytted all that he hath to my hande.
There is no man greater in the house than I, Neyther hath he kepte any thynge from me, but only the, because thou art hys wyfe. Howe than can I do this great wyckednes, and synne agaynst God?
And after thys maner spake she to Ioseph daye by daye: but he harkened not vnto her, to slepe nere her, or to be in her company.
And it fortuned on a certayne conuenient daye, that Ioseph entred into the house, to do hys busynes: and there was none of the housholde by, in the house.
And she caught him by the garment sayinge: come slepe with me. And he lefte hys garment in hyr hande and fled, and gott hym out. And it chaunced.
When she sawe that he had lefte his garment in hyr hande, and was fled out.
She called vnto the men of hir house, and tolde them, sayinge: Se, he hath brought in an Hebrewe vnto vs to do vs shame: for he came in to me, for to haue slept wyth me. And I begane to crye wyth a lowde voyce.
And when he hearde that I lyfte vp my voyce Ꟶ cryed, he left hys garment wt me, and fled awaye, and got him out.
And she layed vp hys garment by her, vntyll hyr Lorde came home.
And she tolde him with these wordes sayinge: Thys Hebrues seruaunte whych thou hast brought vnto vs, came into me to do me shame.
But as soone as I lyft vp my voyce and cryed, he left hys garment wyth me and fled out.
When his master. hearde the wordes of hys wyfe whych she tolde hym sayinge: after this maner dyd thy seruaunte to me, he waxed wrooth.
And the master toke Ioseph Ꟶ put hym in pryson euen in to the place where the kynges prysoners laye bounde. And there continued he in preson,
but the Lorde was wyth Ioseph, and shewed hym mercye, and gote hym fauoure in the syghte of the Lorde of the preson.
And the keper of the preson commytted to Iosephs hande all the presoners that were in the preson house. And whatsoeuer was done there, that dyd he.
And the keper of the preson loked vnto nothynge that was vnder his hande, seynge that the Lorde was with him. For whatsoeuer he dyd, the Lorde made it to prosper.
And it chaunced after this, that the butteler of the kynge of Egypte and hys baker had offended their Lorde the kynge of Egypte.
And Pharao was angrye agaynst his two offycers: agaynst the chefe butler Ꟶ the chefe baker: and put them in warde in hys chefe stewardes house:
euen in the preson and place where Ioseph was bounde.
And the chefe Stewarde gaue Ioseph a charge with them, Ꟶ he serued them. And they contynued a season in warde.
And they dreamed ether of them in one nyght: both the butteler and the baker of the kynge of Egypte which were bounde in the preson house, ether of them his dreame, and eache mannes dreame of a sondrye interpretacyon.
When Ioseph came in vnto them in the mornynge, and loked vpon them: beholde, they were sadd. And he asked Pharaos offycers that were with hym in hys masters warde sayinge:
Wherfore loke ye so sadly to daye?
They answered hym: we haue dreamed a dreame, and haue no man to declare it. And Ioseph sayde vnto them: Do not interpretynges belonge to God: yet tell me?
And the chefe butlar tolde his dreame to Ioseph, and sayde vnto him: In my dreame me thought there stode a vyne before me,
and in the vyne were .iij. braunches, and it was as though it budded, and her blossoms shott forth: and the grapes there of waxed type.
And I had Pharaos cuppe in my hande and toke of the grapes and wronge them in to Pharaos cuppe, and delyuered Pharaos cuppe in to hys hande.
And Ioseph sayde vnto hym: thys is the intrepretacion of it.
The thre braunches ar thre dayes: for wythin thre dayes shall Pharao lyft vp thyne heade and restore the vnto thyne offyce agayne, and thou shalt delyuer Pharaos cuppe in to hys hande, after the old maner wherin thou wast wont to geue hym drynke.
But yf thou thynke on me wyth the, when thou art in good case, shewe mercye (I praye the) vnto me. And make mencion of me to Pharao, and brynge me out of thys house:
for I was stollen out of the lande of the Hebrues, and here also haue I done nothynge at all, wherfore they shulde haue put me in to thys dongeon.
When the chefe baker sawe that the interpretacyon was good, he sayde vnto Ioseph: me thought also in my dreame, that I had .iij. wyker baskettes on my heade.
And in the vppermost basket there was of all maner bakemeates for Pharao. And the byrdes dyd eate them out of the basket that was vpon my head.
And Ioseph answered and sayde: thys is the interpretacyon therof. The thre baskettes are thre dayes,
for thys daye thre dayes shall Pharao take thy heade from the, and shall hange the on a tree, and the byrdes shall eate thy fleshe from of the.
And it came to passe the thyrde daye whych was Pharaos byrth daye that he made a feast vnto all hys seruauntes. And he lyfted vp the head of the chefe buttelar and of the chefe baker amonge hys seruauntes.
And restored the chefe buttelar vnto hys buttelarshyppe agayne: whych also reched the cuppe into Pharaos hande,
but he hanged the chefe baker: euen as Ioseph had interpreted vnto them.
Neyther dyd the chefe buttelar remembre Ioseph, but forgat hym.
And it fortuned after two yeres, that Pharao dreamed, and beholde, he stode by a ryuers syde,
Ꟶ there came out of the ryuer seuen goodly kyne and fatt flesshed, and fedd in a medowe,
Ꟶ .vij. other kyne came vp after them out of the ryuer, euel fauored and leane flesshed, and stode by the other kyne vpon the brynke of the ryuer.
And the euyll fauored and leane flesshed kyne dyd eate vp the seuen well fauored and fatt kyne: and Pharao awoke.
And he slepte agayne and dreamed the seconde tyme. And beholde, seuen eares of corne grewe vpon one stalke, rancke and goodly.
And agayne, seuen thynne eares blasted wyth the east wynde, sprange vp after them:
and the seuen thynne eares deuowred the seuen rancke and full eares. And Pharao a waked: and se, it was a dreame.
And when the mornynge came, his sprete was troubled. And he sent and called for all the sothesayers of Egypte, and all the wyse men therof, and Pharao tolde them hys dreame: but there was none of them that coulde interpretate it vnto Pharao.
Than spake the chefe buttelar vnto Pharao sayinge: I do remembre my fawtes thys daye.
Pharao beynge angrie wyth hys seruauntes, put in warde in the chefe Stewardes house both me Ꟶ the chefe baker.
And we dreamed both of vs in one nyght, and eche mannes dreame of a sondrye interpretacyon.
And there was wyth vs a yonge man, an Hebrue borne, seruaunte vnto the chefe Stewarde. To whom whan we tolde them, he declared oure dreames to vs accordynge to ether of oure dreames.
And as he declared them vnto vs, euen so it came to passe. For he restored me to myne offyce agayne, Ꟶ hanged hym.
Pharao sent therfore and called Ioseph. And they brought hym hastely out of preson. And he shaued hym selfe and chaunged hys rayment, and came in to Pharao.
And Pharao sayde vnto Ioseph: I haue sene a dreame, and no man can interpretate it, and I haue hearde saye of the, that as soone as thou hearest a dreame, thou canst interpretate it.
Ioseph answered Pharao, sayinge: Not I, but God shall geue Pharao an answere of peace.
And Pharao sayde vnto Ioseph: in my dreame me thought I stode by a ryuers syde,
and there came out of the ryuer seuen fatt flesshed, and well fauored kyne, Ꟶ fedd in the medowe.
And the seuen other kyne came vp after them, poore and very euell fauored and leane flesshed: such as I neuer sawe in all the lande of Egypte,
they were so euell fauored. And the seuen leane Ꟶ euell fauored kyne dyd eate vp the fyrst .vii. fatt kyne.
And when they had eaten them vp, a man coulde not perceaue that they had eaten them: but they were still as euell fauored as they were at the begynnynge. And I awoke.
And I sawe agayne in my dreame Ꟶ beholde, .vii. eares sprange out of one stalk, full and fayre,
and .vij. other eares agayne, wythered, thynne and blasted with the east wynde, sprange vp after them.
And the thynne eares deuowred the .vij. good eares. And I haue tolde it vnto the soth sayers, but there was no man that coulde tell, what it meaneth.
And Ioseph answered Pharao: both Pharaos dreames are one. And God hath shewed Pharao what he is aboute to do.
The .vij. good kyne are .vij. yeares: and the .vij. good eares are seuen yeares also, and it is but one dreame.
Lykewyse, the .vii. thynne and euell fauored kyne that came out after them, are .vii. yeares: and the .vii. emptye and blasted eares shalbe .vii. yeares of hunger.
Thys whych I haue sayde vnto Pharao, is it that God is aboute to do, and sheweth it vnto Pharao.
Beholde there come .vii. yeare of great plenteousnes through out all the lande of Egypte.
And agayne there shall aryse after them .vii. yeares of hunger. And all the plenteousnes shalbe forgoten in the lande of Egypte: And the hunger shall consume the lande:
nether shall the plenteousnes be knowen in the lande. by reason of that hunger that shall come after, for it shalbe exceadinge great.
And as concernynge that the dreame was doubled vnto Pharao the seconde tyme, beholde, the thynge is certaynly prepared of God, Ꟶ God wyll shortly brynge it to passe.
Nowe therfore, let Pharao prouyde for a man of vnderstondynge and wysdome, and sett hym ouer the lande of Egypte.
And let Pharao do thys also, that he make offycers ouer the lande, and take vp the fyfte parte of the lande of Egypte in the .vii. plenteous yeares,
and let them gather all the foode of these good yeres that come, and lay vp corne vnder the hande of Pharao, that there maye be foode in the cyties,
and there let them kepe it: that there maye be foode in stoore in the lande, agaynst the seuen yeares of hunger whych shall come in the lande of Egypte, that the lande peryshe not thorowe hunger.
And the sayinge pleased Pharao and all hys seruauntes.
Then sayde Pharao vnto hys seruauntes: where shall we fynde soch a man as thys is, in whom is the sprete of God?
And Pharao sayde vnto Ioseph: for as moche as God hath shewed the all thys, there is no man of vnderstondynge or of wysdome lyke vnto the.
Thou therfore shalt be ouer my house, and accordynge to thy worde shall all my people be ruled, only in the kynges seate wyll I be aboue the.
And Pharao sayde agayne vnto Ioseph: beholde, I haue sett the ouer all the lande of Egypte.
And he toke of hys rynge from hys hande, and put it vpon Iosephs hande, and arayed hym in cloth of raynes, and put a golden cheyne aboute hys necke,
and sett hym vpon the best charett that he had, saue one. And they cryed before hym: Bowe the knee, and Pharao made hym ruler ouer all the lande of Egypte.
And Pharao sayde vnto Ioseph: I am Pharao, wythout the shall no man lyfte vp hys hande or fote in all the lande of Egypte.
And he called Iosephs name zaphnath Paena. And he gaue hym to wyfe Asnath the daughter of Putiphar preast of On. Than went Ioseph abrode in the lande of Egypte.
And he was thyrtye yeare olde when he stode before Pharao kynge of Egypte. And Ioseph departynge from the presence of Pharao, went thorowe out all the lande of Egypte.
And in the seuen plenteous yeares they made sheues
and gathered vp all the foode of the seuen plenteous yeares which were in the lande of Egypte, and layed vp the same in the cyties. The foode of the feldes that grewe rownde aboute euery cyte, layed he vp in the same.
And Ioseph layde vp corne in stoore, lyke vnto the sande of the see, in multitude out of mesure, vntyll he left nombrynge: For it was wythout nombre.
And vnto Ioseph were borne two sonnes (before the yeares of hunger came) whych Asnath the daughter of Putiphar preast of On, bare vnto hym.
And Ioseph called the name of the fyrst sonne Manasse, for God (sayde he) hath made me forgett all my laboure and all my fathers housholde.
The name of the seconde called he Ephraim, for God (sayd he) hath caused me to growe in the lande of my trouble.
And when the seuen yeares of plenteousnes that was in the lande of Egypte were ended,
then came the seuen yeares of derth accordyng as Ioseph had sayde. And the derth was in all landes: but in all the lande of Egypte was there yet foode.
And when the lande of Egypt also began to hunger, the people cryed to Pharao for bread. And Pharao sayde vnto all the Egypcyans, goo vnto Ioseph, and what he sayth to you, that doo.
And the derth was thorow out all the land. And Ioseph opened all that was in the cyties, and solde vnto the Egypcyans. For the hunger waxed sore in the lande of Egypte.
And all countrees came to Egypte to Ioseph for to bye corne: because that the hunger was so sore in all landes.
And Iacob seynge that there was corne in Egypt, sayde vnto hys sonnes: why gape ye one vpon another?
And he sayd: beholde, I haue hearde that there is corne in Egypte. Gete you downe thyther Ꟶ bye vs corne from thence, that we maye lyue Ꟶ not dye.
So went Iosephs ten brethren downe to bye corne of the Egypcyans.
But BenIamin Iosephs brother wolde not Iacob sende with his other brethren, for he sayd: lest some mysfortune happen hym:
And the sonnes of Israel came to bye corne amonge other that came, for there was derth in the lande of Canaan.
And Ioseph was gouerner in the lande, and solde to all the people of the lande. And hys brethren came, and fel flat on the grounde before hym.
When Ioseph sawe hys brethren, he knewe them: and made hym selfe straunge vnto them, and spake roughly vnto them, sayinge: Whence come ye? They answered: out of the lande of Canaan, to bye vytayle.
And Ioseph knewe hys brethren, but they knewe not hym.
And Ioseph remembred his dreames which he dreamed of them, and sayd vnto them: ye are spies, and to se where the lande is weake is youre comynge.
And they sayd vnto him: nay my Lorde: but to bye vitayle thy seruauntes are come.
We are all one mans sonnes, and meane truly, and thy seruauntes are no spyes.
And he sayd vnto them agayne, nay, but euen to se where the lande is weake, is youre comynge.
And they sayde: we thy seruauntes are .xii. brethren, the sonnes of one man in the lande of Canaan. And beholde, the yongest is thys daye wyth oure father, and one, no man woteth where he is.
And Ioseph sayde vnto them, that is it that I spake vnto you, sayinge: ye are spyes.
Here by ye shall be proued. By the lyfe of Pharao, ye shall not goo hence, excepte youre yongest brother come hyther.
Sende out one of you whych maye fett youre brother, Ꟶ ye shalbe kepte in presone, that youre wordes maye be proued, whether there be any trueth in you: or els by the lyfe of Pharao, ye are but spies.
And he put them in warde thre dayes.
And Ioseph sayde vnto them the thryde daye: Thys doo and lyue, for I feare God.
If ye meane no hurte, let one of youre brethren be bounde in the house of youre preson, and goo ye brynge the necessarye foode vnto youre housholdes,
but brynge youre yongest brother vnto me: that your wordes maye be tryed, and that ye dye not. And they dyd so.
And one sayde to another: we haue verely synned agaynst oure brother, in that we sawe the anguysh of hys soull when he besought vs, Ꟶ we wolde nat heare him: and therfore is thys troubyll come vpon vs.
And Ruben answered them sayinge: sayde I not vnto you that ye shulde not synne agaynst the lad? and ye wolde not heare. And see, hys bloude is requyred.
They were not aware that Ioseph understode them, for he spake vnto them by an interpreter.
And he turned from them Ꟶ wepte and turned to them agayne, and comened with them, Ꟶ toke out Symeon from amonge them, and bownde hym before theyr eyes,
and Ioseph commaunded to fyll theyr sackes wyth corne, and to put euery mans money in hys sacke, and to geue them vytayle to spende by the waye. And thus dyd he vnto them.
And they laded theyr asses wyth the corne and departed thence.
And as one of them opened hys sacke, for to geue hys asse prauender in the Inne, he spyed hys money: for it was in hys sackes mouth.
And he sayde vnto hys brethren: my money is restored me agayne: For lo, it is euen in my sacke. And theyr harte fayled them, and they were astonyed, and sayde one to another: why hath God dealt thus wyth us?
And they came vnto Iacob theyr father vnto the lande of Canaan and tolde hym all that had happened them, sayinge:
The man, euen the Lorde of the lande spake roughly to vs, and toke vs for spyes of the countre.
And we sayd vnto him: we meane truely Ꟶ are no spyes.
We be .xii. brethren, sonnes of oure father, one is a waye, and the yongest is thys daye wyth oure father in the lande of Canaan.
And the Lorde of the countre sayde agayne vnto vs: here by shall I knowe yf ye meane truly: leaue one of youre brethren here with me, and take foode necessary for youre housholdes and get you awaye,
Ꟶ brynge youre yongest brother vnto me, that I maye knowe that ye are no spyes, but meane truely: So wyll I delyuer you youre brother, Ꟶ ye shall occupye in the lande.
And it fortuned as they emptyed theyr sackes, beholde: euery mans bundell of money was in his sacke. And when both they Ꟶ their father sawe the bundells of money, they were afrayde.
And Iacob theyr father sayde vnto them: Me haue ye robbed of my chyldren: Ioseph is a waye, and Symeon is awaye, and ye take Ben Iamin awaye. All these thynges are agaynst me.
Ruben sayde vnto hys father: Slee my two sonnes, yf I brynge hym not to the agayne. Delyuer hym to my hande, and I wyll brynge hym to the agayne:
And he sayde: my sonne shall not go downe wyth you. For hys brother is dead, Ꟶ he is left alone. If some mysfortune happen vnto him by the waye which ye go, ye shall brynge my gray head with sorowe vnto the graue.
And the derth was greate in the lande.
And it fortuned when they had eaten vp the corne whych they brought out of the lande of Egypt theyr father sayde vnto them: goo agayne, Ꟶ by vs a lytle food.
Iuda answered hym, and sayde: the man dyd testifye vnto vs, sayinge: loke that ye see not my face, excepte youre brother be wyth you.
If thou wylt sende oure brother wt vs, we wyll go downe, and bye the foode.
But yf thou wylt not sende hym, we wyll not goo downe: for the man sayde vnto vs: loke that ye see not my face, excepte youre brother be wyth you.
And Israel sayde: wherfore delt ye so cruelly wyth me, as to tell the man that ye had yet a brother?
They answered: The man asked vs straytly of oure kynred sayinge, is youre father yet alyue? haue ye not another brother? And we tolde hym accordynge to these wordes. Cowld we knowe that he wolde saye: brynge your brother downe with you?
Than sayde Iuda vnto Israel hys father: Sende the lade with me, that we maye ryse Ꟶ goo, Ꟶ that we maye lyue Ꟶ not dye: both we, thou Ꟶ also oure children.
I wylbe suertye for hym, of my handes shalt thou requyre hym. If I brynge hym not to the agayne, Ꟶ set him before thyne eyes, than let me bere the blame for euer.
Truly except we had made thys taryenge: by thys, we had bene there twyse and come agayne.
And theyr father Israel sayde vnto them: If it must nedis be so nowe: than do thus. Take of the best frutes of the lande in youre vesselles, and brynge the man a present, a curtesye bawlme, and a curtesye of hony, spyces and myrre, notts Ꟶ almondes.
And take double money in youre hande. And the money that was brought agayne in youre sackes, take it agayne wyth you, lest peraduenture it was some ouersyghte.
Take also youre brother wyth you and, aryse and goo agayne to the man.
And God almyghtye geue you mercye in the syghte of the man, that he maye delyuer you youre other brother, Ꟶ this BenIamin, and I shalbe robbed of my chylde, as I haue bene.
Thus toke they the present and twyse so moch more money in theyr hande with BenIamin. And rose vp, went downe to Egypte, and stode before Ioseph.
When Ioseph sawe BenIamin wyth them, he sayde to the rular of hys house: brynge these men home, and sley and make redye: for these men shall dyne wt me at noone.
And the man dyd as Ioseph bad, Ꟶ brought them into Iosephs house.
When the men were brought into Iosephs house, they were afrayde, and sayde: because of the money that came in oure sackes mouthes at the fyrst tyme, are we brought in, that he maye pycke a quarell wt vs, Ꟶ to laye some thynge to oure charge, and to brynge vs in bondage and oure asses also.
Therfore came they to the man that was the rular ouer Iosephs house, Ꟶ commened with hym at the doore of the house,
and sayde: Oh Syr, we came downe hyther at the fyrst tyme to bye foode:
Ꟶ as we came to an inne, it happened that we opened oure sackes: and beholde, euery mannes money was in hys sacke wyth full weyghte: And we haue brought it agayne in oure hande,
and other mony haue we brought also in oure handes, to bye foode, but we cannot tell who put oure money in oure sackes.
And he sayde: peace be vnto you, feare not: youre God and the God of youre father hath geuen you that treasure in youre sackes, I had youre money. And he brought Simeon out to them,
and the man led them into Iosephs house, and gaue them water to washe theyr fete, Ꟶ gaue theyr asses prauender:
And they made redye theyr present agaynst Ioseph came at none, for they herde saye that they shulde eate bred there.
When Ioseph came home, they brought the present into the house to him, whych was in their handes, Ꟶ fell flat on the grounde before hym.
And he welcomed them courteously sayinge: is youre father that old man whych ye tolde me of, in good health? and is he yet alyue?
they answered: thy seruaunte oure father is in good health, and is yet alyue. And they bowed downe theyr heades, and made obaysaunce.
And he lyftinge vp his eyes, behelde his brother BenIamin his mothers sonne, and sayde: is this youre yonger brother of whome ye sayde vnto me? And he sayde: God be mercyfull vnto the my sonne.
And Ioseph made hast (for hys hert dyd melt vpon his brother) Ꟶ sought where to wepe, and entred into his chambre, Ꟶ wepte there.
And he wasshed his face Ꟶ came out and refrayned hym selfe, and sayde: set bread on the table.
And they prepared for hym by him selfe, and for them by them selues, Ꟶ for the Egypcians which dyd eate with him by them selues, because the Egypcians maye not eate bread with the Hebrues, for that is an abhomynacyon vnto the Egypcyans.
And they satt before hym: the eldest accordynge vnto hys age, Ꟶ the yongest accordynge vnto hys youth. And the men merueled amonge them selues.
And they broughte rewardes vnto them from before hym: but Ben Iamins parte was fyue tymes so moch as any of theyrs And they drynkynge were dronke with hym.
And he commaunded the ruler of his house sayinge: fyll the mens sackes wt foode, as moch as they can carye,
and put euery mans money in his sacke mouth, and put my syluer cupin the sackes mouth of the yongest, and hys corne money also. And he dyd accordinge to the worde that Ioseph had sayde.
And in the mornynge assoone as it was lyghte, the men were let goo, they and their asses.
And when they were out of the cytie and not yet farre awaye, Ioseph sayde vnto the ruelar of hys house: vp and folowe after the men, and whan thou dost ouertake them, thou shalt saye vnto them: wherfore haue ye rewarded euell for good?
is that not the cuppe in the which my Lord drynketh, and for the which he prophecyeth? ye haue euell done that ye haue done.
And whan he ouertoke them, he sayde the same wordes vnto them.
And they answered hym: wherfore sayeth my Lord soch wordes? God forbydd that thy seruauntes shulde doo so:
Beholde, the money which we founde in oure sackes mouthes, we brought agayne vnto the, out of the lande of Canaan: howe then shulde we steale out of thy Lordes house, ether syluer or golde?
wyth whomsoeuer of thy seruauntes it be founde, let him dye, and we also will be my Lordes bondmen.
And he sayde: Nowe also let it be accordynge vnto youre woordes: he with whom it is founde, shalbe my seruaunte: and ye shalbe harmelesse.
And attonce euery man toke downe hys sacke to the grounde, and euery man opened hys sacke.
And he serched, and began at the eldest and left at the yongest. And the cuppe was founde in Ben Iamins sacke.
Then they rent their clothes, and laded euery man his asse, and went agayne vnto the cytie.
And Iuda and hys brethren came to Iosephs house for he was yet there, and they fell before him on the grounde.
And Ioseph sayd vnto them: what dede is this which ye haue done? wote ye not that soche a man as I can prophesye?
Then sayde Iuda: what shall we saye vnto my Lorde? what shall we speake, or what excuse can we make? God hath founde out the wykednesse of thy seruauntes. Beholde, both we Ꟶ he with whom the cuppe is founde, are my Lordes seruauntes.
And he answered. God forbyd that I shulde do so, but the man with whom the cuppe is founde, he shalbe my seruaunte. And go ye in peace vnto youre father.
Then Iuda went vnto hym and sayde: oh my Lorde, let thy seruaunte speake a worde in my Lordes eares, and be not wrooth wyth thy seruaunte: for thou art euen as Pharao.
My Lord asked his seruaunte sayinge: haue ye a father or a brother?
And we answered my Lorde we haue a father that is olde, and a yonge lad which he begat in hys age: and the brother of the sayde lad is dead, and he is all that is left of that mother. And hys father loueth hym.
And thou saydest vnto thy seruauntes: brynge him vnto me, that I maye sett myne eye vpon him.
And we answered my Lorde, that the lad coulde not goo from his father, for yf he shulde leaue his father, he were but deed.
Than saydest thou vnto thy seruauntes excepte your youngest brother come with you, loke that ye se my face no moare.
And when we came vnto thy seruaunt oure father, we shewed hym what my lorde had sayd:
And oure father sayd vnto vs: goo agayne, Ꟶ bye vs a lytle fode.
And we answered: we cannot goo downe. Neuerthelesse: yf oure yongeste brother go wt vs, then wyll we go downe, for we maye not see the mannes face, excepte oure youngest brother be wt vs.
And thy seruaunt oure father sayde vnto vs: ye knowe that my wyfe bare me .ij. sonnes.
And the one went out from me, and I sayde: of suertye he is torne in peaces, and I sawe hym not sence.
And ye take this also awaye from me. If some mysfortune happen vpon him, ye shall brynge my gray heed in sorowe vnto the graue.
Nowe therfore, when I come to thy seruaunt my father, and the lad be not with vs (seynge that his lyfe hangeth by the laddes lyfe)
then shall it come to passe, that as soone as he seeth that the lad is not come, he wyll dye. So shall we thy seruauntes bringe the gray hedde of thy seruaunt our father with sorowe vnto the graue.
For I thy seruaunt became suertye for the lad before my father and sayde: yf I bringe him not vnto the agayne, I wyll bere the blame vnto my father all my lyfe longe.
Nowe therfore let me thy seruaunt byde here for the lad, and be my Lordes bondman: and let the lad goo vp wt his brethren.
For howe can I goo vp to my father, yf the lad be not with me? onlesse I wolde see the wretchednes that shall come on my father.
Ioseph coulde no longer refrayne before all them that stode by hym. Wherfore he cryed: brynge furth all the men fro me. And there remayned no man wyth him, whyle Ioseph vttred hym selfe vnto hys brethren.
And he wepte alowde, so that the Egypcyans, and the house of Pharao herde it.
And Ioseph sayde vnto hys brethren: I am Ioseph, doth my father yet lyue? And hys brethren coulde not answere hym, they were so abasshed at hys presence.
And Ioseph sayde vnto his brethren: come nere to me, and they came nere. And he sayde: I am Ioseph youre brother whom ye solde in to Egypte.
Nowe therfore be not greued ther wyth, nether let it seme a cruel thynge in your eyes, that ye solde me hyther. For God dyd send me before you to saue lyfe.
For thys is the seconde yeare of derth in the lande, and fyue moo are behynde, in whych there shall nether be earynge nor heruest.
Wherfore God sent me before you to make prouisyon, that ye myghte contynue in the erth, and to saue youre lyues by a greate delyueraunce.
So nowe it was not ye that sent me hyther, but God: which hath made me a father vnto Pharao Ꟶ Lorde of all hys house, Ꟶ ruler thorowe out all the lande of Egypte.
Hast you, and goo vp to my father and tell him. This sayeth thy sonne Ioseph: God hath made me Lorde of all Egypte. Come downe therfore vnto me, tarye not.
And thou shalt dwell in the lande of Gosan and be by me: thou and thy chyldren, and thy chyldrens chyldren: thy shepe, and thy beestes, Ꟶ all that thou hast.
And there wyll I make prouisyon for the, for there remayne yet .v. yeares of derth, lest thou Ꟶ thy houshold and all that thou hast come to pouertye.
And beholde, youre eyes do se, Ꟶ the eyes also of my brother Ben Iamin, that myne awne mouth speaketh to you.
Therfore tell my father of all my honoure in Egypt and of all that ye haue sene, and make hast and brynge my father hyther.
And he fell on hys brother Ben Iamins necke and wepte, and Ben Iamin wepte on hys necke.
Moreouer he kyssed all hys brethren and wepte vpon them. And after that, hys brethren talked wyth hym.
And the tydynges came vnto Pharaos house, so that they sayde: Iosephs brethren are come, Ꟶ it pleased Pharao well and all hys seruauntes.
And Pharao spake vnto Ioseph: saye vnto thy brethren, this do ye: lade your beestes and get you hence, vnto the lande of Canaan,
Take youre father, and your housholdes and come vnto me, and I wyll geue you the good of the lande of Egypte, and ye shall eate the fatt of the lande.
And thou also shalt commaunde them. Thys do ye: take charettes wyth you out of the lande of Egypte, for youre chyldren and for youre wyues: and brynge your father, and come.
Also, regarde not youre stuffe, for the good of all the lande of Egypt is youres.
And the chyldren of Israel dyd euen so, And Ioseph gaue them charettes according to the commaundement of Pharao, and gaue them vytayle also to spende by the waye.
And he gaue vnto eche of them chaunge of rayment: but vnto Ben Iamin he gaue .iij. hundred peces of syluer and .v. chaunge of rayment.
And vnto hys father he sent after the same maner .x. asses laden wyth good, out of Egypt, and .x. she asses laden wyth corne, bred and meate: for hys father by the waye.
So sent he hys brethren awaye to departe: And he sayde vnto them: se that ye fall not out by the waye.
They departed therfore from Egypt and came in to the lande of Canaan vnto Iacob theyr father, and tolde hym sayinge:
Ioseph is yet alyue, Ꟶ is gouerner ouer all the lande of Egypte. And Iacobs hert wauered, for he beleued them not.
And they tolde hym all the wordes of Ioseph, whych he had sayde vnto them. And when he sawe the charettes whych Ioseph had sent to carye hym, the sprete of Iacob theyr father reuyued.
And Israel sayde: I haue ynough that Ioseph my sonne is yet alyue: I wyll goo, and se hym, yer that I dye.
Israel toke hys iourney wt all that he had, and came vnto Beer Seba Ꟶ offred offringes vnto the God of his father Isahac.
And God spake vnto Israel in a visyon by nyght sayenge: Iacob, Iacob. And he answered: here am I.
And he sayde: I am God, the God of thy father, fere not to goo downe into Egypt. For I wyll there make of the a great people.
I will goo downe with the into Egypt, Ꟶ I will also bringe the agayne, and Ioseph shall put hys hande vpon thyne eyes.
And Iacob rose vp from Beer Seba. And the sonnes of Israel caryed Iacob theyr father, and their chyldren Ꟶ theyr wyues in the charettes whych Pharao had sent to carye him.
And they toke theyr catell and the goodes which they had gotten in the lande of Canaan, Ꟶ came in to Egypte: both Iacob Ꟶ all hys seed with hym,
hys sonnes Ꟶ hys sonnes sonnes with hym, his daughters and hys sonnes daughters and all hys seed brought he with hym in to Egypte.
These are the names of the chyldren of Israel whych came in to Egypte, both Iacob Ꟶ his sonnes: Ruben, Iacobs first sonne:
The chyldren of Ruben: Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron Ꟶ Charmi.
The chyldren of Symeon: Iemuel, Iamin, Ohad, Iachin, Ꟶ zohar Ꟶ Saul the sonne of a Cananitish woman.
The chyldren of Leui: Gerson, Kahath and Merari.
The chyldren of Iuda: Er, Ꟶ Onan, Sela, and Pharez and zerah, But Er Ꟶ Onan dyed in the lande of Canaan, The chyldren of Pharez also were Hezron Ꟶ Hamul.
The chyldren of Isachar: Tola, Phua, Iob and Simron.
The chyldren of zabulon: Sered, Elon Ꟶ Iaheleleel.
These be the chyldren of Lea whych she bare vnto Iacob in Mesopotamia with his daughter Dina. All the soules of hys sonnes and daughters make .xxx. and .iij.
The chyldren of Gad: ziphion, Ꟶ Haggi, Suni, and Ezbon, Eri, Ꟶ Arodi, and Areli.
The chyldren of Asser: Iemna, and Iesua, Iesui, and Brya and Serah theyr syster. And the chyldren of Brya: Heber and Malchiel.
These are the chyldren of Silpha, whom Laban gaue to Lea hys daughter. And these she bare vnto Iacob euen .xvi. soules.
The chyldren of Rahel Iacobs wyfe: Ioseph and Ben Iamin.
And vnto Ioseph in the lande of Egypte were borne: Manasses and Ephraim whych Asnath the daughter of Putiphar preast of On bare vnto hym.
The chyldren of Ben Iamin: Bela, Becher, Asbel, Gera, Naeman, Ehi Ꟶ Ros, Mupim, Hupim and Ard.
These are the children of Rahel, whych she bare vnto Iacob, .xiiii. soules alltogether.
The chyldren of Dan: Husim.
The children of Nephtali: Iahezeel, Guni, Iezer and Sillem.
These are the sonnes of Bilha, whych Laban gaue vnto Rahel hys daughter, and she bare these vnto Iacob, alltogether .vii. soules.
And so the soules that came wt Iacob in to Egypte, whych came out of hys loyns (besyde Iacobs sonnes wyfes) were all together .lx. and .vi. soules.
And the sonnes of Ioseph, which were borne him in Egypte, were .ij. soules: So that all the soules of the house of Iacob whych came into Egypte, are .lxx.
And he sent Iuda before hym vnto Ioseph, to directe hys face vnto Gosan, Ꟶ they came in to the lande of Gosan.
And Ioseph made redye hys charett, and went vp to mete Israel hys father vnto Gosan, and presented hym selfe vnto hym, and fell on hys necke, and wepte vpon hys necke a good whyle.
And Israel sayde vnto Ioseph: Nowe am I content to dye, in somoch as I haue sene the and because thou art yet alyue.
And Ioseph sayde vnto hys brethren, and vnto hys fathers house: I wyll goo vp and shewe Pharao Ꟶ tell hym: My brethren and my fathers house which were in the lande of Canaan, are come vnto me,
and they are shepherdes (for they were men of catell) Ꟶ they haue brought theyr shepe and theyr oxen and all that they haue.
And yf it chaunce that Pharao call you, and aske you, what youre occupacyon is,
ye shall answere: thy seruauntes haue bene men occupyed aboute catell, from our chyldhode vnto thys tyme, we and oure fathers, that ye maye dwell in the lande of Gosan. For euery shepe keper is abhominacyon vnto the Egypcyans.
Ioseph came therfore and tolde Pharao and sayde: my father and my brethren, theyr shepe and their oxen and all that they haue, are come out of the lande of Canaan,
and beholde, they are in the lande of Gosan. And Ioseph toke of the hynmost of hys brethren: euen fyue men, and presented them vnto Pharao.
And pharao sayde vnto hys brethren: what is youre occupacyon? And they answered Pharao: shepherdes are thy seruauntes, both we Ꟶ also oure fathers.
They sayde moreouer vnto Pharao: for to sogeorne in the lande are we come, for thy seruauntes haue no pasture for theyr shepe, so sore is the fameshment in the lande of Canaan. Nowe therfore let thy seruauntes dwell in the lande of Gosan.
And Pharao sayde vnto Ioseph: thy father and thy brethren are come vnto the.
The land of Egypte is before the: In the best place of the lande make both thy father and thy brethren dwell: euen in the lande of Gosan let them dwell. Moreouer yf thou knowe any men of actiuite amonge them, make them ruelars ouer my catell.
And Ioseph brought in Iacob hys father, and sett hym before Pharao. And Iacob blessed Pharao.
And Pharao sayde vnto Iacob: howe olde art thou?
Iacob sayde vnto Pharao: the dayes of my pilgremage are an hundred and .xxx. yeares. Fewe Ꟶ euell haue the dayes of my lyfe bene, and haue not attayned vnto the yeares of the lyfe of my fathers in the dayes of theyr pilgremages.
And Iacob blessed Pharao, and went out from hym.
And Ioseph prepared dwellynges for hys father and hys brethren, and gaue them possessyons in the land of Egypte, in the best of the lande: euen in the lande of Rameses, as Pharao had commaunded.
And Ioseph made prouisyon for hys father, hys brethren Ꟶ all his fathers housholde wyth bread, euen as yonge chyldren are fedd.
There was no bread in all the lande, for the derth was exceadynge sore: so that the lande of Egypte and the lande of Canaan, were fameshed by the reason of the derth.
And Ioseph brought together all the money that was founde in the lande of Egypte and of Canaan, for the corne whych they boughte: and he layde vp the money in Pharaos house.
When money fayled in the lande of Egypte Ꟶ of Canaan, all the Egypcyans came vnto Ioseph and sayde: geue vs bred: wherfore suffrest thou vs to dye before the whan oure money is spent?
Then sayde Ioseph: brynge youre catell, Ꟶ I wyll geue yow for your catell, yf ye be without money.
And they brought theyr catell vnto Ioseph. And Ioseph gaue them bread for horses Ꟶ shepe, and oxen, and asses, and fed them wyth bread for all theyr catell that yeare.
But when that yeare was ended, they came vnto hym the nexte yeare, Ꟶ sayde vnto him: we will not hyde it from my Lord how that oure money is spent, my Lord also had our catell Ꟶ beastes, neyther is there ought left in the syght of my Lorde, but euen oure bodies and our landes.
Wherfore lettest thou vs dye before thyne eyes, Ꟶ the lande to goo to noughte? by vs Ꟶ our landes for bread: Ꟶ both we and oure landes will be bonde to Pharao. Onely geue vs seed, that we maye lyue and not dye, Ꟶ that the lande goo nat to wast.
And so Ioseph boughte all the land of Egypte for Pharao. For the Egypcians solde euery man hys lande because the derth was sore vpon them: Ꟶ so the lande became Pharaos.
And he appoynted the people vnto the cyties, from one syde of Egypte vnto the other:
only the lande of the Prestes bought he not. For the prestes had an ordinaunce of Pharao, that they shulde eate that which was appoynted vnto them: which Pharao had geuen them wherfore they solde not theyr landes.
Then Ioseph sayde vnto the folke: beholde I haue boughte you thys daye Ꟶ youre lande for Pharao. Take there bread Ꟶ sede Ꟶ sowe the land.
And of the encrease, ye shall geue the fyfte parte vnto Pharao, Ꟶ .iiij. partes shalbe youre awne, for seed of the feld: Ꟶ for you, and them of youre housholdes, and for youre chyldren, to eate.
And they answered: Thou haste saued oure lyues. Let vs fynde grace in the syghte of my Lord, Ꟶ we wyll be Pharaos seruauntes.
And Ioseph made it a lawe ouer the lande of Egypte vnto thys daye: that Pharao shulde haue the fyfte parte, excepte the lande of the preastes only, whych was not Pharaos.
And Israel dwelt in Egypte: euen in the countre of Gosan. And they had theyr possessyons therin, Ꟶ grewe and multiplied exceadyngly.
Moreouer, Iacob lyued in the lande of Egypte .xvij. yeares, so that the hole age of Iacob was an hundred and .xlvij. yeare.
When the tyme drewe nye, that Israel must dye: he sent for his sonne Ioseph, Ꟶ sayde vnto hym: If I haue founde grace in thy syghte, oh, put thy hande nowe vnder my thye, and deale mercyfully and truely wt me, that thou burye me not in Egypte:
but I will lye with my fathers, and thou shalt carye me out of Egypte, Ꟶ burye me in theyr buryall. And he answered: I wyll do as thou hast sayd.
And he sayde swere vnto me. And he sware vnto hym. And Israel, worshypped towarde the beddes head.
After these deades it happened, that a messaunger sayde vnto Ioseph: thy father is sycke. And he toke wt him his .ii. sonnes, Manasses Ꟶ Ephraim.
Then was it sayd vnto Iacob: beholde, thy sonne Ioseph commeth vnto the. And Israel toke his strength vnto hym, Ꟶ satt vp on the bedd,
Ꟶ Iacob sayde vnto Ioseph: God allmyghtie apeared vnto me at Lus in the lande of Canaan, Ꟶ blessed me,
Ꟶ sayde vnto me: beholde, I wyll make the growe, Ꟶ wyll multiplye the, Ꟶ wyll make a great nombre of people of the, and wyll geue thys land vnto thy seed after the vnto an euerlastyng possessyon.
And now thy .ii. sonnes Manasses Ꟶ Ephraim which were borne vnto the in the lande of Egypte, before I came to the in to Egypte, are myne: euen as Ruben Ꟶ Symeon are myne.
And the children which thou hast gotten after them, shalbe thyne awne: Ꟶ shalbe called after the names of theyr brethren in theyr enheritaunce.
And whan I came from Mesopotamia, Rahel dyed vpon my hand in the lande of Canaan, by the waye: when ther was but a feldes brede to come vnto Ephrat. And I buryed her there in the waye to Ephrat. The same is Bethlehem.
And Israel behelde Iosephs sonnes and sayde: what are these?
Ioseph sayd vnto his father: they are my sonnes which God hathe geuen me here. And he sayde: oh, brynge them to me, Ꟶ let me blesse them.
And the eyes of Israel were dymme for age, so that he coulde not well see. And he broughte them to hym, and he kyssed them and embraced them.
And Israel sayde vnto Ioseph: I had not thought to haue sene thy face, and yet loo, God hath shewed it me and also thy seed.
And Ioseph toke them awaye from his lappe, Ꟶ worshypped on the grounde before hym.
Than toke Ioseph them both: Ephraim with his ryghte hande towarde Israels left hande, Ꟶ Manasses wt hys left hande, towarde Israels ryghte hande, Ꟶ brought them vnto hym.
And Israel stretched out hys ryghte hande Ꟶ layde it vpon Ephraims heade which was the yonger, Ꟶ hys lyfte hande vpon Manasses heed, gydinge hys handes wysely, for Manasses was the elder.
And he blessed Ioseph Ꟶ sayde: God, before whome my fathers Abraham Ꟶ Isahac dyd walke, God whych hath fedd me all my lyfe longe vnto thys daye,
And the angell whych hath delyuered me from all euyll, blesse these laddes: Ꟶ let my name be named in them, Ꟶ the name of my fathers Abraham Ꟶ Isahac, Ꟶ that they maye growe into a multitude in the myddes of the erth.
When Ioseph sawe that hys father layde hys ryghte hande vpon the heade of Ephraim, it displeased him. And he lyfte vp his fathers hande, to haue remoued it from Ephraims heade vnto Manasses heade,
Ꟶ Ioseph sayde vnto hys father: Not so my father, for thys is the eldest. Put thy ryght hande vpon hys heade.
And hys father wolde not, but sayde: I knowe it well my sonne, I knowe it well. He shalbe also a people Ꟶ shalbe great. But hys yonger brother shalbe greatter than he, and hys seed shall be full of people.
And he blessed them that daye and sayde: In the let Israel blesse Ꟶ saye: God make the as Ephraim and as Manasses. And sett Ephraim before Manasses.
And Israel sayde vnto Ioseph: beholde, I dye. And God shalbe wyth you and brynge you agayne vnto the lande of youre fathers.
Moreouer I haue geuen vnto the, a porcyon of lande aboue thy brethren, which I gatt out of the hande of the Amorite in my swerde and in my bowe.
And Iacob called for hys sonnes and sayde: come together, that I maye tell you what shall happen you in the last dayes.
Gather you to gether, and heare ye sonnes of Iacob, herken vnto Israel youre father.
Ruben myne eldest sonne, thou art my myghte and the beginnynge of my strength, the noblenesse of dignyte, and the noblenesse of power.
Unstable as water. Thou shalt not be the chefest, because thou wentest vp to thy fathers bed. Euen then dyddest thou defyle it, Ꟶ it was nomore my couche.
The brethren Simeon and Leui, cruell instrumentes in their habitacions.
In to their secretes come not my soule, vnto their congregacyon be my honoure not coupled: for in their wrath they slewe a man, Ꟶ in their selfe wyll they, digged downe a wall.
Cursed be their wrath, for it was shamelesse, and their fearsnes, for it was cruell. I wyll deuide them in Iacob, Ꟶ scater them in Israel.
Iuda thou art he, whom thy brethren shall prayse. Thy hande shalbe in the necke of thyne enymies, thy fathers chyldren shall stoupe before the.
Iuda is a lyons whelpe, From thy spoyle my sonne thou art come an hye. He layde hym downe and couched hym selfe as a lyon, and as a lionesse. Who wyll stere hym vp?
The sceptre shall not departe from Iuda, and a lawgeuer from betwene hys fete, vntyll. Sylocome. And vnto hym shall the gatherynge of the people be.
He shall bynde his fole vnto the vyne, and hys asses colt vnto the braunche. He washed hys garment in wyne, and hys mantell in the bloude of grapes.
Hys eyes are redder than wyne, Ꟶ his teeth whytter then mylke.
zabulon shall dwell besyde the heauen of the see and nye the heauen of shyppes. His border shalbe vnto Sydon.
Isachar a stronge asse couchynge hym downe betwene .ij. bordens,
and sawe that rest was good, Ꟶ the lande that it was pleasant, and bowed hys shulder to beare, and became a seruaunte vnto tribute.
Dan shall iudge hys people Ꟶ the trybes of Israel
Dan shalbe a serpent in the waye, an edder in the path, bytinge the horse heles and hys ryder fell bacwarde:
after thy saluacyon haue I loked (o Lorde.)
Gad, an hoost of men shall ouercome him, And he shall ouercome at the last.
Of asser: his bread shalbe fat, and he shall geue pleasures for a kynge.
Nephtalim is a swyfte hynde, geuynge goodly wordes.
That florysshynge childe Ioseph, that plenteous chylde by the well syde, the daughters ran vpon the wall
They haue prouoked hym, and shot hym thrugh with dartes. The archers haue enuyed him:
But hys bowe abode fast, and the armes of hys handes were made stronge, by the handes of the myghtye God of Iacob. Out of hym shall come an herde man, a stone in Israel:
From thy fathers God which hath helped the, and with the almyghtye which hath blessed the wyth blessynges from heauen aboue, wyth blessynges of the depe that lyeth vnder, and wyth blessynges of the brestes and of the wombe.
The blessynges of thy father were stronger then the blessynges of my elders, vnto the vtmost of the hylles of the worlde, and they shalbe on the heade of Ioseph, and on the toppe of the heade of hym that was separat from his brethren.
Ben Iamin shall raueshe as a wolfe. In the mornynge he shall deuoure the praye, and at nyghte he shall deuyde the spoyle.
All these are the .xij. tribes of Israel, and thys their father spake vnto them and blessed them, euery one of them blessed he wyth a seuerall blessynge.
And he charged them, and sayde vnto them: whan I shalbe gathered vnto my people, burye me wyth my fathers, in the caue that is in the felde of Ephron the Hethyte,
in the double caue that is in the felde by the countre of Mamre in the land of Canaan. Whych felde Abraham boughte of Ephron the Hethyte for a possessyon to burye in,
where as were buryed Abraham and Sarah hys wyfe. And where as were buryed Isahac Ꟶ Rebecca his wyfe. And there I buryed Lea.
The felde and the caue that is therin, was bought of the chyldren of Heth.
And when Iacob had commaunded all that he wolde vnto hys sonnes, he plucked vp his fete vnto the bedd and dyed, and was put vnto hys people.
And Ioseph fell vpon hys fathers face, and wepte vpon hym, and kyssed hym.
And Ioseph commaunded hys seruauntes the Phisicyons, to embawme hys father, and the Phisicyons embawmed Israel
.xl. dayes longe, for so longe doth the embawmynge last, and the Egyptians bewayled hym .lxx. dayes.
And when the dayes of wepynge were ended, Ioseph spake vnto the house of Pharao sayinge: If I haue founde fauoure in youre eyes, speake in the eares of Pharao sayinge:
my father made me swere Ꟶ sayde: loo, I dye, burye me in my graue whych I haue made me in the lande of Chanaan. Nowe therfore let me goo and burye my father, and than wyll I come agayne.
And Pharao sayde, goo and burye thy father, accordynge as he made the swere.
And Ioseph went vp to burye hys father, and with hym went all the seruauntes of Pharao that were the elders of his house, and all the elders of the lande of Egypte,
Ꟶ all the house of Ioseph, and his brethren and hys fathers house, only theyr chyldren and their shepe and their catell lefte they behynde in the land of Gosan.
And there went with him also Charettes and horssmen: Ꟶ it was an exceadynge great companye.
And they came to the corne floore of Atad whyche is beyonde Iordane, and there they made a great and exceadynge sore lamentacyon. And he mourned for hys father .vij. dayes.
And when the inhabiters of the lande (euen the Cananytes) sawe the mournynge in the corne floore of Atad, they sayde: thys is a greate mournynge vnto the Egyptians. Wherfore the name of the place is called, The mournynge of the Egyptians, and it is beyonde Iordane:
And hys sonnes dyd vnto him accordynge as he had commaunded them.
For hys sonnes caryed him in to the lande of Canaan, and buryed him in the double caue of the felde: which caue Abraham boughte, and the felde also, to be a place to burye in, of Ephron the Hethite before Mamre.
And Ioseph returned in to Eygpte agayne, he and hys brethren (and all that went vp with him to burye hys father,) assone as he had buryed hym.
And when Iosephs brethren sawe that their father was dead, they sayde: Ioseph myghte fortune to hate vs Ꟶ rewarde vs agayne all the euell which we dyd vnto him.
And they did a commaundement vnto Ioseph sayinge, thy father charged vs before hys deeth sayinge:
Thys wyse shall ye saye vnto Ioseph, forgeue (I praye the) the trespace of thy brethren, and theyr synne: for they rewarded that euell. And nowe (we praye the) forgeue the trespace of the seruauntes of thy fathers God. And Ioseph wept, when they spake vnto hym.
For hys brethren came vnto hym, Ꟶ fell flat before hys face sayinge: beholde, we be thy seruauntes.
To whom Ioseph sayde feare not. Am I God?
Ye thought euell agaynste me: but God turned it vnto good, to brynge to passe, as it is thys daye, and to saue moch people alyue.
Feare not therfore, Nowe, I wyll noryshe you, and youre chyldren, and he comforted them, Ꟶ spake kyndly vnto them.
Ioseph dwelt in Egypte he and hys fathers house, and Ioseph lyued an hundred and .x. yere.
And Ioseph sawe Ephraims chyldren, euen vnto the thyrde generacyon. And vnto Machir the sonne of Manasses were chyldren borne, on Ioseph knees.
And Ioseph sayde vnto hys brethren: I dye. And God wyll suerlye vysett you Ꟶ brynge you out of this lande, vnto the lande whych he sware vnto Abraham, Isaac and Iacob.
And Ioseph toke an ooth of the chyldren of Israel, sayinge: God wyll not fayle but vysett you: and ye shall carye my boones hence.
And so Ioseph dyed, when he was an hundred Ꟶ .x. yere olde. And they enbawmed hym wyth spices, puttynge him in a chest in Egypte.
These are the names of the children of Israel, which came to Egypte wyth Iacob, euery man came wt hys housholde:
Ruben, Simeon, Leui, and Iuda,
Isachar zabulon, and Beniamin,
Dan Nephtali, Gad and Aser.
All the soules that came out of the loynes of Iacob were .lxx. But Ioseph was in Egypte allredie.
And Ioseph dyed and all hys brethren and all that generacyon,
and the chyldren of Israel grewe, encreased, multiplyed, and waxed exceadinge myghtye: and the lande was full of them.
But there rose vp a newe kynge in Egypte whych knewe not Ioseph.
And he sayde vnto his folke: beholde, the people of the chyldren of Israel are greater and myghtyer than we.
Come on, let vs playe wisely wyth them, lest they multiplye, Ꟶ lest it happen, that (yf there chaunce any warre) they ioyne them selues vnto oure enemyes and fyghte agaynst vs, and so gete them out of the lande.
Therfore dyd they sette taskmasters ouer them, to kepe them vnder wt burthens. And they bylte vnto Pharao treasure cities: Phiton and Rameses.
But the more they vexed them, the moare they multiplyed and grewe, so that they abhorred the chyldren of Israel.
And the Egyptians helde the chyldren of Israel in bondage without mercye.
Therfore was their lyfe bytter vnto them in that cruell bondage, in claye Ꟶ brycke, and all maner of worke in the feldes. For all their bondage which they serued them, was full of tyrannye.
And the kynge of Egypte sayde vnto the mydwiues of the Hebrues women, of which the ones name was Sephora and the other Phua:
when ye do the offyce of a mydwife to the women of the Ebrues and se in the byrth tyme that it is a boye, ye shall kyll it. But yf it be a daughter, it shall lyue.
Not withstondynge the mydwiues feared God and dyd not as the kynge of Egypte commaunded them: but saued the men chyldren.
And the kynge of Egypte called for the mydwiues and sayde vnto them: why haue ye delt on thys maner, and haue saued the menchyldren?
And the mydwiues answered Pharao, that the Hebrues wemen are not as the wemen of Egypte: for they are sturdie women, and are delyuered yer the midwyues come at them.
And God therfore delt well with the midwyues. And the people multiplyed and waxed very myghtye.
And it fortuned because the midwyues feared God, he made them houses.
And Pharao charged all hys people, sayinge: All the menchyldren that are borne, cast into the ryuer, and saue the maydechyldren alyue.
And ther went a man of the house of Leui. And toke a daughter of Leui.
And the wyfe conceaued and bare a sonne. And when she sawe that it was a proper chylde she hyd hym thre monethes.
And when she coulde no longer hyde hym, she toke a basket of bulrusshes and dawbed it with slyme and pytche, and layde the chylde therin, and put it in the flagges by the ryuers brynke.
And his sister stode a farre of, to wete what wold come of it.
And the daughter of Pharao came doune to washe herselfe in the ryuer, and hyr maydens walked alonge by the ryuers syde. And when the sawe the basket amonge the flagges, she sent hyr mayde to fetch it.
And when she had opened it, she sawe it was a chylde: and beholde, the babe wepte. And she had compassyon on it, and sayde: it is one of the Hebrues chyldren.
Then sayde hys syster vnto Pharaos daughter: shall I go and call vnto the a nurse of the Hebrues wemen, to nurse the, the chylde?
Pharaos daughter answered her: Goo. And the mayde ranne and called the chyldes mother.
To whom Pharaos daughter sayde: Take thys chylde a waye, and nurse it for me, I wyll rewarde the. And the woman toke the chylde, and nursed it vp.
The chylde grewe, Ꟶ she brought it vnto Pharaos daughter, Ꟶ it was made hyr sonne, Ꟶ she called the name of it Moses, because (sayde she) I toke him out of the water.
And it happened in those dayes, when Moses was waxed great, that he went out vnto his brethren and loked on their burdens, Ꟶ spied an Egyptian smytynge an Hebrue whych was one of hys brethren.
And he loked rounde aboute, and when he sawe no man by, he slewe the Egyptian, and hyd him in the sonde.
And whan he was gone out another daye: beholde two Hebrues stroue to gether. And he sayde vnto hym that dyd the wronge: wherfore smytest thou thy felowe?
He answered: who made the a man of auctoryte to iudge vs? Speakest thou to kyll me, as thou kylledst the Egyptian? And Moses feared Ꟶ sayde: of a suertie thys thynge is knowne:
And Pharao herde of it, and went aboute to slee Moses: And Moses flyenge from the face of Pharao, dwelt in the lande of Midian, and he sat doune by a welles syde.
The preast of Midian had .vij. daughters which came and drewe water, and fylled the troughes, for to water their fathers shepe.
And the shepardes came Ꟶ droue them awaye: but Moses stode vp and helped them, and watered their shepe:
And when they came to Raguel their father, he sayde: howe happeneth it that ye are come so soone to daye?
And they answered: a man of Egypte delyuered vs from the hande of the shepardes, and so drewe vs water, Ꟶ watered the shepe.
He sayde vnto hys daughters. And wher is he? why haue ye so lefte the man? Call hym that he maye eate bread.
And Moses was content to dwell with the man. And he gaue Moses zephora hys daughter,
which whan she bare a sonne. called him Gerson: for he sayde: I haue bene a straunger in a straunge lande.
And it chaunced in processe of tyme, that the kynge of Egypte dyed, and the chyldren of Israel syghed by the reason of bondage, and cryed.
And their complaynt came vp vnto God from the bondage: and God hearde their mone. And God remembred hys promyse with Abraham, Isaac and Iacob.
And God loked vpon the chyldren of Israel, and God had respecte vnto them.
Moses kepte the shepe of Iethro hys father in lawe, preest of Midian, and he droue the flocke to the backesyde of the desert, and came to the mountayne of God, Horeb.
And the angell of the Lorde appeared vnto him in a flame of fyre out of the myddes of a bush. And he loked, Ꟶ beholde, the bush burned wt fyre, and the bush was not consumed.
Therfore Moses sayde: I wyll goo nowe, and see thys greate syght, howe it cometh that the bushe burneth not.
And when the Lorde sawe that he came for to see, God called vnto him out of the myddes of the bushe, and sayde: Moses, Moses. He answered: here am I.
And he sayde: come not hyther, put thy shooes of thy fete: for the place where on thou stondest is holy grounde.
And he sayde I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isahac Ꟶ the God of Iacob And Moses hyd his face, for he was afrayed to loke vpon God.
And the Lorde sayde: I haue surely sene the trouble of my people whych are in Egypte, and haue herde theyr crye from the face of their taskemasters. For I knowe their sorowes,
and am come downe to delyuer them out of the hande of the Egyptians, and to brynge them out of that lande vnto a good lande and a large: and vnto a lande that floweth wyth mylcke and hony: euen vnto the place of the Cananites and Hethites, and Amorites, and Pherezites, and Heuites, and of the Iebusites.
Nowe therfore, the complaynt of the chyldren of Israel is come vnto me, and I haue also sene the oppressyon wherwith the Egyptians oppresse them.
Come thou therfore, and I wyll sende the vnto Pharao, that thou mayest brynge my people the chyldren of Israel out of Egypte.
And Moses sayde vnto God: what am I to goo vnto Pharao, and to brynge the chyldren of Israel out of Egypte?
And he answered: I wyll be wyth the. And thys shalbe a token vnto the that I haue sent the: after that thou hast brought the people out of Egypte, ye shall serue God vpon thys mountayne.
And Moses sayde vnto God: beholde, when I come vnto the chyldren of Israel, I shall saye vnto them: the God of youre fathers hath sent me vnto you, and yf they saye vnto me, what is hys name, what answere shall I geue them?
And God answered Moses: I am that I am: and he sayde: thys shalt thou saye vnto the chyldren of Israel. I am hath sent me vnto you.
And God spake further vnto Moses: thus shalt thou saye vnto the chyldren of Israel the Lorde God of youre fathers, the God of Abraham the God of Isahac, and the God of Iacob hath sent me vnto you: thys is my name for euer, and thys is my memoryall into generacyon and generacyon.
Goo and gather the elders of Israel to gether, and thou shalt saye vnto them: the Lorde God of youre fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isahac, and the God of Iacob apeared vnto me, and sayde: In visitynge haue I visited you, and knowe that which is done to you in Egypte
And I haue sayde, I wyll brynge you out of the tribulacyon of Egypte vnto the lande of the Canauytes, and Hethites, and Amorytes, and Pherezytes, and Heuytes, and Iebusytes: euen vnto a lande that floweth wyth mylcke and hony.
And whan they heare thy voyce then goo, both thou and the elders of Israel shall go vnto the kynge of Egypte, and saye vnto him: The Lorde God of the Hebrues hath met wyth vs: and nowe wyll we go therfore .iij. dayes iourney into the wyldernesse, and do sacrifyce vnto the Lorde oure God.
And I am sure, that the kynge of Egypte wyll not let you goo, no not in a myghtye hande:
and I wyll stretche out myne hande and smyte Egypte wyth all my wonders which I will do in the myddes therof. And after that he wyll let you goo.
And I wyll gett thys people fauoure in that syghte of the Egyptians: so that when ye goo, ye shall not goo emptie:
but a wyfe shall borow of hir neyghbouresse Ꟶ of her that soieorneth in hir house, iewels of syluer and of Gold and rayment. And ye shall put them on youre sonnes and daughters, Ꟶ shall robbe the Egyptians.
Moses answered and sayde: Se, they wyll not beleue me nor herken vnto my voyce: but will saye the Lorde hath not apeared vnto the.
And the Lorde sayde vnto him: what is that whych is in thyne hande? he answered a rodd.
And he sayde: cast it on the grounde. And he cast it on the grounde, and it became a serpent. And Moses fled from the syght of it.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: put forth thyne hande and take it by the tayle. And therfore he put forth hys hande Ꟶ caught it, and it became a rodd in his hande.
For thys thinge (sayeth he) shall they beleue the, that the Lorde God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isahac Ꟶ the God of Iacob hath apeared vnto the.
And the Lorde sayde forthermore vnto hym: thrust thyne hande in to thy bosome. And he thrust hys hande in to hys bosome. And whan he toke it out agayne, beholde, his hande was leperous euen as snowe.
And he sayde: put thyne hande in to thy bosome agayne. And he put hys hande into his bosome agayne, and plucked it out of hys bosome, Ꟶ beholde, it was turned agayne as hys other flesshe.
Therfore yf they wyll not beleue the nether heare the voyce of the fyrst token, yet wyll they beleue for the voyce of the seconde token.
But and yf they wyll not beleue the two signes, nether herken vnto thy voyce, thou shalt take of the water of the ryuer, Ꟶ powrest vpon the drye lande. And the water which thou takest out of the ryuer, shall turne to bloude vpon the drye lande.
Moses sayde vnto the Lorde: oh my Lorde, I am not eloquent from yester daye Ꟶ yeryesterdaye, Ꟶ namely sence thou hast spoken vnto thy seruaunte: but I am slowe mouthed and slowe tonged.
And the Lorde sayde vnto hym: who hath made mans mouth, or who hath made the domme or the deaff, the seynge or the blynde? haue not I the Lorde?
Therfore I will be with thy mouth, Ꟶ teache the what thou shalt saye.
He sayde: oh my Lorde, sende I praye the by the hande of him whom thou wilt sende.
And the Lorde was angrye with Moses, Ꟶ sayde: do not I knowe Aaron thy brother the leuyte, that he can speake? For lo, he commeth furth to mete the, Ꟶ when he seyth the, he wylbe glad in his herte.
Therfore thou shalt speake vnto hym, and put these wordes in hys mouth, and I wylbe with thy mouth and wyth hys mouth, and wyll teache you what ye ought to do.
And he shalbe thy spokesman vnto the people: he also shall be thy mouth Ꟶ thou shalt be hys God:
and thou shalt take this rodd in thy hande, wherwith thou shalt do myracles.
Therfore Moses went and returned to Iethro hys father in lawe agayne, Ꟶ sayde vnto him: I wyll go nowe, and turne agayne vnto my brethren whych are in Egypte, and se whether they be yet alyue. And Iethro sayde to Moses, goo in peace.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses in Midian: goo, and returne agayne in to Egypte for they are dead which went aboute to kyll the.
And Moses toke hys wyfe, and his sonnes, Ꟶ put them on an asse, and went agayne to Egypte, Ꟶ Moses toke the rodd of God in his hande.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: when thou art entred Ꟶ come into Egypte agayne, se that thou doo all the wondres before Pharao which I haue put in thy hande: but I wyll holde hys herte, and he shall not let the people goo.
And thou shalt saye vnto Pharao, thus sayeth the Lorde: Israel is myne eldest sonne,
and I haue sayde vnto the that thou shuldest let my sonne goo, that he maye serue me. And thou woldest not let hym goo: beholde, I wyll slee thyne eldest sonne.
And it chaunced by the waye in the ynne that the Lorde mett hym, and wolde haue kylled him.
And zephora toke a stone, Ꟶ cut awaye the foreskyne of hyr sone, Ꟶ fell at his fete, Ꟶ sayde: a bloudyhusbande art thou vnto me.
Then he lett him goo. And she sayde a bloudy husbande, because of the circumcysion.
Then sayde the Lorde vnto Aaron: go mete Moses in the wildernesse. And he went and met hym in the mount of God, and kyssed him.
And Moses tolde Aaron all the wordes of the Lorde which had sent him, and all the tokens which he had charged him withall.
So went Moses Ꟶ Aaron and gathered all the elders of the chyldren of Israel.
And Aaron tolde all the wordes whych the Lorde had spoken vnto Moses, and dyd the myracles in the syght of the people,
and the people beleued. And when they herde that the Lorde had visited the chyldren of Israel and had loked vpon their tribulacyon, they bowed their head, and worshypped.
Moses Ꟶ Aaron went in after warde, and tolde Pharao, thus sayeth the Lorde God of Israel: Let my people goo, that they maye kepe holye daye vnto me in the wildernesse.
And Pharao sayde: who is the Lorde, that I shulde heare hys voyce, Ꟶ let Israell goo?
I knowe not the Lorde, nether will I let Israel goo. And they sayde: the God of the Hebrews hath mett with vs: and therfore wyll we go .iij. dayes iourney into the deserte, and sacrifyce vnto the Lorde oure God: lest there happen vnto vs ether pestylence or swerde.
Then sayde the kynge of Egypte vnto them: wherfore do ye, Moses and Aaron let the people from their worke, get you vnto your laboure.
And Pharao sayde furthermore: beholde, there is moche people nowe in the lande, and ye make them leaue their worke.
And Pharao commaunded the same daye vnto the taskemasters which were amonge the people, and vnto the offycers, sayinge:
ye shall geue the people no more strawe, to make brycke wyth all, (as ye dyd in tyme passed.) let them goo and gather them strawe them selues
and the nombre of brycke whyche they were wont to make in tyme passed, laye vnto their charges also, and mynysh nothynge therof. For they be ydell and therfore crye sayinge: we wyll goo Ꟶ do sacrifyce vnto oure God.
They must haue more worke layed vpon them, that they maye laboure therin, Ꟶ not regarde vayne wordes.
Than went the taskemasters of the people and the offycers out: and tolde the people Thus sayeth Pharao: I wyll geue you no moare strawe,
goo youre selues and gather you strawe where ye can fynde it, yet shall none of youre laboure be minyshed.
And so were the people scatered abrode thorowe out all the lande of Egypte for to gather stubbyll in stead of strawe.
And the taskemasters hasted them forwarde sayinge: fulfyll youre worke daye by daye, euen as yf ye had strawe.
And the offycers of the chyldren of Israel whych Pharaos taskemasters had sett ouer them, were beaten. And they sayde vnto them: wherfore haue ye not fulfylled youre taske in makinge brycke, both yesterdaye and to daye, as well as in tymes past?
The offycers also of the chyldren of Israel came Ꟶ complayned vnto Pharao, sayinge: wherfore dealest thou thus wyth thy seruauntes?
there is no strawe geuen vnto thy seruauntes, and they saye vnto vs: make brycke. And thy seruauntes are beaten, and thy people is foule intreated.
He sayde: ydell ar ye, ydell, and therfore ye saye: We wyll goo and do sacrifyce vnto the Lorde.
Goo therfore nowe and worke, and ther shall no strawe be geuen you, and yet shall ye delyuer the hole tale of brycke.
And the offycers of the chyldren of Israel dyd wyth heuynes loke on them that sayde: ye shall minyshe nothynge of youre daylye makynge of brycke.
And they mett Moses and Aaron, which stode in there waye as they came out from Pharao,
Ꟶ sayde vnto them: The Lorde loke vnto you and iudge you, whych hath made the sauoure of vs stincke in the eyes of Pharao Ꟶ in the eyes of his seruauntes, and haue put a swerde in their hande to slee vs.
Moses returned vnto the Lorde Ꟶ sayde: Lorde wherfore hast thou dealte cruelly wt this people: and wherfore hast thou sent me?
For sence I came to Pharao to speake in thy name, he hath fared foule wyth thys folke, and yet thou hast not delyuered thy people at all.
Then the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: Nowe shalt thou see, what I wyll doo vnto Pharao, for in a myghtye hande shall he let them goo, and in a myghtye hande shall he dryue them out of hys lande.
And God spake vnto Moses, and sayde vnto him: I am the Lorde,
I appeared vnto Abraham Isahac and Iacob as an allmyghtye God: and in my name Iehouah was I not knowne vnto them.
Moreouer I made an appoyntment with them to geue them the lande of Canaan: the lande of their pilgremage where in thy were straungers.
And I haue also herde the gronynge of the chyldren of Israel, whom the Egyptians kepe in bondage, and haue remembred my couenaunt.
Wherfore saye vnto the chyldren of Israel: I am the Lorde, I wyll brynge you out from the burdens of the Egyptians, and wyll rydd you out of their bondage, Ꟶ wyll delyuer you in a stretched out arme and in great iudgementes.
And I wyll take you for my people, Ꟶ wyll be to you a God. And ye shall knowe, that I am the Lorde youre God which brynge you out from the burdens of the Egyptians.
And I wyll brynge you vnto the lande concernynge the whych I dyd lyft vp my hande to geue it vnto Abraham, Isahac and Iacob, and wyll geue it vnto you for a possessyon: euen I the Lorde.
And Moses tolde the chyldren of Israel euen so: But they harkened not vnto Moses, for anguyshe of sprete and for cruel bondage.
The Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge:
Goo in, Ꟶ speake vnto Pharao kynge of Egypte, that he let the chyldren of Israel goo out of hys lande.
And Moses spake before the Lorde sayinge: beholde, the chyldren of Israel herken not vnto me, howe than shall Pharao heare me? which am of vncircumcised lyppes?
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses and vnto Aaron, and gaue them a charge vnto the chyldren of Israel and vnto Pharao kynge of Egypte: to brynge the chyldren of Israel out of the lande of Egypte.
These be the heedes of theyr fathers houses. The chyldren of Ruben the eldest sonne of Israel are these: Hanoh, and Pallu, Hezron, and Charmi, these be the housholdes of Ruben
The chyldren of Simeon: Gemuel, and Iamin, Ohad, and Iachim, zohar, and Saul the sonne of a Cananytesh wyfe: these are the kynreddes of Simeon.
These also are the names of the chyldren of Leui in their generacyons: Gerson, and kahath and Merari. Leui lyued an hundred Ꟶ .xxxvij. yere.
The sonnes of Gerson: Libni and Semei by their kynreddes.
The chyldren of kahath: Amram, and Iesear, Hebron and Usiel. And kahath lyued an hundred and .xxxiij. yere.
The chyldren of Merari: Mahely and Musi: these are the kynreddes of Leui by their generations.
Amram toke Iochebed hys nece to wyfe and she bare hym Aaron and Moses. And Amram lyued an hundred and .xxvij. yere.
The chyldren of Iezear, Korah, Nepheg and Sichri:
The chyldren of Usiel: Misael, Elzaphan and Sithri.
And Aaron toke Elizaba daughter of Aminadab and syster of Nahason, to wyfe: whych bare hym Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
The chyldren of Korah: Assir, and Elkana and Abiassaph: these are the kynreddes of the korahites.
Eleazar Aarons sonne toke him one of the daughters of Putuel to wife, which bare him Pinehas: and these be the pryncipall fathers of the Leuites thorowe out their kynreddes.
This is that Aaron and Moses to whom the Lorde sayde: carye the chyldren of Israel out of the lande of Egypte, accordynge to theyr armyes.
These are that Moses and Aaron which spake to Pharao kynge of Egypte, that they myghte brynge the chyldren of Israel out of Egypte.
And in the daye when the Lorde spake vnto Moses in the lande of Egypte,
he spake vnto hym, sayinge: I am the Lorde. speake thou vnto Pharao the kinge of Egypte all that I saye vnto the.
And Moses sayde before the Lorde: Beholde, I am of vncircumcised lyppes, and howe shall Pharao geue me audience?
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: beholde, I haue made the Pharaos God, and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophete.
Thou shalt speake all that I commaunded the, and Aaron thy brother shall speake vnto Pharao, that he sende the chyldren of Israel out of hys lande.
And I wyll harden Pharaos hert, and multiplie my myracles and my wondres in the lande of Egypte.
But Pharao shall not herken vnto you, that I maye sett myne hand vpon Egypte, and brynge out myne armyes, and my people the chyldren of Israel out of the lande of Egypte, in great iudgementes,
and the Egyptians shall knowe, that I am the Lorde: when I stretche forth my hande vpon Egypte, and brynge out the chyldren of Israel from amonge them.
Moses and Aaron dyd as the Lorde commaunded them, euen so dyd they.
Moses was .lxxx. yere olde, and Aaron .lxxxiij. when they spake vnto Pharao.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses and Aaron sayinge:
yf Pharao speake vnto you sayinge: shewe a wondre, thou shalt saye vnto Aaron: take thy rodd and cast it before Pharao, that it maye be a serpent.
Than went Moses and Aaron in vnto Pharao, and dyd euen as the Lorde had commaunded. And Aaron cast forth his rodd before Pharao and before his seruauntes and it turned to a serpente.
Than Pharao called for the wyse men and enchaunters, Ꟶ those wyse men of Egypte dyd in like maner wt there sorcery.
For they cast downe euery man hys rodd, and they turned to serpentes: but Aarons rodde dyd eate vp theyr roddes:
and he hardened Pharaos herte: that he herkened not vnto them, euen as the Lorde had sayde.
The Lorde also sayde vnto Moses. Pharaos herte is hardened, he refuseth to let the people goo.
Get the vnto Pharao in the mornynge, lo, he wyll come vnto the water, and thou shalt stonde vpon the ryuers brynke agaynst he come, and the rodd whyche turned to a serpente, shalt thou take in thyne hande.
And thou shalt saye vnto hym: the Lorde God of the Hebrues hath sente me vnto the, sayinge let my people goo, that they maye serue me in the wildernes: And beholde, hyther to thou woldest not heare.
Thus sayth the Lorde: In thys thou shalt knowe that I am the Lorde. Beholde, I wyll smyte (with the staffe that is in myne hande) the water that is in the ryuer, and it shall turne to bloude.
And the fyshe that is in the ryuer shall dye, and the ryuer shall stynke: and it shall greue the Egyptians to dryncke of the water of the ryuer.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, saye vnto Aaron: take thy staffe, and stretche out thyne hande ouer the waters of Egypte, ouer their streames, ouer their ryuers and pondes and all pooles of water, whych they haue, that they maye be bloude, and that there maye be bloud thorowe out all the lande of Egypte: both in vessels of wodd and also of stone.
And Moses and Aaron dyd euen as the Lorde commaunded. And he lyfte vp the staffe and smote the waters that were in the ryuer in the syghte of Pharao and in the syghte of hys seruauntes, and all the water that was in the ryuer, turned into bloud.
And the fyshe that was in the ryuer dyed and the ryuer stanke: and the Egyptians coulde not dryncke of the waters of the ryuer. And there was bloude thorowe out all the lande of Egypte.
And the enchaunters of Egypte dyd lykewyse wyth their sorceries, and he hardened Pharaos hert: neyther dyd he harken vnto them as the Lorde had sayde.
And Pharao turned hym selfe, and went agayne into hys housse, and let not hys herte there vnto.
And the Egyptians dygged rounde aboute the ryuer for water to drynke, for they coulde not drynke of the water of the ryuer.
And it continued a weke after that the Lorde had smyten the ryuer.
The Lorde spake vnto Moses: Goo vnto Pharao Ꟶ tell him; thus sayeth the Lorde: lett my people goo, that they maye serue me.
If thou wylt not let them goo: beholde, I wyll smyte all thy border wt frogges.
And the ryuer shall scrall wyth frogges, whych shall go vp and come into thyne house and in to thy preuy chambre where thou slepest, and vpon thy bedd, and into the house of thy seruauntes, Ꟶ vpon thy people, and into thyne ouens, and vpon thy meates.
And the frogges shall come vpon the and on thy people and vpon all thy seruauntes.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses: saye vnto Aaron: stretche forth thyne hande with thy rodd ouer the stremes, ouer the ryuers, and ouer the pondes, that thou mayest brynge vp frogges vpon the lande of Egypte.
And Aaron stretched hys hande ouer the waters of Egypte, and the frogges came vp, Ꟶ couered the lande of Egypte.
And the sorcerers dyd lyke wyse wt theyre sorcery, and brought frogges vp vpon the lande of Egypte.
Then Pharao called for Moses Ꟶ Aaron and sayde praye ye vnto the Lorde, that he maye take awaye the frogges from me Ꟶ from my people, and I wyll let the people goo, that they maye do sacrifyce vnto the Lorde.
And Moses sayde vnto Pharao: reioysse thou ouer me, and appoynte when I shall praye for the and for thy seruauntes, and for thy people, to dryue awaye the frogges from the, and thy houses, and that they maye remayne but in the ryuer only.
He sayde: tomorowe. And he sayde: euen as thou hast sayde, that thou mayest knowe that there is none lyke vnto the Lorde oure God.
And so the frogges shall departe from the and from thy houses, from thy seruauntes and from thy people, and shall remayne in the ryuer only.
Moses and Aaron went out from Pharao, and Moses cryed vnto the Lorde vpon the apoyntment of frogges, which he had made vnto Pharao.
And the Lorde dyd accordynge to the sayinge of Moses. And the frogges dyed out of the houses, out of the courtes and feldes.
And they gathred them together vpon heapes, Ꟶ the lande stanke of them.
But when Pharao sawe that he had rest geuen him, he hardened hys herte and herkened not vnto them, as the Lorde had sayde.
And the Lord sayde vnto Moses: saye vnto Aaron: stretche out thy rodd and smyt the dust of the lande, that it maye turne to lyse thorowe out all the lande of Egypte.
And they dyd so. For Aaron stretched out his hande Ꟶ with his rodd he smote the dust of the erth, which turned to lyse in man and beest, so that all the dust of the lande turned to lyse, thorowe out all the lande of Egypte.
And the enchaunters assayde lykewyse with their enchauntmentes to brynge forth lyse, but they coulde not. And the lyse were both vpon men and beestes.
Then sayde the enchaunters vnto Pharao: it is the fyngre of God. And Pharaos hart remayned obstinate, and he harkened not vnto them, euen as the Lorde had sayde.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: ryse vp early in the mornyng, and stande before Pharao, for he wyll come forth vnto the water: and thou shalt saye vnto him: thus saith the Lorde: Let my people go, that they maye serue me.
Els, yf thou wylt not let my people goo, beholde, I wyll sende all maner of flyes both vpon the and thy seruauntes, and thy people, and into the houses. And the houses of the Egipcians shalbe full of flyes, and the grounde wheron they are.
And the lande of Gosan where my people are, will I cause to be wonderfull in that daye: so that ther shall no flyes be there. Wherbye thou shalt knowe, that I am the Lorde in the myddes of the erth.
And I wil put a diuision betwene my people and thyne. And euen tomorowe shall this myracle be done.
The Lorde dyd euen so: and there came noysome flies into the house of Pharao, and into his seruauntes houses, and into all the lande of Egipt: and the lande was corrupte with these flyes.
And Pharao called for Moses and Aaron, and sayde: Go, and do sacrifice vnto youre God in the lande.
And Moses answered: it is not mete that we so do. For then we must offer vnto the Lorde our God, that which is an abhomination vnto the Egipcians. But and yf we sacrifice that, which is an abhomination vnto the Egipcians before their eyes, shulde they not stone us?
we will go thre dayes iorneye into the deserte, and sacrifice vnto the Lord our God as he hath commaunded vs.
And Pharao sayd: I will let you go, that ye maye sacrifice vnto the Lorde youre God in the wildernesse: but go not farre awaye, praye for me.
And Moses sayde: beholde, I will go out from the, Ꟶ praye vnto the Lorde, that the flyes maye departe from Pharao, Ꟶ from his seruauntes and from his people to morow. But let Pharao from hensforth deceaue nomore, that he will not let the people go to sacrifice vnto the Lorde:
And Moses went out from Pharao, and prayed vnto the Lorde.
And the Lorde dyd accordinge to the sayinge of Moses: and the flyes departed from Pharao, and from hys seruauntes, and from his people, and there remayned not one.
And Pharao hardened his herte euen then also, and dyd not let the people go.
The Lorde sayd vnto Moses: go in vnto Pharao and thou shalt tell him: thus sayth the Lorde God of the Ebrues: lett my people go, that they maye serue me.
If thou wilt not let them go, and wylt holde them styll,
beholde, the hande of the Lorde is vpon thy flocke which is in the felde: for vpon hostes, asses, camels, oxen and shepe, there shalbe a mighty great morayne.
And the Lorde shall do wonderfully betwene the beastes of Israel and the beastes of Egypt: so that there shall nothynge dye of all that pertayneth to the children of Israel.
And the Lorde appointed a tyme, saying: to morow the Lorde shall finysh this worde in the lande.
And the Lorde dyd it on the morow, and all the catell of Egipt dyed: but of the catell of the chyldren of Israel dyed not one.
And Pharao sent, and beholde, ther was not one of the catell of the Israelites deed. And the hert of Pharao was hardened that he wolde not let the people go.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses and Aaron: take youre handes full of asshes out of the fornace, and Moses shall sprynkle it vp into the ayre, in the syght of Pharao,
and it shall turne to dust in all the lande of Egipt: that ther maye be swellyng sores with blaynes both on man and beaste thorowout all the lande of Egipte.
And they toke asshes oute of the fornace, and stode before Pharao, and Moses sprynkled it vp into the ayre. And there were sores with blaynes both in men and in beastes:
and the sorcerers coulde not stande before Moses because of the blaines: for ther were botches vpon the enchaunters Ꟶ vpon all the Egipcians.
And the Lord hardened the hert of Pharao, Ꟶ he herkened not vnto them, as the Lorde had sayd vnto Moses.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: ryse vp early in the mornynge, and stande before Pharao, Ꟶ thou shalt tell hym: thus sayth the Lord God of the Ebrues: Let my people go, that they maye serue me:
or els I will at this tyme sende all my plages vpon thine herte, and vpon thy seruauntes and on thy people, that thou mayest knowe, that there is none lyke me in all the earth.
For nowe I wyll stretch out my hande, that I maye smyte the and thy people with pestilence: and thou shalt perysh from the earth.
And in very dede for this cause haue I kepte the, for to shewe the my power: and that they might declare my name thorowout all the world.
Yet thou exaltest thy selfe agaynste my people, that thou wylt not let them go:
beholde, to morowe thys tyme I wyll sende downe a myghty great hayle: euen soche a one as was not in Egipt, sens it was grounded vnto thys tyme.
Sende therfore nowe, and gather thy beastes, and all that thou hast in the felde. For vpon all the men and the beastes which are founde in the felde, and not brought home, shall the hayle fall, and they shall dye.
And as many as feared the worde of the Lorde among the seruauntes of Pharao, made their seruauntes and their beastes flee into the houses:
but he that regarded not the worde of the Lorde, left his seruauntes and his beastes in the felde.
And the Lorde said vnto Moses: stretch forth thyne hande vnto heauen, that there maye be hayle in all the lande of Egipt: vpon man and vpon beastes and vpon all the herbes of the felde, thorowout the lande of Egipt.
And Moses stretched out his rod vnto heauen: and the Lord thondred and hayled, and the fyrr ran a longe vpon the grounde. And the Lorde so hayled in the lande of Egypt,
that there was hayle and fyer mengled with the hayle, so greuous, and such as there was none thorowout all the lande of Egipte, sence people inhabited it.
And the hayle smote thorowout all the lande of Egipt, all that was in the felde both man and beast. And the hayle smote all the herbes of the felde, and broke all the trees of the felde:
onely in the lande of Gozan, where the children of Israel were, was there no hayle.
And Pharao sent Ꟶ called for Moses and Aaron, and sayde vnto them: I haue nowe synned: the Lorde is ryghteous: and I and my people are vngodly.
Praye ye vnto the Lorde: for it is moch that there shulde be thonders of God Ꟶ hayle. I will let you go, and ye shall tary no longer.
Moses sayde vnto him: assone as I am out of the citye, I will sprede abrode my handes vnto the Lorde, Ꟶ the thonder shall cease. nether shall there be eny more hayle, that thou mayst knowe howe that the erth is the Lordes.
But I knowe that thou and thy seruauntes yet feare not the face of the Lorde God.
And so the flaxe and the barly were smyten: for the barly was shot vp, and the flaxe was boulled:
but the whete and the rye were not smytten: for they were late sowne.
And Moses went out of the citye from Pharao and sprede abrode his handes vnto the Lorde: and the thonder and hayle ceased nether rayned it vpon the earth.
And when Pharao sawe that the rayne and the hayle and thonder were ceased, he synned agayne: and hardened his herte, he and his seruauntes.
And the hert of Pharao was hardened: nether wolde he let the children of Israel go, as the Lorde had sayde by the hande of Moses.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: go in vnto Pharao: for I haue hardened his herte and the herte of hys seruauntes, that I might put these my sygnes amongest them:
and that thou tell in the audience of thy sonne, and of thy sonnes sonne, what thinges I haue done in Egipte, and the myracles which I haue done amonge them: that ye maye knowe howe that I am the Lorde.
And so Moses and Aaron came vnto Pharao, Ꟶ sayd vnto him: Thus sayth the Lorde God of the Ebrues: howe longe shall it be or thou wylt submitte thy selfe vnto me? Let my people go, that they maye serue me.
Or els, and wylt not let my people go, behold, to morow will I bring greshoppers into thy coastes,
Ꟶ they shall couer the face of the earth, that it cannot be sene: and they shall eate the residue which remayneth vnto you, and is escaped from the hayle: Ꟶ they shall eate euery grene tree that beareth you frute in the felde,
and they shall fyll thy houses, and all thy seruauntes houses, and the houses of all the Egipcyans after soche a maner as nether thy fathers, nor thy fathers fathers haue sene, sens the time they were vpon the earth vnto this daye. And he turned him selfe aboute, and went out from Pharao.
And Pharaos seruauntes sayd vnto him: Howe longe shall he be a slaunder vnto vs? Let the men go, that they maye serue the Lorde their God: knowest thou not yet that Egipt is destroied?
And Moses Ꟶ Aaron were brought agayne vnto Pharao, and he sayde vnto them: Go, and serue the Lorde youre God. Who are they that shall go?
And Moses answered: we will go with oure yonge and with our olde: yee, and with our sonnes and with oure daughters, and with oure shepe, and wt oure oxen we must go. For we must holde a feaste vnto the Lorde.
And he sayde vnto them: let it be so. The Lorde be with you. When I let you go, and your children also take hede, for ye haue some mischefe in hande.
Naye, not so: but go they that are men, and serue the Lorde: for that was your desyre. And they thrust them out of Pharaos presence.
And the Lord sayd vnto Moses: Stretch out thyne hande ouer the lande of Egipt for gresshoppers, that they maye come vpon the lande of Egipt, and eate all the herbes of the lande, Ꟶ all that the hayle left behynde.
And Moses stretched forth his rod ouer the lande of Egipt: Ꟶ the Lorde brought an east winde vpon the lande, all that daye, and all that nyght. And in the morning, the east wynde brought the greshoppers,
and the greshoppers went vp ouer all the lande of Egipt: and remayned in all quarters of Egipt very greuously. Before them were ther no soch greshoppers, nether after them shalbe:
for they couered all the face of the earth: so that the land was darke. And they dyd eate all the herbes of the lande, and all the frutes of the trees, and whatsoeuer the hayle had lefte: there was no grene thinge lefte in the trees and herbes of the felde thorowe all the lande of Egipte.
Therfore Pharao called for Moses Ꟶ Aaron in haste, Ꟶ sayde: I haue synned agaynst the Lorde youre God Ꟶ against you.
And nowe forgeue me my sinne only this once: Ꟶ pray vnto the Lorde your God, that he maye take awaye from me this deeth only.
And Moses went out from Pharao, and prayed vnto the Lorde:
Ꟶ the Lorde turned a mightye strong west winde, and it toke awaye the greshoppers and cast them into the redd see: so that there was not one greshopper in all the coaste of Egipt.
And the Lorde hardened Pharaos herte, so that he wolde not lett the children of Israel go.
And the Lorde sayd vnto Moses: stretch out thy hande vnto heauen, that there maye be vpon the lande of Egipt darcknes, which maye be felt.
And Moses stretched forth his hande vnto heauen, and there was a thicke darcknes vpon all the lande of Egipt thre dayes longe,
no man sawe another, nether rose vp from the place where he was by the space of thre dayes: but all the children of Israel had lyght where they dwelled.
And Pharao called for Moses, Ꟶ sayde: go, and serue the Lorde, only let youre shepe and youre oxen abyde, and let your children go with you.
And Moses sayde: thou must geue us also offeringes and burntofferinges for to sacrifyce vnto the Lorde our God:
our catell also shall go with vs, Ꟶ there shall not one hoffe be left behinde: for therof must we take to serue the Lorde oure God. Neyther do we knowe what we shall offre vnto the Lorde, vntyll we come thyther.
But the Lorde hardened Pharaos herte: and he wolde not let them go.
And Pharao sayde vnto him: get the fro me, and take hede to thy selfe, and se my face nomore. For whensoeuer thou commest in my syght, thou shalt dye.
And Moses saide: Let it be as thou hast sayde, I wyll se thy face nomore.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: yet wyll I brynge one plage more vpon Pharao and vpon Egipte: and after that, he wyll let you go hence. And when he letteth you go, he shall vtterly driue you hence.
Speake thou therfore in the eares of the people, that euery man borowe of his neyghbour, and euery womaan of her neyghboures iewels of syluer and iewels of golde.
And the Lord shall gyue the people fauour in the syght of the Egipcians. Moreouer, Moses was very great in the lande of Egipt, in the syght of Pharaos seruauntes and in the sight of the people.
And Moses sayde: thus sayth the Lorde: At mydnight wyll I go out into the middes of Egipte,
and all the fyrste borne in the lande of Egipt shall dye, euen from the fyrst borne of Pharao that sytteth on his seate, vnto the fyrst borne of the mayde seruaunte that is behynde the mylle, and all the fyrste gendred of the catell.
And there shalbe a great crye thorowout all the lande of Egipt, such as there was neuer none lyke, nor shalbe.
But amonge the chyldren of Israel, shall not a dogge moue his tonge, nor yet man or beast: that ye maye knowe howe that the Lorde, putteth a difference betwene the Egipcyans and Israel.
And these thy seruauntes shall all come downe vnto me. And fall before me, and saye: gett the out and all the people that are vnder the, and then wyll I departe. And he went oute from Pharao with an angry countenaunce.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: Pharao shall not heare you, that my wonders may be multiplyed in the lande of Egipte.
And Moses and Aaron dyd all these wonders. before Pharao. And the Lorde hardened Pharaos herte, so that he wolde not let the chyldren of Israel go out of his lande.
And the Lord spake vnto Moses and Aaron in the lande of Egipt, sayinge:
Thys monethe shalbe vnto you the beginning of monethes: and the fyrst moneth of the yeare shall it be vnto you.
Speake ye vnto all the congregacyon of Israel, saying: In the .x. daye of thys moneth, euery man take vnto him a lambe, according to the house of the fathers, a lambe thorowout euery house.
Yf the housholde be to lytle for the lambe, let hym take hys neyghboure which is nexte vnto his house according to the nombre of the soules: euery one of you, according to his eating, shal make your counte for a lambe.
And let the lambe of yours be wtout blemysh, a male of a yeare olde, which ye shall take out from amonge the shepe, or from amonge the goates.
And ye shall kepe him in vntyll the .xiiij. daye of the same moneth. And euery man of the multitude of Israel shall kyll him about euen.
And they shall take of the bloud, Ꟶ strike it on the .ij. syde postes Ꟶ on the vpperdorepost euen in the houses, where they shall eate hym.
And they shall eate the flesh the same night: rost wt fyer Ꟶ wt vnleuended bread, Ꟶ wt sowre herbes they shall eate it.
Se that ye eate not therof rawe ner soden in water, but roste wt fier: the head, fete, Ꟶ purtenaunce therof.
And ye shall let nothyng of it remayne vnto the morning. That which remayneth of it vntyll the morowe, shall ye burne with fyer.
Of this maner shall ye eate it: with your loynes gyrded, and your shoes on your fete, and your staues in your handes. And ye shall eate it in haste: for it is the Lordes passeouer:
for I wyll passe thorowe the lande of Egipt this same nyght, and wyll smytte all the first borne in the land of Egipt, both of man and beaste, and vpon all the goddes of Egipt will I the Lord do execution.
And the bloude shalbe vnto you a token in the houses wherin ye are. And when I se the bloud, I will passe ouer you, and the plage shal not be vpon you to destroye you, when I smyte the lande of Egipte.
And this daye shalbe vnto you a remembraunce: and ye shall kepe it holy vnto the Lorde, euen thorowout youre generatyons shall ye kepe it holy daie, that it be a custome for euer.
Seuen dayes shall ye eat vnleuended bread: and the fyrste daye ye shall put a waye leuen out of youre houses. For whosoeuer eateth leuended bread from the fyrst daye vntill the seuenth daye, that soule shalbe plucked out from Israel.
The fyrste daye shalbe an holy conuocation, and the seuenth daye shalbe an holy conuocation vnto you. There shalbe no maner of worcke done in them, saue about that onely which euery man must eate, that onely maye ye do.
And ye shall obserue vnleuended bread. For this same daye haue I brought your armyes out of the lande of Egypte, therfore ye shall obserue this daye, Ꟶ all your children after you, by a custome for euer.
The fyrst moneth and the .xiiij. daye of the moneth at euen, ye shall eate swete bread vnto the .xxj. daye of the moneth at euen agayne.
Seuen dayes shall there be no leuended breade founde in youre houses. And whosoeuer eateth leuended bread, that soule shalbe roted out from the multitude of Israel: whyther he be a straunger or borne in the lande.
Ye shall eate nothyng leuended: but in all your habitations shall ye eate swete bread.
Moses called for the elders of Israel, and sayde vnto them: chose out and take you to euery housholde of you a shepe, and kyll it for passeouer.
And take a bunche of ysope, Ꟶ dyp it in the bloude that is in the basen, and stryke the vpperposte and the two syde postes with the bloud that is in the basen, and none of you go out at the dore of hys house, vntyll the mornyng.
For the Lorde will go about to smyte the Egipcians. And when he seeth the bloude vpon the vpper dore poste Ꟶ on the two side postes: he will passe ouer the dore, and will not suffer the destroyer to come into your house to plage you.
Therfore shall ye obserue this thing, that it be an ordinaunce both to the and thy sonnes for euer.
And when ye become into the land which the Lorde wyll geue you, accordynge as he hath promysed, ye shall kepe thys seruyce.
And when youre chyldren aske you what maner of seruyce is this ye do,
ye shall saye: it is the sacrifyce of the Lordes passe ouer, which passed ouer the houses of the children of Israel in Egipte, as he smote the Egypcians, and saued oure houses. And the people bowed them selues, and worshypped:
And the chyldren of Israel went, and dyd as the Lorde had commaunded Moses and Aaron. Euen so dyd they.
And at mydnight, the Lorde smote all the fyrst borne in the lande of Egipte, from the fyrst borne of Pharao that satte on hys seate, vnto the fyrst borne of the captyue that was in preson: and all the fyrste gendred of catell.
And Pharao arose in the nyghte, he and all his seruauntes and all the Egipcians: and there was a greate cryinge in Egipt: for there was no house where there was not one deed.
And he called vnto Moses and Aaron by nyght, saying: ryse vp, and get you oute from amonge my people: both ye and also the children of Israel, and go and serue the Lorde as ye haue sayde.
And take youre shepe and your droues with you as ye haue sayde, and departe and blesse me.
And the Egypcians were fierce vpon the people, that they myght sende them out of the lande in haste: for they sayde: we dye all.
And the people toke their dowgh before it was sowred, and theyr vitayles bounde in clothes vpon theyr shoulders.
And the children of Israel dyd accordyng to the saying of Moses: and they borowed of the Egipcyans iewelles of siluer, and iewelles of golde, and rayment.
And the Lorde gaue the people fauoure in the syght of the Egippcians: so that they graunted soch thinges as they required. And they robbed the Egypcians.
And the children of Israel toke their iorneye from Rameses to Suchoth syxe hundred thousande men of fote, besyde children.
And moch comon people went also wt them, and shepe, and oxen, and exceadynge great flocke.
And they baked swete cakes of the dowgh which they brought out of Egipt, for it was not sowred. For when they were thrust oute by the Egipcyans, they coulde not tarie to prepare them selues any prouisyon of meate:
The dwellinge of the children of Israel, which they dwelled in Egipte, was .iiij. hundred and .xxx. yeares:
and when the .iiij. hundred and .xxx. yeares were expired, euen the selfe same daye departed all the hoostes of the Lorde out of the lande of Egipt,
It is a nyght to be obserued to the Lorde, in the which he brought them oute of the lande of Egypte. Thys is that nyghte of the Lorde which all the chyldren of Israel muste kepe thorowout theyr generations.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses and Aaron: This is the lawe of passeouer: there shall no straunger eate therof.
But euery seruaunt that is bought for money (after that thou hast circumcised him) shall eate therof.
A straunger and a hyerd seruaunt shall not eate therof.
In one house shall it be eaten. Thou shalte carye none of the fleshe oute at the house. Neyther shall ye breake a bone therof.
All the multitude shall obserue it.
If a straunger also dwell amonge you, Ꟶ will holde passeouer vnto the Lorde, let him circumcyse all that be males: and then lett him come and obserue it, and he shall be as one that is borne in the lande. For no vncircumcised persone shall eate therof.
One maner of lawe shalbe vnto him that is borne in the lande, and vnto the straunger that dwelleth amonge you.
And all the chyldren of Israel dyd as the Lorde commaunded Moses and Aaron. Euen so dyd they.
And the self same daye dyd the Lorde bring the chyldren of Israel out of the lande of Egipt with their armyes.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, saying:
Sanctify vnto me all the first borne, that open all maner matrices amonge the children of Israel aswell of man as of beaste: for it is myne.
And Moses sayd vnto the people: thynke on this daye in which ye came out of Egipt, out of the house of bondage: for thorow a mightye hande the Lord brought you out from thence. There shall no leuended bread be eaten.
This daye come ye out in the moneth when corne beginneth to rype.
When the Lorde hath brought the into the lande of the Cananites, Hethites, Amorites, Heuites Ꟶ Iebusites: which he sware vnto thy fathers that he wold geue the a lande wherin mylcke Ꟶ hony floweth, thou shalt kepe this seruice in thys same moneth:
Seuen dayes thou shalte eate swete bread: and in the seuenth daye, it is the feaste of the Lord.
Swete bread shalbe eaten seuen daies: and ther shall no leuended bread be sene, nor yet leuen with the in all thy quarters.
And thou shalt shewe thy sonne in that daie sayinge: this is done, because of that which the Lord dyd vnto me, when I came out of Egipte.
And it shalbe a signe vnto the vpon thyne hande, and for a remembraunce betwene thyne eyes, that the Lordes lawe maye be in thy mouth. For in a stronge hand the Lorde brought the out of Egipt.
Kepe therfore this ordynaunce in his ceason from yeare to yeare.
And it will come to passe, that the Lord shall bring the into the lande of the Cananites, which he sware vnto the and to thy fathers: and shall geue it the.
And then thou shalt appointe vnto the Lorde all that openeth the matrice. And euery caste thing, the fyrst doth open the matrice of a beast which thou hast: yf they be males, they shall be the Lordes.
And euery fyrst gendred of an asse, thou shalt redeme with a lambe: yf thou redeme him not, thou shalt breake his neck. All the fyrst borne amonge thy chyldren also, shalt thou bye out.
And when thy sonne asketh the to morowe, sayinge what is this, thou shalt saye vnto him: With a mightye hande the Lorde brought vs out of Egipt, out of the house of bondage.
And when Pharao was looth to let vs go, the Lorde slewe all the first borne in the lande of Egipte: aswell the fyrste borne of man as of beaste. Therfore I sacrice vnto the Lorde all the males that open the matrice, and all the fyrst borne of my children I redeme.
This shalbe a token vpon thyne hande, and a remembraunce betwene thyne eyes, that the Lorde brought vs out of Egipte thorowe a mightye hande.
It came to passe, that whan Pharao had lett the people go, God caryed them not thorowe the waye and lande of the Philistines, which was the more nye waye. But God sayde: lest the people happly repent whan they se warre: Ꟶ so turne agayne to Egipte.
But God led the people about thorowe the waye of the wildernes of the redd see. And the children of Israel went vp harnessed out of the lande of Egipte.
And Moses toke the bones of Ioseph with him: for he made the children of Israel swere, saying God will surely viset you, and ye shall take my bones awaye hens with you.
And they toke their iorneye from Sucoth: and abode in Etham in the edge of the wildernes.
And the Lorde wente before them by daye in a pyller of a cloude to leade them the waye: and by nyght in a pyller of fyer to geue them lyght, that they might go both by daye and nyght.
The pyller of the cloude departed not by daye, nor the pyller of fyer by night out of the sight of the people.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, saying:
Speake to the children of Israel, that they turne and remayne before Pi Hiroth betwene Migdol and the see, oueragaynst Baalzephon: and before that shall they pitch by the see.
For Pharao wyll saye of the children of Israel: they are tangled in the lande, the wildernes hath shut them in.
And I will harden Pharaos hert, that he shall folowe after you: and I will get me honoure vpon Pharao and vpon all his hoost, the Egipcians also shall knowe that I am the Lorde. And they dyd euen so.
And it was tolde the king of Egipt that the people fled. And the hert of Pharao and of his seruauntes turned agaynst the people and they sayde: why haue we this done that we haue let Israel go out of our seruice?
and he made ready his charettes: and toke hys people with him
and toke syxe hundred chosen charettes and all the charettes of Egipt and captaynes vpon euery one of them.
And the Lord hardened the hert of Pharao kyng of Egipt, and he folowed after the chyldren of Israel. But the children of Israel wente out with an hye hande:
and the Egipcians folowed after them, and all the horses and charettes of Pharao and his horsemen and his hoost ouertoke them abyding by the see, besyde Pi Hiroth before Baal zephon.
And when Pharao drewe nie, the children of Israel lyft vp their eyes and beholde, the Egipcians folowed after them, and they were sore afrayde: and the children of Israel cryed out vnto the Lorde.
But they sayde vnto Moses: because there were no graues in Egipt, hast thou therfore brought vs awaye for to dye in the wyldernes? wherfore hast thou serued vs thus, for to carye vs out of Egipte?
Dyd not we tell the this in Egipt, saying: let vs be in rest, that we maye serue the Egipcians? For it had bene better for vs to haue serued the Egipcians then for to dye in the wildernesse.
And Moses sayde vnto the people: feare ye not, stande styll, Ꟶ beholde, howe the Lorde shall saue you this daie. For ye that haue sene the Egipcians this daye, shall se them nomore for euer.
The Lorde shall fyght for you, and ye shall holde your peace.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: wherfore cryest thou vnto me? speake vnto the children of Israel that they go forwarde.
But lyfte thou vp thy rodd, and stretche oute thy hande ouer the see, and deuide it a sondre, and let the children of Israel go on drye grounde thorowe the middest of the see.
And behold, I will harden the hert of the Egipcians that they maye folowe them. And I wyll get me honoure vpon Pharao and vpon all his host, and vpon his charettes and vpon his horsmen.
And the Egipcians shall knowe that I am the Lorde when I haue gotten me honoure vpon Pharao, vpon his charettes and vpon his horsmen.
And the angell of God which went before the hoost of Israel remoued, and beganne to go behynde them. And the clowden piller that was before the face of them beganne to stonde behynde them,
and came betwene the hoost of the Egipcians and the hooste of Israel. It was also a darcke clowde, and gaue lyght by nyght: and all the nyght long the one came not at the other.
And Moses stretched forth hys hande ouer the see: and the Lord caryed awaye the see by a verye stronge easte wynde all that nyght, and made the see drye lande, and the waters were deuyded.
And the children of Israel went into the myddest of the see vpon the drye grounde. And the waters were a walle vnto them, on their ryght hande, and on their lefte hande.
And the Egipcians folowed and went in after them to the myddest of the see, euen all Pharaos horses, hys charettes and his horsemen.
And in the morning watch, the Lorde loked vnto the hoost of the Egipcians out of the fyery and clowdy pyller: and troubled the hoost of the Egipcians,
and toke of hys charet wheles Ꟶ caryed them awaye violently. So that the Egipcians sayde: Let vs fle from the face of Israel: for the Lorde fighteth for them agaynst the Egipcians.
And the Lorde sayd vnto Moses: stretch out thyne hande ouer the see, that the waters maye come agayne vpon the Egipcian, vpon his charettes and vpon his horsemen.
And Moses stretched forth hys hande ouer the see, and it came agayne to his course rarly in the mornynge, and the Egipcians fledd agaynst it. And the Lorde ouerthrew the Egipcians in the myddest of the see:
and the water returned and couered the charettes and the horsmen: and all the hoost of Pharao that came into the see after them, so that there remayned not one of them.
But the chyldren of Israel walked vpon drye lande thorowe the myddest of the see, and the waters were a walle vnto them on the ryght hande of them, and on the left.
Thus the Lorde delyuered Israel the selfe same daye out of the hande of the Egipcians: and Israel sawe the Egipcians deed vpon the see syde.
And Israel sawe that mightye power which the Lord shewed vpon the Egipcians: and the people feared the Lorde, and beleued the Lorde and his seruaunt Moses.
Then Moses Ꟶ the chyldren of Israel sange this songe vnto the Lord and sayde: I wyll syng vnto the Lorde: for he hath triumphed gloriously: the horse and him that rode vpon him hath he ouerthrowne in the see.
The Lord is my strength and prayse, and he is become my saluacion. He is my God, and I wyll glorify hym: my fathers God, Ꟶ I wyll exalte hym.
The Lorde is a man of warre. The Lorde is hys name.
Pharaos charettes and his hoost hath he caste into the see. Hys chosen captaynes also are drowned in the red see,
the depe waters haue couered them: they soncke to the botome as a stone.
Thy ryght hande Lorde, is become glorious in power: thy ryght hande Lorde hath all to dashed the enemy.
And in thy greate glory thou hast ouerthrowne them that rose vp agaynst the: thou sentest forth thy wrath which consumed them euen as stobell.
Thorowe the winde of thy nastrels the water gathered together, the floudes stode styll as an heape, and the depe water congeled together in the hert of the see.
The enemye sayd: I wyll folowe on them: I will ouertake them, I will deuyde the spoyle, I wyll satisfye my lust vpon them, I wyll drawe my sweard, myne hande shall destroye them.
Thou blewdest wt thy wynde, the see couered them, they sancke as leed in the mightye waters.
Who is lyke vnto the, o Lorde, among goddes? who is lyke the so glorious in holynes, fearfull in prayses, shewing wonders?
Thou stretchedest out thy ryght hande, the erth swalowed them.
Thou in thy mercye hast caryed thys people which thou deliueredst: Ꟶ hast brought them in thy strength vnto thy holy habitatyon.
The nations heard and were afrayed, sorowe came vpon the Philistines.
Then the dukes of the Edomites were amased, and the mightyest of the Moabites, tremblynge came vpon them: all the inhabiters of Canaan waxed faynte harted:
Lett feare and dreade fall vpon them in the greatnes of thyne arme, let them be as styll as a stone, tyll thy people passe thorowe, O Lorde, whyle thys people passe thorowe, which thou hast goten.
Thou shalte brynge them in, and plante them in the mountayne of thyne enheritaunce, the place, Lord, which thou hast made for to dwell in, the sanctuary, o Lorde, which thy handes haue prepared.
The Lorde shall raigne euer and all waye.
For Pharaos horse went in wt his charettes and horsemen into the see, Ꟶ the Lord brought the waters of the see vpon them. But the children of Israel went on drye land in the myddest of the see.
And Mir Iam a prophetysse the syster of Aaron toke a tymbrell in her hande, Ꟶ all the wemen came out after her wt tymbrels Ꟶ daunces.
And Mir Iam sange before them: Synge ye vnto the Lorde: for he hath triumphed gloriously: the horse Ꟶ his ryder hath he ouerthrowne in the see.
And so Moses brought Israel from the redd see, Ꟶ they went out into the wildernes of Sur. And they went thre dayes longe in the wildernes, and founde no waters.
And whan they came to Mara, they coulde not drincke of the waters of Mara: for they were bytter: therfore the name of the place was called, Mara,
And the people murmured agaynst Moses, sayinge: what shall we drincke?
And he cried vnto the Lorde: and the Lorde shewed hym a tree, which when he had cast into the water, the waters were made swete. There he made them an ordinaunce and a lawe, and there he proued him,
Ꟶ sayde: If thou wylt herken vnto the voyce of the Lorde thy God, and wylt do that which is right in his sight, and wylt geue eare vnto his commaundementes, Ꟶ kepe all hys ordinaunces: then wyll I put none of these diseases vpon the which I brought vpon the Egipcians: for I am the Lorde that healeth the.
The children of Israel came to Elim where were xii. welles of water and .lxx. palme trees, and they abode there by the waters.
And they toke their iorney from Elim: Ꟶ all the hole company of the children of Israel came to the wildernes of Sin, which is betwene Elim and Synai: the .xv. day of the .ij. moneth after their departyng out of the lande of Egypt.
And the hole multitude of the children of Israel murmured agaynst Moses and Aaron in the wyldernes:
and the children of Israel sayde vnto them: wolde to God we had died by the hande of the Lorde in the lande of Egypte, when we sat by the fleshepottes, and when we dyd eate bread our belyes full: for ye haue brought vs out into this wyldernes, to kyll thys hole multitude with honger.
Then sayde the Lorde vnto Moses: behold, I wyll rayne bread from heauen to you, and the people shall go out, and gather daye by daye that I may proue them, whither they will walke in my lawe or no.
The .vj. daye they shal prepare for them selues that which they wyll bryng in, and let it be twise asmoch as they gather in dayly.
And Moses Ꟶ Aaron sayde vnto all the children of Israel: at euen ye shall knowe that it is the Lorde, which brought you out of the lande of Egypt:
and in the morning, ye shall se the glory of the Lorde: because he hath heard your grudginges agaynst the Lorde. And what are we that ye haue murmured against vs?
And Moses sayde: At euen shall the Lorde geue you flesh to eate, and in the mornyng bread ynough: for the Lorde hath hearde your murmurynges which ye murmur agaynst him: for what are we? your murmuringes are not against vs, but agaynst the Lorde.
And Moses spake vnto Aaron: Saye vnto all the company of the children of Israel, come forth before the Lorde: for he hath heard your grudgynges.
And as Aaron spake vnto the hole multytude of the chyldren of Israel, they loked towarde the wildernes: and beholde, the glorye of the Lorde appeared in the cloude.
And the Lord spake vnto Moses, saying:
I haue hearde the murmurynge of the chyldren of Israel, tell them therfore and saye: at euen ye shall eate flesh, and in the morning ye shalbe fylled with breed, and ye shall knowe that I am the Lord your God.
And at euen the quayles came and couered the grounde where they laye. And in the morninge, the dewe laye rounde about the hooste.
And when the dewe was fallen: beholde it laye vpon the grounde in the wyldernes, small Ꟶ round and thyn as the hore frost on the grounde.
And when the chyldren of Israel sawe it, they sayde euery one to hys neyghboure: It is Manna. For they wist not what it was. And Moses sayde vnto them: this is the breed which the Lord hath geuen you to eate.
This is the worde which the Lorde hath commaunded: gather of it euery man for him self to eate: a gomer full for a man according to the nombre of you, and take euery man for them which are in his tente.
And the chyldren of Israel dyd euen so, Ꟶ gathered some more, some lesse,
and when they dyd mete it with a gomer, vnto hym that had gathered moch, remayned nothing ouer, and vnto him that had gathered litle, was there no lacke: euery man gathered sufficient for his eatyng.
And Moses sayde vnto them: Se that no man let ought remayne of it tyll the mornyng.
Not withstondyng they harkened not vnto Moses: but some of them lefte of it vntyll the mornyng, and it waxed full of wormes and stancke, and Moses was angry with them.
And they gathered it all morninges, euery man for hys eatynge. And assoone as the heate of the sunne came, it moulte.
And the sixte day, they gathered twise so moch breed two gomers for one man: Ꟶ all the rulers of the multitude came, Ꟶ tolde Moses.
He sayd vnto them: this is that which the Lorde hath sayde: tomorow is the rest of the holy Sabbath vnto the Lord: bake that which ye will bake, and seth that ye will seth, and that which remayneth, laye vp tyll the mornynge.
And they layde it vp tyll the mornynge, as Moses bad: and it stanke not, nether breed there any worme therin.
And Moses sayde: that eate thys daye: for it is the Sabbath vnto the Lorde: todaye ye shall not fynde it in the felde.
Syxe dayes ye shall gather it, and in the seuenth daye which is the Sabbath, there shalbe none.
Notwithstondyng, there went out some of the people in the seuenth daye for to gather, Ꟶ they founde none.
And the Lord sayde vnto Moses: howe longe refuse ye to kepe my commaundmentes and my lawes?
Se, the Lorde hath geuen you a Sabbath, therfore he geueth you the syxte daye bread for two dayes. Byde therfore euery man at home Ꟶ lett no man go out of hys place the seuenth daye.
And the people rested the seuenth daye.
And the house of Israel called it Manna. And it was lyke vnto coriander seede, whyte: and the taste of it was like vnto wafers made with hony.
And Moses sayd: this is that which the Lorde commaundeth, fyll a gomer of it, which maye be kept for youre children after you: that they maye se the bread wherwith I haue fedd you in wyldernesse, when I brought you out of the lande of Egipt.
And Moses spake vnto Aaron: take a cruse and put a gomer full of Manna therin, and laye it vp before the Lorde to be kepte for yor children after you,
as the Lorde commaunded Moses. So Aaron layde it vp before the testimonye to be kept.
And the chyldren of Israel dyd eate Manna fourtye yeare, vntyll they came vnto a lande inhabited. And so they dyd eate Manna euen vntyll they came vnto the borders of the land of Canaan.Exo
And all the company of the chyldren of Israel thorowout their armies went from the wyldernes of Sin after the commaundement of the Lorde, and pytched in Raphidim: where was no water for the people to drincke.
And the people chode with Moses, and sayde: geue vs water to drincke. Moses sayde vnto them: why chyde ye with me? wherfore do ye tempte the Lorde?
There the people thirsted for water, and the people murmured agaynst Moses, Ꟶ sayde: wherfore hast thou thus brought vs oute of Egipte: to kyll vs and oure chyldren and catell with thyrste?
And Moses cryed vnto the Lorde, saying: what shall I do vnto thys people? they be allmoost ready to stone me.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: go before the people, and take wt the of the elders of Israel, Ꟶ thy rod wherwith thou smotest the ryuer, take in thyne hande, and go.
Beholde, I stonde before the besyde a rocke that is in Horeb: Ꟶ thou shalt smyte the rocke, and there shall come water out therof, that the people maye dryncke. And Moses dyd euen so before the eyes of the elders of Israel.
And he called the name of the place Masse and Meriba. because of the chidynge of the children of Israel, and because they tempted the Lorde, sayinge: is the Lorde amonge vs or not?
Then came Amalech and fought with Israel in Raphidim.
And Moses sayde vnto Iosua: chose vs oute men, and goo fyghte with Amalech. And tomorow I will stonde on the toppe of the hyll, and the rodd of God shalbe in my hande.
Iosua did as Moses bade hym, Ꟶ foughte with Amalech. And Moses, and Aaron, Ꟶ Hur went vp to the toppe of the hyll.
And it happened, that when Moses helde vp his hande, Israel had the better. And when he late hys hande downe, Amalech had the better.
But Moses handes were heuye, and therfore they toke a stone and put it vnder hym, and he satt downe there on. And Aaron and Hur stayed vp his handes, the one on the one syde and the other on the other syde. And hys handes remayned stedye vntyll the goynge downe of the sonne.
And Iosua discomfeted Amalech and hys people, with the edge of the swerde.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: writte thys for a remembraunce in a boke, and commite it vnto the eares of Iosua, for I will vtterly put out the remembraunce of Amalech from vnder heauen.
And Moses made an alter and called the name of it. The Lorde is he that worketh myracles for me.
For he sayde: the hande is on the seate of God the Lorde wyll haue warre with Amalech from generacyon to generacyon.
Iethro the prest of Midiam Moses father in lawe herde of all that God had done for Moses and for Israel hys people, and that the Lord had broughte Israel out of Egypte.
Therfore he toke ziphora Moses wyfe, (After he had sente her backe)
and hyr two sonnes, of which the one was called Gerson, for he sayd: I haue bene an alient in a straunge lande.
The name of the other was Eliesar: for the God of my father (sayde he) was myne helpe, and delyuered me from the swerde of Pharao:
And Iethro Moses Father in lawe came with his two sonnes Ꟶ his wyfe vnto Moses into the wildernesse: where he abode by the mount of God.
And he sayde vnto Moses: I thy father in lawe Iethro am come to the, and thy wyfe also and hyr two sonnes with her.
And Moses went oute to mete hys father in lawe and dyd obeyssaunce and kyssed hym and eache asked other of hys health, and they came into the tent.
And Moses tolde hys father in lawe all that the Lorde had done vnto Pharao and to the Egyptians for Israels sake, and all the trauayle that had happened them by the waye, and howe the Lorde delyuered them.
And Iethro reioysed ouer all the goodnesse whyche the Lorde had done to Israell, and because he had delyuered them out of the hande of the Egyptians.
And Iethro sayde: blessed be the Lorde whiche hath delyuered you oute of the hande of the Egyptians and out of the hande of Pharao, which hath also delyuered hys people from the captyuite of the Egyptians.
Nowe I knowe that the Lorde is greater then all goddes, for in the thynge wherby they dealt cruelly wyth them, are they them selues peryshed.
And Iethro Moses father in lawe offred burntofferynges and sacrifyces vnto God. And Aaron and all the elders of Israel came to eate breade wyth Moses father in lawe before God.
And it chaunced on the morow, that Moses satt to iudge the people, and the people stode aboute Moses from mornynge vnto euen.
And whan Moses father in lawe sawe all that he did vnto the people, he sayd: what is thys that thou doest vnto the people? why syttest thou thy selfe alone, and all the people stonde aboute the from mornynge vnto euen?
And Moses sayde vnto hys father in lawe: because the people come vnto me to seke councell of God.
When they haue a matter, they come vnto me, and I iudge betwene euery man and hys neyghboure, and shewe them the ordynaunces of God and hys lawes.
And Moses father in lawe sayd vnto him: it is not well that thou doest.
Thou both weryest thy selfe, and thys people that is wt the: for thys thynge is of more weyght, then thou art able to perfourme thy selfe alone.
Heare nowe therfore my voyce, and I wyll geue the councell, and God shalbe with the. Be thou vnto the people to God warde, that thou mayest brynge the causes vnto God,
and thou shalt teache them ordinaunces and lawes, and shewe them the waye wherin they must walke, and the worke that they must doo.
Morouer thou shalt seke oute amonge all the people, men of actiuite, and such as feare God: true men, hatynge coueteousnes: and make them heedes ouer the people, captaynes ouer thousandes, ouer hundredes, ouer fyftye and ouer ten.
And let them iudge the people at all seasons. And euery greate matter that happeneth, let them bringe vnto the, but let them iudge all small causes them selues, and so shall it be easyer for thy selfe, and they shall bere with the.
If thou shalt do thys thinge, (and God charge the with all) thou shalt be able to endure, and yet the people shall come to theyr place in peace.
And so Moses obeyed the voyce of hys father in lawe, and did all that he had sayde,
and chose actyue men oute of all Israel and made them as heedes ouer the people: namely, captaynes ouer thousandes, ouer hundredes, ouerfyfty and ouerten.
And they iudged the people at all seasons, but broughte the harde causes vnto Moses: and iudged all small matters them selues.
And Moses let hys father in lawe departe, and he went into hys awne lande.
In the thyrde moneth, whan the children of Israel were gone oute of the lande of Egipt, the same daye came they into the wyldernesse of Sinay.
For they were departed from Raphidim, and were come to the deserte of Sinay, and had pitched theyr tentes in the wildernesse. And there Israel abode before the mounte.
But Moses went vp vnto God. And the Lorde called to hym out of the mountayne, sayinge: thus shalt thou saye vnto the house of Iacob, and tell the chyldren of Israel:
ye haue sene what I dyd vnto the Egyptians, and toke you vp vpon Eegles wynges, Ꟶ haue brought you vnto my selfe:
Nowe therfore yf ye wyll heare my voyce in dede, and kepe myne appoyntement: ye shall be myne awne, aboue all nacyons, for all the erth is myne.
Ye shall be vnto me also a kyngdome of preastes and an holy people: and these are the wordes which thou shalt saye vnto the chyldren of Israel.
Moses came and called for the elders of the people, and layde before theyr faces all these wordes which the Lorde commaunded hym.
And the people answered all to gether, and sayde. All that the Lorde hath sayde, we wyll doo. And Moses brought the wordes of the people vnto the Lorde.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: Lo, I come vnto the in a thycke cloud, that the people maye heare me talkynge with the, and beleue the for euer. Moses shewed the wordes of the people vnto the Lorde.
And the Lorde sayd vnto Moses: Go vnto the people, and sanctifye them to daye and to morowe, and let them wash theyr clothes:
Ꟶ be redy agaynst the thyrde daye. For the thyrde daye the Lorde wyll come downe in the syght of all the people vpon mounte Sinay.
And thou shalt set markes rounde aboute the people and saye: beware, that ye go not vp into the mounte, or touche the bordre of it. Whosoeuer toucheth the mounte, shall surely dye.
There shall not an hande touch it: Els he shall be stoned or shot thorowe: whether it be beast or man, it shall not lyue: when the trompe bloweth longe, than maye they come vp into the mountayne.
And Moses went downe from the mounte vnto the people, and sanctifyed them, and they wasshed theyr clothes:
And he sayd vnto the people: be redye agaynst the thyrde daye, and come not at youre wyues.
And the thyrde daye in the mornynge there was thunder, and lyghtenynge, and a thycke clowde vpon the mounte, and the voyce of the trompe exceadynge lowde, so that all the people that was in the hoste was afrayed.
And Moses brought the people oute of the tentes to mete with God, and they stode vnder the hyll.
And mounte Sinay was all to gether on a smoke: because the Lorde descended downe vpon it in fyre. And the smoke therof ascended vp, as the smoke of a kele, and all the mount was exceadyng fearfull.
And whan the voyce of the trompe blewe and waxed lowder and lowder Moses spake, Ꟶ God answered him by a voyce:
And the Lorde came downe vpon mounte Sinay, euen in the toppe of the hyll, and whan the Lord called Moses vp into the toppe of the hyll. Moses went vp.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: go downe: charge the people, that they prease not vp to se the Lorde, and so many of them perish.
And let the prestes also whych come to the Lorde sanctifye them selues, lest the Lorde destroye them.
And Moses sayde vnto the Lorde: the people cannot come vp into the mounte Synay, for thou chargedest vs saying: set markes aboute the hyll, and sanctifie it:
And the Lorde sayde vnto him: awaye, and get the downe: and thou shalt come vp, thou and Aaron with the. But let not the Prestes and the people presume for to come vp vnto the Lorde: lest he destroye them.
And so Moses went downe vnto the people and tolde them.
And God spake all these wordes and sayde:
I am the Lorde thy God, which haue brought the out of the lande of Egipte, oute of the house of bondage.
Thou shalt haue none other goddes in my syght.
Thou shalt make the no grauen ymage, nether any symilitude that is in heauen aboue, ether in the erth benethe, or in the waters vnder the erth.
Thou shalt not worshyppe them, nether serue them: for I the Lorde thy God, am a gelouse God, and vyset the synne of the fathers vpon the chyldren vnto the thyrde and fourth generacyon of them that hate me:
and shewe mercye vnto thousandes in them that loue me and kepe my commaundementes.
Thou shalt not take the name of the Lorde thy God in vayne, for the Lorde wyll not holde him gyltlesse that taketh his name in vayne.
Remembre the Sabbath daye that thou sanctifye it.
Sixe dayes shalt thou laboure and do all that thou hast to do:
but the seuenth daye is the Sabbath of the Lorde thy God, in it thou shalt do no maner of worke, thou and thy sonne, and thy daughter, thy man seruaunte and thy mayde seruaunte, thy catell and the straunger that is within thy gates.
For in syxe dayes the Lorde made heauen and erth, the see and all that in them is, and rested the seuenth daye: wherfore the Lorde blessed the Sabbath daye and halowed it.
Honour thy father Ꟶ thy mother, that thy dayes maye be longe in the lande which the Lord thy God geueth the.
Thou shalt not kyll.
Thou shalt not breake wedlocke.
Thou shalt not steale.
Thou shalt not bere false witnesse agenst thy neyghboure.
Thou shalt not couet thy neyghbours house: nether shalt thou couet thy neyghbours wyfe, or hys man seruaunte, or hys mayde, or his oxe, or his asse, or whatsoeuer thy neyboure hath.
And all the people sawe the thunder and the lyghtenynge, and the noyse of the trompe, and the mountayne smokynge, And when the people sawe it, they remoued and stode a farre of,
and sayde vnto Moses: talke thou with vs, and we wyll heare: but let not God talke with vs, lest we dye.
And Moses sayde vnto the people: feare not, for God is come to proue you, and that his feare maye be in youre face, that ye synne not.
And the people stode a farre of, and Moses went into the thycke clowde where God was.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: thus thou shalt saye vnto the chyldren of Israel. Ye haue sene that I haue talked with you from oute of heauen.
Ye shall not make therfore with me goddes of syluer neyther shall ye make you goddes of golde.
An alter of erth thou shalt make vnto me, and theron offer thy burntofferynges and thy peace offerynges, thy shepe and thyne oxen. In all places where I shall put the remembraunce of my name thyther I wyll come vnto the and blesse the.
And yf thou wylt make me an alter of stone, se thou make it not of hewen stone. Els yf thou lyfte vp thy tole vpon it, thou hast poluted it.
Neyther shalt thou goo vp by steppes vnto myne alter, that thy fylthynesse be not shewed there on.
These are the lawes whyche thou shalt set before them.
If thou bye a seruaunte that is an Hebrue, syxe yeres he shal serue, and in the seuenth he shall goo out fre payinge nothynge.
If he came alone, he shall goo out alone. And yf he came maried, hys wyfe shall goo oute with hym:
And yf hys master haue geuen hym a wyfe and she haue borne hym sonnes or daughters: then the wyfe and hyr children shalbe hir masters and he shall goo oute alone.
And yf the seruaunte saye: I loue my master, my wyfe and my chyldren, I wyll not goo oute fre.
Hys master shall brynge hym vnto the iudges, and sett hym to the doore or the dorepost and hys master shall bore hys eare thorowe with a nawle, and he shalbe hys seruaunte for euer.
And yf a man sell hys daughter to be a seruaunte: she shall not goo oute as the men seruauntes doo.
If she also please not hyr master, and he geueth her to noman to wyfe, then shall he let hyr go fre: to sell her vnto a straunge nacyon shall he haue no power, seinge he despysed her.
If he haue promysed her vnto hys sonne to wyfe, he shall deale with her as men do with theyr daughters.
And yf he take hym another wyfe, yet hyr fode, hyr rayment and dutie of mariage shal he not mynishe.
And yf he do not these thre vnto her, then shall she goo out fre and paye no money.
He that smyteth a man that he dye, shalbe slayne for it.
If a man laye not awayte but God delyuer hym into hys hande, then I wyll poynte the a place whether he shall fle.
If a man come presumpteously vpon hys neyghboure to slee him with gyle, thou shalt take him fro myne alter that he dye.
He that smyteth hys father or hys mother, let hym be slayne for it.
He that stealeth a man and selleth him (yf it be proued vpon hym) shall be slayne for it.
And he that cursseth hys father or mother, shall be put to deth for it.
If men stryue together Ꟶ one smyte another with a stone or with hys fyste, and he dye not, but lyeth in bedd:
yf he ryse agayne and walke without vpon hys staffe, then shall he that smote him go quyte: saue onely he shall bere hys charges for lesynge hys tyme, and shall paye for hys healynge.
And yf a man smyte hys seruaunte or his mayde with a rodd, and they dye vnder hys hande, it shalbe auenged in dede.
And yf they continue a daye or two, it shall not be auenged, for they are hys money.
Yf men stryue Ꟶ hurte a woman with chylde, so that hyr frute departe from her, and yet no misfortune foloweth: then shall he be mersed, accordynge as the womans husband wyll laye to his charge, and he shall paye as the dayes men appoynte hym.
And yf any misfortune folowe, then shall he paye lyfe for lyfe
eye for eye, toth for toth, hande for hande, fote for fote,
burning for burninge, wounde for wounde, strype for strype.
And yf a man smyte hys seruaunte or his mayde in the eye that it peryshe, he shall lett them goo fre for the eyes sake.
Also yf he smyte oute hys seruauntes or hys maydes toth, he shall let them go oute fre for the tothes sake.
If an oxe gore a man or a woman that they dye, then the oxe shalbe stoned, and hys fleshe shall not be eaten: but the owner of the oxe shall go quyte.
If the oxe were wont to pusshe in tyme past, and it hath bene told hys master: and he hath not kept hym, but that he hath kylled a man or a woman: then the oxe shalbe stoned and hys owner shall dye als
If there be sett to hym a summe of money, then he shall geue for the delyueraunce of hys lyfe, whatsoeuer is put vnto hym.
And whether he hath gored a sonne or hurte a daughter, he shalbe serued after the same maner.
But yf it be a seruaunt or a mayde that the oxe hath gored, then he shall geue vnto theyr master .xxx. sycles, and the oxe shall be stoned.
If a man open a well or dygge a pytt and couer it not, and an oxe or an asse fall therin,
the owner of the pyt shall make it good, and geue money vnto theyr master, and the dead beast shalbe hys.
If one mans oxe hurte another that he dye: then they shall sell the lyue oxe and deuyde the money, and the deed oxe also they shall deuyde.
Or yf it be knowen that the oxe hath vsed to pusshe in tymes past, and hys master hath not kepte him, he shall paye oxe for oxe, and the deed shalbe his awne.
If a man steale an oxe or shepe and kylle it or selle it, he shall restore fyue oxen for an oxe, and foure shepe for a shepe.
If a thefe be founde breakynge vp and be smytten that he dye, there shall no bloude be shed for hym:
but yf the sonne be vp when he is founde, then there shalbe bloude shede for hym. A thefe shall make restitucyon: If he haue not wherwith, he shalbe solde for his thefte.
If the thefte be founde in hys hande alyue (whether it be oxe, asse or shepe) he shall restore double.
If a man do hurte felde or vineyarde, and put in hys beast to fede in another mans felde: of the best of his owne felde, and of the best of hys awne vineyarde, shall he make restitucion.
If fyre breake out and catche in the thornes, and the stackes of corne, or the stondynge corne, or felde be consumed therwith: he that kyndled the fyre shall make restitucion.
If a man delyuer hys neyghboure money or stuffe to kepe, and it be stolen out of hys house. If the thefe be founde, let hym paye double.
And yf the thefe be not founde, then the goodman of the house shalbe brought vnto the iudges. Whether he haue put hys hande vnto hys neyghboures good.
And in all maner of trespace, whether it be for oxen, asse, shepe, rayment or any maner of lost thynge which another chalengeth to be hys, the cause of both partyes shall come before the iudges. And whom the iudges condemne: let hym paye double vnto his neyghboure.
If a man delyuer vnto hys neyghboure to kepe, asse, oxe, shepe or whatsoeuer beast it be, and it dye or be hurte or taken awaye (and no man se it:)
then shall an othe of the Lorde be betwene them, that he hath not put hys hande vnto hys neyghbours good, and the owner of it shall take the othe, and the other shall not make it good.
And yf it be stollen from hym, then he shall make restitucyon vnto the owner therof:
If it be torne with wylde beastes, then let hym brynge recorde of the tearynge: and he shall not make it good.
And yf a man borowe oughte of hys neyghboure, and it be hurte or els dye, and the owner therof be not by, he shal make it good
But yf the owner therof be by, he shall not make it good: namely, yf it be an hyred thinge, and came for hys hyre.
If a man entyse a mayde that is not betrouthed, and lye with her, he shall endote her, and take her to hys wyfe.
And yf hyr father refuse to geue her vnto hym, he shall paye money accordynge to the dowrie of virgens.
Thou shalt not suffre a witch to lyue.
Whosoeuer lyeth with a beest, shalbe slayne for it.
He that offreth vnto any goddes saue vnto the Lord onely, let him be vtterly roted out.
Uexe not a straunger, nether oppresse hym: for ye were straungers in the lande of Egypt.
Ye shall trouble no wedowe nor fatherlesse chylde.
If ye shall trouble them, and they crye vnto me, I wyll surely heare theyr crye,
and then wyll my wrath waxe hoote, and I wyll kyll you with the swerde, and youre wyues shall be wedowes, Ꟶ youre chyldren fatherlesse.
If thou lende money to any of my people that is poore by the, thou shalt not be as a tyraunt vnto hym, nether shalt thou oppresse hym with vsurye.
If thou take thy neyghbours rayment to pledge, thou shalt delyuer it vnto hym agayne by that the sonne goo doune.
For that is hys coueringe onely: euen the rayment for hys skynne, wherin he slepeth. And whan he crieth vnto me, I will heare hym, for I am mercyfull.
Thou shalt not rayle vpon the goddes nether blaspheme the ruelar of thy people.
Thy frutes (whether they be drie or moyst) se thou kepe not backe.
Thy fyrstborne sonne thou shalt geue me, lykewyse also shalt thou doo with thyne oxen and with thy shepe. Seuen dayes it shall be with the damme, and the eyght daye thou shalt geue it me.
Ye shalbe holye people vnto me, neither shall ye eate any flesh that is toorne of beastes in the felde. But shall cast it to dogges.
Thou shalt not accept a vayne tale, nether shalt put thyne hande with the wyked to be an vuryghteous witnesse.
Thou shalt not folowe a multitude to do euell: nether answere in a matter of plee that thou woldest (to folowe many) turne asyde from the trueth,
nether shalt thou paynte a poore mans cause.
Yf thou mete thyne enemies oxe or asse goynge astraye, thou shalt brynge them to hym agayne.
If thou se thyne enemies asse synke vnder his burthen, thou shalt not passe by and let hym alone: but shalt helpe hym to lyfte hym vp agayne.
Thou shalt not bynder the ryghte of thy poore, in theyr sute.
Kepe the ferre from a false mater, and the Innocent Ꟶ ryghteous se thou sley not, for I will not iustifye the wyked.
Thou shalt take no gyftes, for gyftes blynde the seynge, and peruerte the wordes of the ryghteous.
Thou shalt not oppresse a straunger, for ye knowe the herte of a straunger, seinge ye were straungers in the londe of Egypte.
Syxe yeres thou shalt sowe thy lande, and gather in the frutes therof:
and the seuenth yere thou shalt let it rest and lye still, that the poore of thy people maye eate: Ꟶ what they leaue, the beastes of the feld shall eate. In lyke maner thou shalt do also with thy vineyarde and thyne olyue trees.
Syxe dayes thou shalt do thy worcke, and in the seuenth daye thou shalt rest, that thyne oxe and thyne asse maye rest, and the sonne of thy mayde and the straunger maye be refreshed.
In all thynges that I haue sayde vnto you, be circumspecte. And make no rehersall of the names of straunge goddes nether let it be hearde out of thy mouth
Thre feastes thou shalt holde vnto me in a yere.
Thou shalt kepe the feaste of swete bread, that thou eate vnleuend bread seuen dayes longe as I commaunded the, in the tyme of the moneth whan corne beginneth to ripe, for in that moneth ye came oute of Egypte: and se that no man appeare before me emptye.
And the feaste of Heruest, when thou reapest the fyrst frutes of thy laboures, which thou hast sowne in the felde. And the feast of ingatheryng, which is in the ende of the yere: when thou hast gathered in thy laboures out of the felde.
Thre tymes in a yere shall all thy men chyldren appeare before the Lord God.
Thou shalt not offer the bloude of my sacrifyce vpon leuended bread: nether shal the fatt of my feast remayne vntyll the mornynge.
The fyrst of the fyrst frutes of thy lande thou shalt brynge into the house of the Lord thy God thou shalt also not seth a kydd in hys mothers mylke.
Beholde, I sende an Angell before the, to kepe the in the waye, and to brynge the into the place which I haue prepared.
Beware of hym, and heare his voyce, and resyst hym not: for he wyll not spare youre mysdedes Ꟶ my name is in hym.
But and yf thou shalt herken vnto his voyce, Ꟶ do all that I speake, I wylbe an enemye vnto thyne enemyes, and an aduersarye vnto thyne aduersaryes.
For myne Angell shall go before the, and brynge the in vnto the Amorites, and Hethites, Ꟶ Pherezites, and Cananites, Heuites, Ꟶ Iebusites, and I shall destroye them.
Thou shalt not worshyppe theyr goddes, nether serue them, nether do after the workes of them: but ouerthrowe them, and breake doune the ymages of them.
And ye shall serue the Lorde youre God, and he shall blesse thy bread Ꟶ thy water, and I will take all sycknesse awaye from the myddes of the.
There shalbe no woman childlesse or vnfrutefull in thy lande: the nombre of thy dayes wyll I fulfyll.
I wyll sende my feare before the, and wyll trouble all the people whether thou shalt go. And I will make all thine enemyes turne theyr backes vnto the,
and I wyll sende hornettes before the, which shall dryue out the Heuites, the Cananites, and the Hethites before the.
Neuertheles I wyll not cast them oute in one yere, lest the lande growe to a wyldernesse: and the beastes of the felde multiplie agaynst the.
By lytle and lytle I will dryue them oute before the, vntyll thou be increased, Ꟶ enheret the lande.
And I wyll make thy costes from the redd see vnto the see of the Philistines, and from the deserte vnto the ryuer. For I wyll delyuer the inhabyters of the lande into thyne hande, and thou shalt dryue them oute before the.
Thou shalt make none appoyntement with them, nor with theyr goddes.
Nether let them dwell in thy lande, lest they make the synne against me: for yf thou serue theyr goddes, it wyll be thy decaye.
And he sayde vnto Moses: come vp vnto the Lorde: thou Ꟶ Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and the .lxx. elders of Israel, and ye shal worshyppe a farre of.
And Moses hym selfe alone shall go vnto the Lorde, but they shall not come nye, nether shall the people go vp with hym.
And Moses came, Ꟶ tolde the people all the wordes of the Lord and all the lawes: And all the people answered with one voyce, and sayde: all the wordes whiche the Lorde hath sayde, wyll wee doo.
And Moses wrote all the wordes of the Lorde, Ꟶ rose vp early, and set vp an aulter vnder the hyll, Ꟶ .xii. stones according to the .xii. trybes of Israel,
and sent yonge men of the chyldren of Israell, which brought burntofferynges, and offred peace offeringes of oxen vnto the Lord.
And Moses toke halfe of the bloude, and put it in basens, Ꟶ the other halfe he sprenkeld on the aulter.
And he toke the boke of the appoyntement and redd it in the audience of the people. And they sayd. All that the Lorde hath sayde, we wyll do and be obedyent.
And Moses toke the bloude, and sprynkeld it on the people and sayde, beholde thys is the bloude of the appoyntement, which the Lorde hath made with you vpon all these wordes.
Then went Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu and the .lxx. elders of Israel vppe,
and sawe the God of Israel, and there was vnder hys fete, as it were a worke of a Saphir stone; and as it were the heauen when it is cleare,
and vpon the nobles of the chyldren of Israel he sett not his hand. And they sawe God and dyd eate and dryncke.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: come vp to me into the hyll, and be there, and I wyll geue the tables of stone, and a lawe and commaundmentes, which I haue written that thou mayest teach them.
And Moses rose vppe Ꟶ hys minister Iehosua, Ꟶ Moses went vppe into the hyll of God,
and sayde vnto the elders: tarye ye here vntyll we come agayne vnto you. Beholde, here is Aaron Ꟶ Hur with you. If any man haue any matters to do, let hym come to them.
And Moses went vp into the mounte, and a clowde couered the hyll,
and the glorye of the Lorde abode vpon mounte Sinay, and the clowde couered it .vi. dayes. And the seuenth daye he called vnto Moses out of the clowde.
And the facyon of the glorye of the Lorde was lyke consumynge fyre on the toppe of the hyll in the syghte of the children of Israel.
And Moses went into the clowde, and got him vp into the mountayne. And Moses was in the mounte .xl. dayes and .xl. nyghtes.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge:
speake vnto the chyldren of Israel that they brynge me an heue offerynge: of euery man that geueth it wyllyngly with hys herte, ye shall take it.
Thys is the heue offrynge which ye shall take of them golde and syluer and brasse:
yelowe sylke, purple, scarlet, white sylke, and gootes here
rams skynnes that are redd, and the skynnes of taxus and sethim wodd,
oyle for lyghte, spices for anoyntynge oyle, and for swete cense,
Onix stones and stones to be sett in the Ephod and in the brest lappe.
And let them make me a sanctuarie (that I maye dwell amonge them.)
And accordinge to all that I shewe the both after the facyon of the habitacyon, and after the facyon of all the ornamentes therof, euen so shall ye make it.
And they shall make an arke of sethim wood .ii. cubytes and an halfe longe, a cubite and an halfe broade and a cubyte Ꟶ an halfe hye.
And thou shalt ouerlaye it with pure golde, within and without shalt thou ouerley it, and shalt make an hye vpon it a crowne of golde rounde aboute.
And thou shalt cast foure rynges of gold for it, and put them in the foure corners therof .ii. rynges shalbe in the one syde of it, and .ii. in the other.
And thou shalt make barres of sethim wood, and couer them with golde,
and put the barres in the ringes alonge by the sydes of the arke, to bere it with all
And the barres shall be in the rynges of the arke, and shall not be taken awaye from it.
And thou shalt put in the arke, the witnesse which I shall geue the.
And thou shalt make a mercyseate of pure golde .ii. cubytes and an halfe longe and a cubite Ꟶ a halfe brode.
And thou shalt make .ii. cherubins of golde: Euen of a whole worke shalt thou make them in the two endes of the mercyseate:
and the one cherub shalt thou make on the one ende, and the other on the other ende. Euen of the same mercyseate shall ye make Cherubins in the two endes therof.
And the Cherubins shall stretch theyr wynges abrode ouer an hye, coueringe the mercy seate with theyr wynges, and theyr faces shall loke one to another: euen to the mercyseate warde, shall the faces of the cherubins be.
And thou shalt put the mercyseate aboue vpon the arke, and in the arke thou shalt put the witnesse which I wyll geue the.
And from thence I wyll testifye vnto the and wyll comon with the from vpon the mercyseate: from betwene the two Cherubins which are vpon the arke of witnesse, of all thynge which I wyll geue the in commaundement vnto the chyldren of Israel.
Thou shalt also make a table of sethim wodd of two cubytes longe, and one cubytt brode, and a cubytt and an halfe hye.
And thou shalt couer it with pure golde, and make there to a crowne of golde rounde aboute.
And make vnto that an whope of foure fyngers brode, rounde aboute. And make a golden crowne also to the whope rounde aboute.
And make for it foure rynges of gold, and put the rynges in the corners that are on the foure fete therof:
euen ouer against the whope shall the rynges be, to put in barres, to bere the table with all.
And thou shalt make the barres of Sethim wodd, and ouerlaye them with gold, that the table maye be borne with them.
And thou shalt make hys disshes, and spones, flatpeces, and pottes to powre oute withall: Euen of fyne golde shalt thou make them.
And thou shalt sett vpon the table, shewbreed before me alwaye.
And thou shalt make a candelstycke of pure golde euen of a whole worke shall the candelstycke be made with his shaft, braunches, bolles, knoppes and floures proceadinge there out.
Syxe braunches also shall procede out of the sydes of it: thre braunches of the candelstycke out of the one syde and thre out of the other.
Thre cuppes lyke vnto almondes with knoppes Ꟶ floures in one braunche. And thre cuppes lyke almondes in the other braunche, with knoppes and floures. And euen so thorowe out the syxe braunches that procede out of the candelstycke:
and in the candelstycke selfe foure cuppes lyke vnto almondes with theyr knoppes and floures:
and there shall be a knoppe vnder euery two braunches. Of the syxe that procede out of the candelstyck.
And the knoppes and the braunches shalbe of it. And it shalbe one worke euen of pure golde.
And thou shalt make the seuen lampes of it: and the seuen lampes therof, shalt thou put an hye there on, to geue lyghte vnto the other syde that is ouer against it.
The tongges and snoffers therof shalbe of pure golde.
Of an hundred pounde weyghte of fyne golde shalt thou make it with all the apparell.
Loke therfore that thou make them after the facyon that was shewed the in the mounte.
The tabernacle shalt thou make wt ten curtaynes of whyte twyned sylke: yelowe sylke, purple and scarlet. And in them thou shalt make pictures of broderd worke.
The length of one curtayne shalbe eyght and twenty cubytes, Ꟶ the bredth of one curtayne foure cubytes, and euery one of the curtaynes shall haue one measure:
fyue curtaynes shalbe coupled together one to another: and fyue curtaynes shalbe coupled together one to another.
And thou shalt make lowpes of yelow sylke, a longe by the edge of the one curtayne which is in the seluege of the couplynge courtayne. And lykewyse shalt thou make in the edge of the vtmost curtayne that is to be coupled therwith on the other syde.
Fyftye lowpes shalt thou make in the one curtayne, and fyftie lowpes shalt thou make in the edge of the curtayne that is to be couppled therwith on the other syde: that the lowpes maye take holde one of a nother.
And thou shalt make fyftye buttons of golde, and couple the curtaynes together with the buttons: and it shalbe one habitacyon.
And thou shalt make .xi. curtaynes of gotes heere, to be a coueringe vpon the Tabernacle.
The length of a curtayne shalbe .xxx. cubytes and the bredeth foure and they shalbe all .xi. of one measure.
And thou shalt couple .v. curtaynes by them selues, and the sixe by them selues, and shalt double the syxt in the fore front of the tabernacle.
And thou shalt make fyftye lowpes in the edge of the vtmost curtayne on the one syde: euen in the edge of the couplynge courtayne:
and fyftye lowpes in the edge of the other curtayne that must be ioyned vnto it. And thou shalt make fyftie buttones of brasse and put them on the lowpes, and couple the couerynge to gether, that it maye be one.
And the remnaunt that resteth in the curtaynes of the couerynge: euen the halfe curtayne that resteth, shalbe lefte on the backe sydes of the habitacyon:
that a cubyte on the one syde and a cubyte on the other syde maye remayne in the length of the curtaynes of the coueryng, and that it maye remayne of ether syde of the habitacyon to couer it with all.
And vpon the Tabernacle thou shalt make a couerynge of rams skynnes dyed redd: Ꟶ yet a coueringe aboue all of taxus skynnes.
And thou shalt make bordes for the habitacyon of sethim wod to stonde vp ryghte:
ten cubytes longe shall euery borde be, and a cubite Ꟶ an halfe brode.
Two fete shall there be in one borde: and they shalbe separate one from another. And thus shalt thou make for all the bordes of the Tabernacle.
And thou shalt make .xx. bordes for the habitacyon on the south syde,
and thou shalt make .xl. sockettes of syluer vnder the .xx. bordes two sockettes vnder one borde; for hys two fete,
Ꟶ two sockettes vnder another borde for his two fete. In lyke maner in the north syde of the habitacyon there shalbe .xx. bordes
and .xl. sockettes of syluer: two sockettes vnder one borde, and two sockettes vnder another borde.
And in the west ende of the habitacyon, shalt thou make syxe bordes,
and two bordes shalt thou make in the corners of the habitacyon in the metynge together of the two sydes.
And they shall be coupled together beneth and lyke wyse aboue to a rynge. And thus shall it be for the two bordes that are in the corners.
And they shalbe eyght bordes, hauynge sockettes of syluer, euen syxtene sokettes: that there maye be two sokettes vnder one borde, and two sokettes vnder another borde.
And thou shalt make barres of sethim wodd, fyue for the bordes of the Tabernacle in one syde, and fyue barres for the bordes of the Tabernacle in the other syde,
and fyue barres for the bordes of the Tabernacle in the west ende.
And the mydle barre shall goo alonge thorowe the myddes of the bordes from the one ende vnto the other.
And thou shalt couer the bordes with golde, and make theyr rynges of golde, to put the barres thorowe, and thou shalt couer the barres with golde also.
And thou shalt rere vp the habitacyon accordynge to the facion therof, as it was shewed the in the mount.
And thou shalt make a vayle of yelowe sylke, of purpull, scarlet, and whyte twyned sylke. Of broderd worke with pictures shalt thou make it.
And hange it vpon foure pilers of sethim wodd couerd with golde. Whose heades shalbe of golde, stondynge vpon foure sockettes of syluer.
And thou shalt hange vp the vayle wyth rynges, that thou mayest bringe in (with in the vayle) the arcke of witnesse. And the vayle shall vnto you deuyde the holye from the most holy.
And thou shalt put the mercy seate vpon the arcke of wytnesse in the holyest place.
And thou shalt put the table without the vayle: and the candelsticke ouer agaynst the table on the south syde of the habitacyon. And put the table on the north syde.
And thou shalt make an hangynge for the dore of the Tabernacle: of yelowe sylke purple, scarlet, and white twined sylk wroughte with nedle worke.
And thou shalt make for the hangyng, fyue pillers of sethim wodd and couer them with golde, and theyr knoppes shalbe of golde, and thou shalt cast fyue sockettes of brasse for them.
And thou shalt make an aultare of sethim wodd: fyue cubytes longe and fyue cubytes brode. For it shall be foure square, and thre cubytes hye.
And thou shalt make it hornes in the foure corners of it the hornes shalbe of it selfe, and thou shalt couer it with brasse.
And make hys asshepannes, shouels, basens, fleshhokes, fyrepannes Ꟶ all the apparell therof for the same, of brasse.
And thou shalt make vnto it a gredyern also (lyke a net) of brasse. And vpon that net shalt thou make foure brasen rynges in the foure corners therof:
and thou shalt put it vnder the compase of the altare beneth, that the net maye be in the myddes of the altare.
And thou shalt make (two) barres for the altare of sethim wodd, and couer them with brasse,
and let them be put in rynges a longe by the sydes of the altare to beare it wt all.
And make the aulter holowe with bordes: euen as it was shewed the in the mount, so shall they make it.
And thou shalt make the courte of the habitacyon, that there maye be in the south syde hangynges of white twyned sylke, of an hundred cubytes longe, for one syde,
and .xx. pyllers therof, with theyr .xx. sockettes of brasse: but the knoppes of the pyllers Ꟶ theyr whopes shalbe syluer.
In lykewyse on the north syde there shalbe hangynges of an hundred cubytes longe and .xx. pylers with their twentye sockettes of brasse, and the knoppes and the whopes of syluer.
But vpon the west syde the bredth of ye courte shal haue an hanginge of fiftie cubites longe, Ꟶ ten pilers vpon ten sokettes.
And the breadth of the court which is eastwarde, shall haue fyftye cubytes.
Hangynges of fyftene cubytes in the one syde: and their pillers with their thre sockettes:
and lykewyse on the other syde shalbe hanginges of fiftene cubites with their thre pillers and thre sockettes.
And in the gate of the court shalbe a vayle of twentye cubites of yelowe silk, purple, and skarlet Ꟶ whyte twined silke, wrought with nedle worke: Ꟶ foure pillers with their foure sockettes.
All the pillers round about the court shalbe whoped with syluer, Ꟶ their knoppes shalbe of syluer, and their sockettes of brasse.
The length of the court shalbe an hundred cubites, and the breadth fyftye Ꟶ the heigth fyue. And the hanginges shalbe of whyte twined sylk, and their sockettes of brasse.
All the vesselles of the habitation in all maner seruice and the pynnes therof: yee, and all the pynnes also of the courte shalbe of brasse.
And thou shalt commaunde the children of Israel, that they geue the pure oyle olyue beaten for the lyght, to powre allwaye into the lampes.
In the tabernacle of witnesse without the vayle which is before the witnes, shall Aaron and his sonnes dresse it both euening and mornyng before the Lorde: and it shalbe a statute for euer vnto the generations of the children of Israel.
And take thou vnto the Aaaron thy brother and hys sonnes wt him, from amonge the chyldren of Israel, that they maye minister vnto me. Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aarons sonnes.
And thou shalt make holy rayment for Aaron thy brother, that they maye be vnto glory and bewtye.
And thou shalt speake vnto all that are wise harted, and whomsoeuer I haue filled with the sprete of wysdome: that they make Aarons rayment to consecrate him with, that he maye minyster vnto me.
These are the garmentes which they shall make, a brestlap, Ephod, a tunycle, a strayte cote, a miter and a gyrdell. These holy garmentes shall they make for Aaron thy brother and his sonnes, that they maie minister vnto me.
And lett them take golde, yelowe silk, purple, skarlet and whyte twyned silk.
They shall make the Ephod of gold, yelow sylke, purple, skarlet and whyte twyned silke with broderd worke.
The two sydes shal come together, and be closed vp in the two edges therof.
And the gyrdell of the Ephod shalbe of the same workmanship, and of the same stuffe, euen of golde, yelow sylke, purple, skarlet and whyte twyned sylke.
And thou shalt take two onix stones, and graue in them the names of the chyldren of Israel:
syxe names of them in the one stone, and the other syxe in the other stone: accordynge to their byrth.
After the work of a stonegrauer, and of him that graueth signettes shalt thou graue the two stones with the names of the children of Israel, and shalt make them to be set in golde.
And thou shalt put the two stones vpon the two shoulders of the Ephod, that they maye be stones of remembraunce vnto the chyldren of Israel. And Aaron shall beare their names before the Lorde vpon hys two shoulders for a remembraunce.
And thou shalt make hokes of golde
Ꟶ two cheynes of fyne golde: link worke and wrethed, and fasten the wrethed cheynes to the hokes.
And thou shalt make the brestlap of iudgement with broderd worke, euen after the worke of the Ephod shalt thou make it: namely of golde, yelow sylke, purple, skarlet, and whyte twyned silke, shalt thou make it.
Foure square it shalbe and double, an hande brede longe, and an handbrede broade.
And thou shalt fill it with foure rowes of stones. In the first rowe shalbe a Sardions, a Topas, and Smaragdus:
in the second rowe, a Ruby, Saphir and Diamond:
in the thyrde Lygurios, an Achat, Ꟶ Amatist:
in the fourth a Turcas, Onix and Iaspis. And they shall be set in golde in their inclosers.
And the stones shalbe grauen as sygnettes be grauen wt the names of the children of Israel, euen with twelue names, euery one with his name accordyng to the twelue tribes.
And thou shalt make vpon the brestlapp two fastenyng cheynes of pure golde Ꟶ wrethen worke.
And thou shalt make lykewyse vpon the brestlap two rynges of golde: and put them on the edges of the brestlap,
and put the two wrethen cheynes of golde in the two rynges which are in the edges of the brest lappe.
And the other two endes of the two cheynes, thou shalt fasten in two close hokes, and put them vpon the shulders of the Ephod on the foresyde of it.
And thou shalt yet make two rynges of golde, which thou mayest put in the two edges of the brestlappe, euen in the borders therof, towarde the insyde of the Ephod oueragenst it.
And yet two other ringes of golde thou shalt make: and put them on the two sydes of the Ephod, beneth oueragaynst the brestlap, alowe where the sydes are ioyned together vpon the brodered gyrdell of the Ephod.
And they shall bynde the brestlappe by hys rynges vnto the ringes of the Ephod with a lace of yelow silke, that it maye lye closse aboue the broderd gyrdell of the Ephod, and that the brestlap be not losed from the Ephod.
And Aaron shall beare the names of the chyldren of Israel in the brestlapp of iudgement vpon his hert, when he goeth into the holy place for a remembraunce before the Lorde allwaye.
And thou shalte put in the brestlappe of iudgement Urim and Thumin: and they shalbe euen upon Aarons hert, when he goeth in before the Lord: and Aaron shall beare the iudgement of the children of Israel vpon his herte before the Lorde allwaye.
And thou shalt make the tunycle vnto the Ephod altogether of yelow sylke.
And ther shalbe an hole for the heed in the myddes of it, hauyng a bonde of wouen worke rounde about the coler of it (as it were the coller of a partlet) that it rent not.
And beneth vpon the hem, thou shalt make pomgranates of yelow sylke and of purple and skarlet, round about the hem,
and belles of golde betwene them rounde about: and lett there be euer a golden bell and a pomgranate, a golden bell and a pomgranate, rounde about vpon the hem of the tunycle.
And Aaron shall haue it vpon him, when he ministreth, and the sounde shalbe hearde, when he goeth into the holy place before the Lorde, Ꟶ when he commeth out, and he shall not dye.
And thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and graue theron, as sygnettes are grauen. The holynesse of the Lorde,
and put it on a yelow sylke lace to be vpon the mytre, euen vpon the forefront of it.
And it shalbe vpon Aarons foreheede: that Aaron maye beare the synne of the holy thynges which the chyldren of Israel halowe in all theyr holye gyftes. And it shalbe allwayes vpon his foreheed, for the reconcylynge of them before the Lorde.
And thou shalt make a lynnen cote, and thou shalt make a mytre of lynnen and a girdell of nedle worke.
And thou shalt make for Aarons sonnes also cotes, gyrdelles and bonettes, glorious and bewtyfull:
and thou shalt put them vpon Aaron thy brother, and on hys sonnes with him: and shalt anoynte them, and fyll their handes, and sanctifye them, that they maye ministre vnto me.
And thou shalt make them lynnen breches to couer their preuityes, from the loynes vnto the thies shall they reach.
And they shalbe vpon Aaron and his sonnes, when they come into the tabernacle of witnes, or when they come vnto the aultare to minister in holynesse, that they beare no sinne, and so dye. And it shalbe a lawe for euer vnto Aaron and his seed after him.
This thyng also shalt thou do vnto them, when thou halowest them to be my prestes. Thou shalt take a calfe, euen a yonge oxe, and two rammes that are without blemish,
and vnleuened breade, and cakes of swete bread tempered with oyle, Ꟶ wafers of swet bread anoynted with oyle (of wheten floure shalt thou make them)
Ꟶ put them in a maunde, and brynge them in the maunde with the calfe and the two rammes.
And brynge Aaron and his sonnes vnto the doore of the tabernacle of wytnesse, and washe them with water,
and take the garmentes, and put vpon Aaron: the strayte cote the tunycle of the Ephod, Ꟶ the Ephod, and the brestlappe: and gyrd them to hym with the brodered gyrdell which is in the Ephod.
And put the mytre vpon his heed: and put the holy crowne vpon the mytre.
Then shalt thou take the anoynting oyle, and powre it vpon his heed, and anoynte hym.
And bring hys sonnes,
and put albes vpon them, and gyrd them with gyrdels, aswell Aaron, as his sonnes. And put the myters on them, and the preastes office shalbe theirs for a perpetuall lawe. And thou shalt fyll the handes of Aaron and of his sonnes:
and bryng the calfe before the tabernacle of witnes. And Aaron and his sonnes shall put their handes vpon the heed of the calfe,
and thou shalt kyll hym before the Lorde, by the dore of the tabernacle of witnes.
And take of the bloud of the calfe and put it vpon the hornes of the aulter with thy fynger: and powre all the bloude besyde the botome of the aulter,
and take all the fat that couereth the inwardes, and the kall that is on the lyuer, and the two kidneys and the fat that is vpon them: and burne them vpon the aulter.
But the flesh of the calfe and hys skynne, Ꟶ his donge shalt thou burne wt fyer without the hoost. It is a synofferyng.
Thou shalt also take one ram, and Aaron and hys sonnes shalt put their handes vpon the head of the ram,
Ꟶ when thou hast slayne the ramme, thou shalt take hys bloude, and sprynkle it rounde about vpon the aulter,
Ꟶ cut the ram in peces, and washe the inwardes of him and his legges, and put them vnto the peces and vnto his heed:
and then burne the hole ram vpon the aulter for a burntoffering vnto the Lorde, Ꟶ for a swete sauour and a sacrifyce vnto the Lorde.
And take the other ram, and Aaron Ꟶ hys sonnes shall put their handes vpon hys heed.
Then shalt thou kyll hym, and take of hys bloude, and put it vpon the typpe of the ryght eare of Aaron and of hys sonnes, and vpon the thombe of their ryght handes, and vpon the great to of their ryght fote, Ꟶ sprynkle the bloude vpon the aulter rounde about.
And thou shalt take of the bloude that is vpon the aulter, and of the anoyntyng oyle, and sprynkell it vpon Aaron and hys vestimentes, and vpon his sonnes and vpon their garmentes wt hym. And he shalbe halowed Ꟶ his clothes and his sonnes and theyr clothes with hym.
And thou shalt take the fatt of the ram and his rompe, and the fat that couereth the inwardes, and the kall of the lyuer, and the two kydneys and the fat that is vpon them and the ryghte shoulder: for that ram is a full offerynge:
and a symnell of bread, and a cake of oyle bread, and a wafer out of the baskette of swete breade that is before the Lorde,
and putt all vpon handes of Aaron, and on the handes of hys sonnes: and waue them for a waueofferynge before the Lorde.
And agayne, thou shalt take it from of their handes, and burne it vpon the aulter for a burntofferinge, to be a sauoure of swetnes before the Lorde. For it is a sacrifice vnto the Lorde.
And thou shalt take the brest of the ram of Aarons consecracyon, and waue it for a waueoffering before the Lorde: and it shalbe thy parte.
And thou shalt sanctifye the brest of the waueoffering: and the shoulder of the heueofferyng which is waued and heued vp of the ram of the consecracyon for Aaron and for his sonnes.
And it shalbe Aarons and his sonnes by a statute for euer of the chyldren of Israel: for it is an heueoffering. Euen an heueofferyng of the chyldren of Israel, and of their peaceofferinges. Their heueofferinges is the Lordes.
And the holy garmentes of Aaron shalbe his sonnes after him, to be anoynted therin, and to fyll their handes therin.
And that sonne that is preast in his stead after him, shall put them on seuen dayes: when he commeth into the tabernacle of witnes to minyster in the holy place.
And thou shalt take the ram of the consecracyon, and seth his flesh in an holy place.
And Aaron and his sonnes shall eate the flesh of the ram, and the bread that is in the basket: euen by the dore of the tabernacle of witnes: and they shall eate them,
because the atonement was made therwith, to fyll theyr handes, Ꟶ to consecrate them: but a straunger shal not eate therof, because they are holy.
And yf ought of the flesh of the consecracyon or of the bread remayne vnto the mornynge, thou shalt burne it with fyer, and it shall not be eaten, because it is holy.
Therfore shalt thou do vnto Aaron and his sonnes, euen so, according to all thinges which I haue commaunded the: seuen dayes shalte thou fyll their handes,
and offer euery daye a calfe for a synne offerynge, for to reconcyle withall: that thou mayest clense the aultare when thou reconcylest vpon it, and thou shalt anoynte it, to sanctify it.
Seuen dayes thou shalt reconcyle vpon the aulter, and sanctifye it, and it shalbe as an aulter moost holye. Euery one that toucheth the aulter, lett. hym be holy.
This is that which thou shalt offer vpon the aulter: euen two lambes of one yeare olde, daye by daye continually:
the one thou shalt offer in the mornyng, and the other at euen.
And with the one lambe a tenth deale of flour myngled with the fourth parte of an hyn of beaten oyle, and the fourth part of an hin of wyne, for a drynck offerynge.
And the other lambe thou shalt offer at euen, and shalt do therto accordynge to the meatofferyng and drynckofferynge in the mornynge, to be an odoure of a swete sauoure and a sacrifyce vnto the Lorde.
And let this be a continuall burntofferynge amonge youre chyldren after you, before the dore of the tabernacle of witnesse before the Lorde, where I wyll mete you, to speake there vnto the.
There I wyll mete with the chyldren of Israel, and wyll be sanctifyed in myne honoure.
And I wyll sanctifye the tabernacle of witnes and the aulter. And I wyll sanctifye also both Aaron and hys sonnes to be my preastes.
And I wyll dwell amonge the chyldren of Israel: and will be their God.
And they shall knowe that I am the Lorde their God, that brought them oute of the lande of Egypte. for to dwell amonge them: euen I the Lord theyr God.
And thou shalt make an alter to burne incense: of sethim wodde shalt thou make it,
a cubite long and a cubite broade: euen foure square shall it be and two cubites hye: the hornes ther of shall procede out of it,
and thou shalt ouerlaye it with fyne golde, both the roffe and the walles round about, and hys hornes also, Ꟶ shalt make vnto it a crowne of golde round about
and two golden rynges on eyther syde: euen vnder the crowne, that they may be as places for the barres to beare it withall.
And thou shalt make the barres of sethim wodd, and couer them with golde.
And thou shalt putt it before the vayle, that is by the arcke of witnesse, before the mercy seate that is vpon the witnes, where I wyll mete the.
And Aaron shall burne theron swete incense euery mornynge, when he dresseth the lampes,
euen then shall he burne it: and lykewyse at euen, when he setteth vp the lampes he shall burne incense: and thys incensynge shalbe perpetually before the Lorde thorow out youre generacyons.
Ye shall putt no straunge incense theron, burnt sacrifyce or meateofferynge, neyther powre any drinckofferinge theron.
And Aaron shall reconcile vpon the hornes of it once in a yeare: wt the bloude of the synneofferynge of reconcylynge: euen once in the yeare shall he reconcyle it thorow your generacions. It is most holy vnto the Lord.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, saying:
Yf thou takest the summe of the chyldren of Israel after their nombre, they shall geue euery man a reconcylynge of hys soule vnto the Lorde when thou tellest them: that there be no plage amonge them, when thou tellest them.
And thus moch shall euery man geue, and that goeth into the nombre: halfe a sycle, after the sycle of the sanctuarye: a sycle is twentye halfpence. An halfe sycle shalbe the heueofferynge of the Lorde.
All that are nombred from twentye yeare olde and aboue, shall geue an heueofferyng vnto the Lorde.
The ryche shall not passe, and the poore shal not go vnder halfe a sicle. But ye shall geue an heueofferinge vnto the Lorde, that he maye haue mercy vpon your soules.
And thou shalt take the reconcylyng money of the children of Israel, and shalt put it vnto the vse of the tabernacle of witnesse, that it maye be a memoriall vnto the children of Israel before the Lorde, that he maye haue mercy vpon youre soules.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, saying:
thou shalt make a lauer of brasse, and his fote also of brasse to washe withall, and shalt putt it betwene the tabernacle of witnes, and the aulter: and put water therin.
For Aaron and his sonnes shall wash theyr handes and theyr fete therin:
euen when they go into the tabernacle of witnesse, or when they go vnto the aulter to minystre and to burne the Lordes offeringe, they shall wash them selues with water, lest they dye.
And it shalbe an ordinaunce vnto them for euer, both vnto him and his seed thorow out their generacyons.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, saying:
Take vnto the principall spices: of the most pure myrre fyue hundred sicles, of swete cynamon halfe so moche, euen two hundred and fyftie sycles:
of swete calamus, two hundred and fyftye. Of cassia, two hundred and fyftye, after the holy sycle, and of oyle olyfe an hin.
And thou shalt make of the oyle an holy oyntment, euen an oyntment compounde after the crafte of the apoticarye.
And thou shalt noynte the tabernacle of witnes therwith, and the arck of witnes,
and the table, and all his apparell: and the candelstick, and all his apparell: and the aulter of incense,
and the aulter of burntsacrifice with all his vessels, Ꟶ the lauer and his fote.
And thou shalt sanctifye them, that they maye be most holy: so that no man touche them, but they that be halowed.
And thou shalt anoynte Aaron and his sonnes, and consecrate them, that they maye mynistre vnto me.
And thou shalt speake vnto the children of Israel, sayinge: thys shalbe an holy oyntyng oyle vnto me, thorowout youre generacyons.
Upon mannes fleshe shall it not be powred: neyther shall ye make any other after the makynge of it, for yt is holye: and shalbe holye vnto you:
whosoeuer maketh lyke that, or whosoeuer putteth anye of it vpon a straunger, shall perysh from among hys people.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: take vnto the swete spices: balme, Onycha, swete galbanum, these spices with pure franckincense, of eache lyke moch:
and make of them swete smellyng incense, after the craft of the apoticarye, myngled together, pure and holy.
And beate it to powdre and put of it before the witnes in the tabernacle of witnes, where I wyll mete the.
It shalbe vnto you most holy. And se that ye make none after the makyng of that, It shalbe vnto you holy for the Lorde.
Whosoeuer shall make like vnto that, to smell therto, shall perysh from amonge hys people.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
beholde, I haue called by name, Bezaleel the sonne of Ury, the sonne of Hur of the trybe of Iuda.
And I haue fylled hym wt sprete of God, in wysdome, Ꟶ vnderstandynge, in knowledge Ꟶ in all maner worke,
to fynd out sotle feates, Ꟶ to worke in golde, syluer Ꟶ brasse:
and in the crafte to sett stones, and to carue in timbre, and to worke in all maner workmanshyp.
And beholde, I haue geuen hym to be his companion Ahaliab the sonne of Ahisamach of the trybe of Dan, and in the hertes of all that are wyse harted, I haue putt wysdome, to make all that I haue commaunded the,
the tabernacle of witnes, the arck of witnes, and the mercy seate that is therupon: and all the ornamentes of the tabernacle,
and the table and his ornamentes: and the pure candelstick with all his apparell, and the aulter of incens:
and the aulter of burntofferinges and all hys vesselles, and the lauer with his fote.
The vestimentes to ministre in, and the holye garmentes for Aaron the preaste, and the garmentes of his sonnes to ministre in,
and the anoyntyng oyle: and swete cense for the sanctuary, according to all that I haue commaunded the shall they do.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, saying:
Speake vnto the children of Israel and saye: In any wise se that ye kepe my Sabbathes: for it is a signe betwene me and you in your generacions, for to knowe that I the Lorde am he that doth sanctify you.
Kepe my Sabbath therfore: for it is holy vnto you. He that defyleth it, shalbe slayne. For whosoeuer worketh therin, the same soule shalbe roted oute from amonge hys people.
Syxe dayes shall men worcke. And in the seuenth daye is the Sabboth of the holye rest of the Lorde. Whosoeuer doth any worcke in the Sabboth daye, shall dye:
wherfore lett the children of Israel kepe the Sabboth, that they obserue it thorowout theyr generacions, that it be an appoyntment for euer.
For it is a signe betwene me and the chyldren of Israel for euer. For in syxe dayes the Lorde made heauen and earth: and in the seuenth daye he rested, and was refresshed.
And when the Lorde had made an ende of comening with Moses vpon the mounte Sinai, he gaue him two tables of witnes: euen tables of stone, wrytten with the fynger of God.
And when the people sawe, that yt was longe or Moses came downe out of the mountayne, they gathred them selues together vnto Aaron, and sayd vnto hym: Up, make vs goddes to go before vs: for of this Moses (the felowe that brought vs out of the lande of Egypt) we wote not what is become.
And Aaron sayde vnto them: plucke of the golden earynges which are in the eares of your wyues, your sonnes, and of your daughters: and bryng them vnto me.
And all the people plucked of the golden earynges, which they had in theyr eares, Ꟶ brought them vnto Aaron.
And he receaued them of their handes, and fassyoned it with a grauer, and made of it a calfe of molten metall. And they sayde: These be thy goddes, O Israel, which brought the oute of the lande of Egipt.
And when Aaron sawe that, he made an aultare before it. And Aaron cryed, sayinge: to morowe is the holy daye of the Lorde.
And they rose vp in the mornyng, Ꟶ offred burntofferinges, and brought peace offeringes also. And the people sat them downe to eate and dryncke, and rose vp agayne to playe.
And the Lorde sayd vnto Moses: go, get the downe: thy people which thou broughtest out of the lande of Egipt,
haue marred all, they are turned at once out of the waye, which I commaunded them: for they haue made them a calfe of molten metall, and haue worshypped it, and haue offered thereto, sayinge: These be thy goddes, O Israel, which hath brought the oute of the lande of Egipt.
And the Lorde sayde sayd vnto Moses: I haue sene this people: and beholde, it is a styffnecked people,
and nowe suffre me, that my wrath may waxe hote agaynst them, and consume them: and I wyll make of the a mightye people.
And Moses besought the Lord his God, and sayde: O Lorde, why doeth thy wrath waxe hote agaynst thy people, which thou hast brought oute of the lande of Egipte, wt greate power and with a mightye hande?
wherfore shulde the Egipcyans speake and saye: For a myschefe dyd he bryng them out euen for to sley them in the mountaynes, and to consume them from the face of the earth? Turne from thy fearce wrath, and turne from thys euell (deuysed) agaynst thy people.
Remembre Abraham, Isaac and Israel thy seruauntes, to whom thou swareste by thyne awne selfe, and saydeste vnto them: I wyll multiplye your seede as the starres of heuen, and all this lande that I haue spoken of, wyll I geue vnto your seed: and they shall enheret it for euer.
And the Lord refrayned him selfe from that euell which he sayd he wolde do vnto hys people.
And Moses turned hys backe, and went downe from the hyll, and the two tables of witnesse were in hys hande: and the same tables were written on both the leaues,
and were the worcke of God, and the wrytynge was the wrytyng of God grauen in the tables.
And when Iosua hearde the noyse of the people, as they showted, he sayde vnto Moses: there is a noyse of warre in the host.
And he answered: it is not the crye of them that haue the mastry, nor of them that haue the worse: but I do heare the noyes of them that synge.
And it fortuned, assoone as he came nye vnto the hooste, he sawe the calfe and the daunsynge, and Moses wrath waxed hote, and he cast the tables out of his handes, and brake them beneth the hyll.
And he toke the calfe which they had made, and burned it in the fyer, and stampte it vnto powder, and strawed it in the water, and made the chyldren of Israel dryncke of it.
And Moses sayde vnto Aaron: what dyd thys people vnto the, that thou hast brought so greate a synne vpon them?
And Aaron answered: let not the wrath of my Lorde waxe fearce, thou knowest the people that they are euen sett on myschefe:
For they sayde vnto me: make vs goddes to go before vs, for we wote not what is become of Moses, the felowe that brought vs out of the lande of Egipte.
And I sayd vnto them: let them that haue golde pluck it of, and bring it me: and I cast it into the fier: and therof came out thys calfe.
Moses therfore sawe that the people were naked (and that Aaron had made them naked vnto theyr shame amonge theyr enemyes)
and he went and stode in the gate of the hoste, and sayde: If any man pertayne vnto the Lorde, let him come to me. And all the sonnes of Leui gathered them selues together,
Ꟶ came vnto him. And he sayde vnto them: Thus saith the Lorde God of Israel: put euery man his sweard by his syde, Ꟶ go in and out, from gate to gate thorowout the hooste: and sleye euery man, his brother and euery man hys companyon, and euery man hys neyghboure.
And the chyldren of Leui dyd as Moses had sayde. And there fell of the people the same daye about .iij.M. men.
And Moses sayde: fyll your handes vnto the Lorde this daye, euery man vpon hys sonne and vpon his brother and that ther maye be geuen you a blessing this daye.
And on the morowe it fortuned that Moses sayde vnto the people: Ye haue synned a great synne. And nowe I wyll go vp vnto the Lorde: yf paraduenture I maye purchace an atonement for your synne.
Moses therfore went agayne vnto the Lorde, Ꟶ sayde: Oh, thys people haue synned a greate synne and haue made them goddes of golde.
And nowe I praye the, eyther forgeue them their synne: or (yf thou wilt not) wipe me out of thy booke, which thou hast wrytten.
And the Lorde sayd vnto Moses: I will put hym out of my booke that hath synned agaynst me.
And nowe go thou, brynge the people vnto the place which I sayde vnto the: beholde, myne angell shall go before the. Neuerthelater in the daye when I vyset, I wyll vyset their synne vpon them.
And the Lorde plaged the people, because they made the calfe which Aaron made.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: departe, and go hence: thou and the people, which thou hast brought out of the lande of Egypte, vnto the land which I sware vnto Abraham. Isahac and Iacob, sayinge: vnto thy seed will I geue it
(and I wyll sende an angel before the: and wyll cast out the Cananites, the Amorites and the Hethites, the Pherezites, the Heuites, and the Iebusites)
a lande that floweth with mylke and honye. For I wyll not go amonge you my selfe: for ye are a styffnecked people: lest I consume the in the waye.
And when the people heard this euell tidynges, they sorowed: and no man did put on hys best rayment.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses: saye vnto the children of Israel: ye are a styfnecked people: I must come once sodenly vpon you, Ꟶ make an ende of you. Therfore nowe put thy goodly rayment from the, that I maye wete what to do vnto the.
And the chyldren of Israel layde their goodly rayment from them, euen by the mount Horeb.
And Moses toke the tabernacle, and pitched it withoute the hooste a farre of from the hoost: and called it the tabernacle of witnes. And so it came to passe, that euery one which wolde praye vnto the Lorde, wente out vnto the tabernacle of wytnesse, which was without the hooste.
And it fortuned, that when Moses went out vnto the tabernacle, all the people rose vp: and stode euery man at his tente dore: and loked after Moses, vntyll he was gone into the tabernacle.
And assoone as Moses was entred into the tabernacle, the clowdy piller descended, and stode at the doore of the tabernacle, and he talked with Moses.
And all the people saw the clowdy pyller stande at the tabernacles dore, and they rose vp, and worshipped euery man in his tente dore.
And the Lord spake vnto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh vnto his frende: and he turned agayne into the hoost. And the chylde Iosua hys seruaunte the sonne of Num, departed not oute of the tabernacle:
And Moses sayde vnto the Lorde: se, thou sayest vnto me: leade this people forth, and thou hast not shewed me whom thou wylte sende with me. And thou hast sayde moreouer: I knowe the by name, and thou hast also founde grace in my syght.
Nowe therfore yf I haue founde fauoure in thy syght, then shewe me thy waye, that I maye knowe the, and that I maye fynde grace in thy syghte. And consyder also, that thys nacyon is thy people.
And he sayde: my presence shall go with the: and I wyll geue the rest.
He sayde vnto hym: Yf thy presence go not with me, carye vs not hence:
for howe shall it be knowen here, that I and thy people haue founde fauoure in thy syght, but in that thou goest wt vs? Yf thou go with vs, shall not I and thy people haue preemynence before all the people that are vpon the face of the earth?
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: I will do this also that thou hast sayde, for thou hast founde grace in my syghte, and I knowe the by name.
And he sayde: I besech the, shewe me thy glorye.
And he sayde: I wyll make all my good go before the, and I wyll be called in this name of the Lorde before the and will shewe mercy to whom I wyll shewe mercye, and wyll haue compassyon on whom I wyll haue compassion.
And he sayd furthermore: thou mayst not se my face: for there shall no man se me, and lyue.
And the Lorde sayde: beholde, there is a place by me, Ꟶ thou shalt stonde vpon a rock:
and whyle my glory goeth forth, I will put the in a clyft of the rock: and wyll put myne hande vpon the, whyle I passe by.
And I wyll take awaye myne hande, Ꟶ thou shalt se my back partes: but my face shall not be sene.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: hewe the two tables of stone lyke vnto the fyrst, and I will write vpon them the wordes that were in the first tables which thou brakest.
And be ready in the mornynge, that thou mayest come vp early vnto the mount of Sinai: and stand there with me in the top of the mount.
There shall no man come vp wt the, neyther let any man be sene thorowout all the mount, neyther let shepe nor oxen fede before the hyll.
And Moses hewed two tables of stone lyke vnto the fyrst, and rose vp early in the mornynge, and went vp vnto the mount of Sinai, as the Lorde had commaunded hym: and toke in his hande the two tables of stone.
And the Lorde descended in the clowde, and stode with hym there: and he called vpon the name of the Lorde.
And when the Lord walked before him, he cryed, Lorde Lorde God, mercyfull and gracyous, long suffering, Ꟶ aboundaunt in goodnes Ꟶ trueth,
Ꟶ kepyng mercye in store for thousandes, forgeuynge wikednes, vngodlynes Ꟶ synne, Ꟶ not leauynge one innocent, visytynge the wyckednes of the fathers vpon the children and vpon childrens children, euen vnto the third and fourth generacyon.
And Moses bowed him selfe to the earth quyckly, and worshipped,
and sayde: If I haue founde grace in thy syght (O Lorde) then lett my Lorde go wt vs: for it is a stubburne people, and thou shalt haue mercy vpon oure wyckednes and oure synne, and shalt take vs for thyne enheritaunce.
He sayde: beholde, I make an appoyntment before all thy people: and I will do maruaylles: soch as haue not bene done in all the worlde, neyther in all nacyons. And all the people amonge which thou art, shall se the worke of the Lorde: for it is a terryble thynge that I wyll do with the:
kepe those thinges that I commaunde the thys daye. Behold, I cast out before the the Amorites, Canaanites, Hethites, Pherezites, Heuytes and Iebusites.
Take hede to thy selfe, that thou make no compacte with the inhabyters of the lande whether thou goest, lest it be cause of ruyne amonge you.
But ouerthrowe their aulters, and breake their ymages, and cut doune their groues.
Thou shalt worshyp no straunge God. For the Lorde is called gelous, because he is a gelous God:
lest yf thou make any agrement with the inhabiters of the lande, and they goo a whoring after theyr goddes, and do sacrifice vnto theyr goddes, they call the, and thou eate of theyr sacrifice:
Ꟶ thou take of their daughters vnto thy sonnes, and theyr daughters go a whoringe after theyr goddes,
and make thy sonnes go a whoring after their goddes also. Thou shalt make the no goddes of metall.
The feaste of swete bread shalt thou kepe. Seuen dayes thou shalt eate vnleuended bread, as I commaunded the in the tyme of the moneth, when corne begynneth to rype. For in the moneth when corne begynneth to ripe, thou camest out of Egipt.
All that breaketh vp the matryce is myne: and all that breaketh the matryce amonge thy catell, yf it be male: whether it be oxe or shepe.
But the fyrst of the asse thou shalt bye out wt a lambe. And yf thou redeme hym not, thou shalt breake hys neck. All the fyrst borne of thy sonnes shalt thou redeme. And se that no man appeare before me empty.
Syxe dayes thou shalt worke, and in the seuenth daye thou shalt rest, bothe from earyng and reaping.
Thou shalt obserue the feast of wekes with thy fyrst frutes of whet heruest, and the feast of in gatherynge at the yeares ende.
Thryse in a yeare shall all your mens children appeare before the Lorde Iehoua God of Israel.
Whan I cast out the nacions before the, and enlarge thy coastes: so that no man shall desyre thy lande, thou shalt go vp to appeare before the Lorde thy God, thryse in the yeare.
Thou shalt not offre the bloude of my sacrifyce vpon leuen, neyther shall ought of the sacrifyce of the feaste of Passeouer be left vnto the mornyng.
The fyrst rype frutes of thy lande thou shalt bryng vnto the house of the Lord thy God. And thou shalt not sethe a kydd in hys mothers mylke.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: wryte these wordes: for after the tenoure of these wordes I haue made a couenaunt with the and with Israel.
And he was there wyth the Lorde fourtye dayes and fourtye nyghtes, and dyd neyther eate bread ner dryncke water. And he wrote vpon the tables the wordes of the couenaunt, euen ten verses.
And it fortuned, when Moses came downe from mount Sinai, the two tables of witnes were in Moses hande, when he came downe from the mount. And Moses wyst not that the skynne of his face shone in maner of an horne, whyle he talked with him.
And Aaron and all the children of Israel loked vpon Moses: and beholde, the skynne of his face shone, Ꟶ they were afrayed to come nye him.
And when he had called them, Aaron Ꟶ all the chefe that were in the company came vnto him, and Moses talked with them.
And afterward, all the children of Israel came nye, Ꟶ he commaunded them all that the Lord had sayde vnto hym in mount Sinai.
And whan Moses had made an ende of comening with them, he put a coueryng vpon his face.
And agayne, whan Moses went in before the Lord to speake wt him, he toke the couering of vntill he came out. And he came out, and spake vnto the children of Israel that which he was commaunded.
And the children of Israel sawe the face of Moses, that the skinne of Moses face shone. And Moses put the couering vpon his face agayne, vntill he went in, to comen with him.
And Moses gathered all the company of the children of Israel together, and sayd vnto them: these are the wordes which the Lord hath commaunded that ye shulde do them:
Sixe dayes ye shall worke: but the seuenth daye shalbe vnto you the holye Sabbath of the Lordes reste: whosoeuer doth any worke therin, shall die.
Ye shall kyndle no fier thorowout all youre habitacions vpon the Sabbath daye.
And Moses spake vnto all the multitude of the children of Israel saying: this is the thing which the Lorde commaunded, saying:
Take from among you an heue offering vnto the Lorde. Whosoeuer is of a willing hert, let him bryng it for the heue offerynge of the Lorde. Namely gold, syluer and brasse,
and yelowsilk, purple, scarlet, whyte sylke, goates heerre,
and rams skynnes red and taxus skinnes with sethim wod:
oyle for light and spices for the anoynting oyle, Ꟶ for the swete cense.
And Onix stones and stones to be set in the Ephod and in the brestlappe.
And let all them that are wyse harted among you, come and make all that the Lord hath commaunded:
the habitacyon with the tent therof and his coueryng, Ꟶ hys rynges, and his bordes, his barres, his pyllers, and his sockettes:
the arck and the staues therof, with the mercy seate and the vayle that couereth it:
the table and his barres and all his vessels: and the shewebred:
the candelstick of lyght and his apparell and his lampes with the oyle for the light:
the cens aultar and his barres: the anoynting oyle Ꟶ the swete cens: and the hangyng of the dore at the entryng in of the tabernacle:
the aultar of burnt sacrifyce with his brasen grediren, his staues, and all his vessels: the lauer and hys fote:
and the hangynges of the court with his pyllers and their sockettes, and the hangyng in the dore of the court:
the pynnes of the habitacion and the pynnes of the court wt their coardes:
the minystring garmentes to minystre in the holy place: and the holy vestimentes for Aaron the preast, and the vestimentes of his sonnes, that they maye minystre him.
And all the companye of the chyldren of Israel departed from the presence of Moses.
And euery one came (as many as theyr hertes coraged them, Ꟶ as many as their spretes made them wylling) Ꟶ brought a present for the Lord, to the making of the tabernacle of witnes, and for all his vses, and for the holy vestimentes.
And they came both men Ꟶ wemen (euen as many as were willing harted) and brought bracelettes, and earinges, ringes and chaynes, which iewels were all of golde: Ꟶ all the men brought a waue offeryng of golde vnto the Lord.
And euery man, with whom was founde yelow sylk, purple, scarlet, whyte sylk, and goates hearre and redd skynnes of rams Ꟶ taxus skynnes, brought them.
All that dyd heue vp an oblacyon of golde and brasse, and brought an heue offering vnto the Lorde. And all men with whom was found sethim wod for any maner worke of the ministracyon, brought it.
And all the women that were wyse herted dyd spynne with theyr handes, and brought the sponne worke both of yelow sylke, purple, scarlet and whyte sylk.
And all the wemen whom their awne hert moued, span goates hearre wisely.
And the Lorde brought onix stones, Ꟶ stones to be set in the Ephod, and in the brestlappe,
and spyce and oyle for lyght and for the anoynting oyle and for the swete cens.
And the children of Israel brought a willyng offeryng vnto the Lorde, both men and wemen: as many as had willing hertes to brynge, for all maner workes which the Lorde had commaunded to be made, by the handes of Moses.
And Moses sayde vnto the chyldren of Israel: beholde, the Lorde hath called by name Bezaleel the sonne of Uri the sonne of Hur of the trybe of Iuda,
Ꟶ hath fylled hym with the sprete of God, in wisdome and vnderstanding, in knowledge, and in all maner worke,
to fynde out curious workes which are made in golde, syluer and brasse.
In the crafte of stones to set them: and in caruynge of wodd to make any maner of sotle worke.
And he hath put in his harte that he may teache: both he and Aholiab the sonne of Ahisamach of the trybe of Dan.
Them hath he fylled with wysdome of herte, to worke all maner of grauen, and sotle, and nedle worke in yelowe sylke, and purple, in scarlet, and whyte sylke, and in weuynge. And to do all maner of worke and sotle feates.
And Bezaleel wrought, Ꟶ Aholiab and all wyse harted men, to whom the Lorde gaue wysdome and vnderstandynge, to knowe howe to worcke all maner worke for the seruyce of the Sanctuary, and all that the Lorde had commaunded.
And Moses called Bezaleel, Aholiab and all the wyse herted men and soche as the Lorde had geuen wysdome vnto, and as many as theyr hartes coraged to come vnto that worcke to worcke it.
And they receaued of Moses all the present, whyche the chyldren of Israell had brought for the worcke of the seruyce of the Sanctuary, to make it. And besyde that they brought giftes vnto it euery daye in the mornynge.
And all the wyse men that wrought all the holye worcke, came euery man from hys worcke whyche they made,
and spake vnto Moses, sayinge: the people brynge to moche and more then ynough for the seruyce and worcke whyche the Lord hath commaunded to be made.
And then Moses gaue a commaundement, and they caused it to be proclaymed thorowe out the hoste sayinge: se that nether man nor woman prepare any moare worcke for the present of the Sanctuary: and so the people were forbydden to bringe:
for the stuffe they had, was sufficyent for all the worcke, to make it, and to moche.
All the wyse harted men therfore, and they that wroughte for the habitacyon, made ten curtaynes of whyte twyned sylke, yelowe sylke, purple and scarlet: with pictures of broderd worcke made he them.
The length of one curtayne was .xxviii. cubytes, and the breadth foure and the curtaynes were all of one syse.
And he coulpled fyue curtayns by them selues, and other fyue by them selues.
And he made lowpes of yelowe sylke alonge by the edge of one curtayne, euen in the seluege of the couplynge courtayne. And lykewyse he made on the syde of the couplynge curtayne on the other syde.
Fyftye lowpes made he in the one curtayne, Ꟶ fyftye in the edge of the couplynge curtayne on the other syde: and the lowpes helde one curtayne to another.
And he made fyftye rynges of golde, and coupled the curtaynes one to another wyth the rynges: and so was it made one dwellynge place.
And he made .xi. curtaynes of goates herre, to be a tent ouer the tabernacle.
The length of a curtayne, had .xxx. cubytes and was foure cubites brode, and they all eleuen of one syse.
And he coupled fyue curtaynes by them selues, Ꟶ syxe by them selues,
and he made fyftye lowpes alonge by the border of the vtmost couplynge curtayne, and fyftye in the edge of the other couplynge curtayne.
And he made fyftye rynges of brasse to couple the tent together, that it myght be one.
And he made a couerynge vpon the tent of rammes skynnes redd, and yet another of taxus skinnes aboue that.
And he made stondynge bordes (for the tabernacle) of Sethim wodd.
The length of a borde was ten cubytes, the breadth one cubyte and a halfe.
One borde had two fete, wherby they were ioyned one to another. And thus made he for all the bordes of the Tabernacle.
And he made .xx. bordes for the southsyde of the habitacyon,
and .xl. sockettes of syluer vnder the .xx. boordes two sockettes vnder one boorde, for his two fete.
And for the other syde of the dwelling which is towarde the north, he made twentye boordes,
Ꟶ theyr fourtye sockettes of syluer, two sockettes vnder one boorde.
And towarde the west ende of the Tabernacle. He made syxe boordes,
and two other bordes made he in the corners of the habitacyon for eyther syde,
and they were ioyned closse beneth and aboue with a clampe, and thus they dyd to both the corners.
And there were eyght boordes Ꟶ syxtene sockettes, of syluer, vnder euery borde two sockettes.
And he made barres of Sethim wodd fyue for the bordes of the Tabernacle in the one syde:
and fyue for the bordes of the Tabernacle in the other syde, and fyue barres for the boordes of the habitacyon in the west ende.
And he made the myddest barre to shote thorowe the bordes: euen from the one ende to the other,
and ouerlayde the boordes wyth golde, and made rynges of golde to thrust the barres thorowe, and couered the barres wyth golde.
And he made an hangyng of yelow sylke, purple, scarlet and whyte twyned sylke, euen with pyctures made he it of broderd worcke.
And made ther vnto foure pillers of Sethim wodd, and ouerlayde them with golde. Theyr knoppes were also of golde, and he cast for them foure sockettes of syluer.
And he made an hangynge for the tabernacle dore: of yelowe sylke, purple, scarlet and whyte twyned sylke of nedle worcke.
And the fyue pylers of it with theyr knoppes, Ꟶ ouerlayde the knoppes of them Ꟶ the whopes wyth golde. Their fyue sockettes also were of brasse.
And Bezaleel made the arke of Sethim wodd, two cubites and an halfe long, and a cubite and a halfe brode, and a cubite and a halfe hye:
and ouerlayde it with fyne golde within and without, and made a crowne of golde to it rounde aboute,
and cast for it foure rynges of golde for the foure corners of it: two rynges for the one syde, and two for the other,
and made barres of Sethim wodd, and couered them with golde,
and put the barres in the rynges a longe by the syde of the arke, to bere it with all.
And he made the mercy seate. of pure gold: two cubytes and a halfe was the length therof, and one cubyte and a halfe the breadth:
Ꟶ he made two Cherubyns of thycke golde vpon the two endes of the merciseate.
One Cherub on the one ende, and another Cherub on the other ende.
Euen of the mercyseate made he the Cherubins: namely, in the endes therof. And the Cherubynes spred oute theyr wynges aboue an hie, and couered the mercyseate therwith. And theyr faces were one to another: euen to the mercyseate warde, were the faces of the Cherubyns.
And he made the table of Sethim wodd two cubytes was the length therof and a cubyte the breadth, and a cubyte and a halfe the heygth of it.
And he ouerlayde it with fyne golde, and made therto a crowne of golde rounde aboute,
and made therto an whope of an hande breade, rounde aboute and made vpon the whope a crowne of golde rounde aboute,
and cast for it foure rynges of golde, and put the rynges in the foure corners that were in the foure fete therof.
Euen harde by the whope were the rynges, into the whiche the barres were put, to bere the table withall.
And he made the barres of Sethim wodd, Ꟶ couered them with gold to bere the table withall,
and made the vessels (for the table) of pure golde: the disshes, spones, flat peces and pottes to powre withall.
And he made the candelstycke of pure golde: euen of one pece made he the candelstycke. For hys fote, hys shafte, hys cuppes, his knoppes and hys floures were of one pece.
Syxe braunches proceding out of the sydes therof, thre out of the one side, and thre out of the other.
And in one braunche thre cuppes made lyke vnto almondes wyth knoppes Ꟶ floures: and in another braunche thre cuppes made lyke almondes with knoppes and floures. And so thorowe out the syxe braunches that proceded out of the candelstycke.
And vpon the canndelstick self were .iiij. cuppes after the facyon of almondes wyth knoppes Ꟶ floures:
vnder euery two braunches a knoppe.
And the knoppes and the braunches proceded out of it, and it was all one pece of pure thycke golde.
And he made hys seuen lampes with the tonges and snoffers therof, of pure golde.
Euen of an hundred weyght of pure golde, made he it with all the vessels therof.
And he made the cens alter of Sethim wood. The length of it was a cubyte, Ꟶ the breadth a cubite, for it was, foure square Ꟶ two cubytes hye, with hornes proceding out of it.
And he couered it with pure golde, both the toppe and the sydes therof rounde about,
and the hornes of it, Ꟶ made vnto it a crowne of golde rounde about. And he made two rynges of golde for it, euen vnder the croune therof in the two corners of it and in the two sydes therof to put barres in, for to bere it withall:
Ꟶ made the barres of Sethim wodd and ouerlayde them with gold.
And he made the holy anoyntinge oyle, and the swete pure incens after the apotecaryes crafte.
And he made the burntoffering alter of Sethim, wodd fyue cubytes was the length therof, and fyue cubytes the breadth: euen .iiii. square, Ꟶ .iii. cubytes hye.
And he made vnto it hornes in the foure corners of it procedyng out of it, Ꟶ he ouerlayde it with brasse.
And he made all the vessels of the alter: the cauldrons, shouels, basyns, fleshhokes and colepannes. All the vessels therof made he of brasse.
And he made a brasen gredyren of networcke vnto the alter, rounde aboute alowe beneth vnto the myddes of the altare,
Ꟶ cast .iiii. rynges of brasse for the .iiii. endes of the gredyren to put barres in.
And he made the barres of Sethim wood and couered them with brasse,
and put the barres into the rynges in the foure corners of the altare, to bere it withall, and made the alter holowe wyth in the bordes.
And he made the lauer of brasse, and the fote of it also of brasse in the syghte of them that dyd watch at the dore of the tabernacle of witnesse.
And he made the courte on the southsyde, Ꟶ the hangynges of the courte were of whyte twyned sylke, hauynge an hundred cubites.
Theyr pylers were twentye, Ꟶ theyr brasen sockettes twenty. But the knoppes of the pylers, Ꟶ theyr whopes were of syluer.
And on the north syde the hangynges were an hundred cubytes. Theyr pylers were .xx. Ꟶ theyr sockettes of brasse .xx. But the knoppes Ꟶ the whopes of the pylers were of syluer.
On the west syde, were hangynges of .l. cubytes .x. pyllers Ꟶ theyr .x. sockettes. But the knoppes Ꟶ the whopes of the pillers were of syluer.
And towarde the east syde, were hangynges of .l. cubytes:
the hangynges of the one syde of the gate were fyftene cubytes longe, with thre pyllers, and thre sockettes.
And of the other syde of the court gate were hangynges also of .xv. cubytes longe, with thre pyllers and thre sockettes.
All the hangynges of the courte rounde aboute, were of whyte twyned sylke:
but the sockettes of the pyllers were of brasse: and the knoppes and the whopes of the pyllers were of syluer, and the couerynge of the heedes was of syluer, and all the pyllers of the courte were whoped about with syluer.
And the hangynge of the gate of the courte was nedle worke, of yelowe, sylke purple, scarlet and whyte twyned sylke .xx. cubytes longe, and fyue in the bredth, ouer agaynst the hangynges of the courte.
And theyr pyllers were foure and theyr foure sockettes of brasse, and the knoppes of syluer, and the heedes ouerlayed wyth syluer, and whoped aboute with syluer,
and all the pynnes of the tabernacle Ꟶ of the courte rounde aboute were of brasse.
Thys is the summe of the habitacyon of witnesse, as it was counted accordynge to the commaundement of Moses for the office of the Leuytes by the hande of Ithamar sonne to Aaron the preast.
And Bezaleel the sonne of Uri the sonne of Hur of the trybe of Iuda, made all that the Lorde commaunded Moses,
and with him was Aholiab sonne of Ahisamach of the trybe of Dan, a conninge grauer and a worker of nedle worke in yelowe sylk, purple scarlet and whyte twyned sylke.
All the golde that was occupyed for all the worcke of the holy place, was the golde of the waueofferynge, euen .xxix. hundred weyght, and seuen hundred and .xxx. sycles, accordinge to the sycle of the Sanctuary.
And the summe of syluer that came of the multitude, was .v. score hundred weyght, Ꟶ a thousande seuen hundred Ꟶ .lxxv. sycles after the Sycle of the Sanctuary.
For euery man an halfe weight, euen halfe a sycle after the sycle of the Sanctuary, for all them that went to be nombred from .xx. yeare olde and aboue, euen for .vi. hundred thousande and thre thousande and .v. hundred and .l. men.
And of the .v. score hundred weyght of syluer, were cast the sockettes of the Sanctuary, and the sockettes of the vayle: an hundred sockettes of the fyue score hundred weyght, an hundred weyght to euery sockette.
And of the thousande seuen hundred Ꟶ .lxx. sycles, he made knoppes to the pyllers, and ouerlayde the heedes and whoped them.
And the brasse of the waueofferinge was .lxx. hundred weyght, and two thousande, Ꟶ .iiii. hundred sycles.
And therwith he made the sockettes to the dore of the Tabernacle of witnesse, and the brasen altare and the brasen gredyren for it, withall the vessels of the alter,
and the sockettes of the courte rounde aboute, Ꟶ the sockettes for the courte gate, Ꟶ all the pynnes of the habitacyon, and all the pynnes of the courte rounde aboute.
And of the yelowe sylke, purple Ꟶ scarlet, they made the vestimentes of ministracyon to do seruice in the holy place, and made the holy garmentes for Aaron, as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And he made the Ephod of golde, yelow sylke, purple, scarlet Ꟶ whyte twyned sylke.
And they dyd beate the gold into thynne plates, and cutte it into wyers: to worke it in the yelowe sylke, purple, scarlet, and in the fyne whyte, with broderd worke.
And they made two sydes for it, to cloose them vp by the two edges.
And the brodrynge of the gyrdell that was vpon it, was of the same stuffe, and after the same worcke: of golde, yelowe sylk, purple, scarlet, and twyned whyte sylke, as the Lorde comaunded Moses.
And they wrought Onix stones cloosed in ouches of golde, and graued as sygnettes are grauen with the names of the chyldren of Israel,
and put them on the shoulders of the Ephod, that they shuld be stones for a remembraunce of the chyldren of Israel, as the Lord commaunded Moses.
And he made the breastlappe of connyng worcke, and lyke the worcke of the Ephod: euen of golde, yelowe sylke, purple, scarlet, Ꟶ twyned whyte sylke.
It was .iiii. square, and they made the breastlappe double, an hande breadeth longe and an hande breadeth brode.
And they fylled it with .iiii. rowes of stones. The fyrst rowe: a Sardios, a Topas and Smaragdus:
the seconde rowe, a Rubye a Saphir and a Diamonde:
in the .iii. rowe, Ligurios, an Achat, and an Amatist:
in the fourth rowe: a Turcas, and Onix, and a Iaspis. And they were closed in ouches of golde in theyr inclosers.
And the .xii. stones were grauen as sygnettes with the names of the chyldren of Israel: euery stone wt hys name, accordynge to the .xii. trybes.
And they made vpon the breastlappe, two fastenynge cheynes of wrethen worcke and pure golde.
And they made two hokes of golde, Ꟶ two golde rynges, and put the two rynges in the two corners of the breastlappe
And they put the two chaines of golde in the two ringes, in the corners of the brestlappe:
And the two endes of the two chaynes they fastened in the two hokes, and put them on the shulders of the Ephod vpon the fore front of it.
And they made two rynges of golde, and put them on the two corners of the breastlappe vpon the edge of it whych was on the insyde by the Ephod.
And they made two golden rynges, and put them on the two sydes of the Ephod, beneth on the foresyde of it and ouer agaynst hys felowe, aboue vpon the brodrynge of the Ephod,
and they strayned the breastlappe by hys rynges vnto the rynges of the Ephod, wyth a lace of yelowe sylke: that it myght be vpon the brodrynge of the Ephod, and that the breastlappe shulde not be lowsed from of the Ephod: as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And he made the tunycle vnto the Ephod of wouen worke, all together of yelowe sylke,
and there was an hole in the myddest of the tunycle, as the coler of a partlet, wyth a bonde rounde aboute the coler, that it shulde not rent.
And in the tunycle they made hemmes with pomgranates, of yelowe sylke, purple, scarlet, and whyte twyned sylke.
And they made lytle belles of pure golde, and put them amonge the pomgranates rounde aboute vpon the edge of the tunycle: a bell and a pomgranate,
a bell and a pomgranate rounde about the hemmes of the tunycle to mynistre in, as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And they made cotes of fyne whyte of wouen worcke for Aaron and hys sonnes,
Ꟶ a mytre of fyne whyte, and goodly bonettes of fyne whyte, and lynen breches of twyned whyte,
and a gyrdell of twyned whyte, yelowe sylke, purple and scarlet: euen of nedleworcke, as the Lord commaunded Moses.
And they made the plate for the holy croune of fyne golde, and wrote vpon it wyth grauen worcke, the holynes of the Lorde:
and tyed vnto it a lace of yelowe silke to fasten it an hye vpon the mytre, as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
Thus was all the worcke of the habitacyon and of the Tabernacle of witnesse fynysshed. And the chyldren of Israel dyd accordynge to all that the Lorde had commaunded Moses: Euen so dyd they.
And they brought the habitacyon vnto Moses: the tent and all his apparell, buttones, boordes, barres, pillers Ꟶ sockettes.
the coueryng of rams skynnes redd, and the couerynge of taxus skynnes, and the hangynge vayle,
the arcke of witnesse and the barres therof and the mercyseate:
the table and all the vessels therof, Ꟶ the shewbred:
the pure candelstycke, with the lampes therof: euen with the lampes to be prepared and all the vessels therof, and the oyle for lyghte:
the golden altare, and the anoyntynge oyle, and the swete cens, and the hangynge of the Tabernacle doore,
and the brasen alter wyth hys gredyren of brasse: his barres and all hys vessels, the lauer and hys fote:
the hangynges of the courte wyth hys pyllers and sockettes: the hangynge to the courte gate, and hys pynnes and coardes, and all the vessell of the seruyce of the habitacyon for the Tabernacle of witnesse:
the mynistrynge vestimentes to serue in the holy place, and the holy vestimentes for Aaron the preast, Ꟶ his sonnes raymentes to mynistre in,
accordinge to all that the Lorde commaunded Moses: euen so the chyldren of Israel made all the worke.
And Moses behelde all the worcke, and se, they had done it euen as the Lorde commaunded: euen so had they done, and Moses blessed them.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge.
In the fyrst daye of the first moneth, shalt thou sett vp the habitacyon, and the Tabernacle of witnesse,
and put therin the arcke of witnesse, and couer the arcke wyth the vayle,
and brynge in the table and apparell it accordynge to the order therof. And thou shalt brynge in the candelstycke, and lyght hys lampes,
and sett the cens alter of golde before the arcke of wytnesse, and put the hangynge at the dore of the habitacyon.
And set the burntofferyng alter before the dore of the habitacyon and Tabernacle of witnesse,
and sett the lauer betwene the Tabernacle of witnesse and the alter and put water therin,
and make the courte round aboute, and hange vp the hangynge at the courte gate.
And thou shalt take the anoyntynge oyle, and anoynt the habitacyon, and all that is therin, and halowe it with all the vessels therof, that it maye be holye.
And thou shalt anoynte the altare of burntofferynge and all hys vessels, and sanctifye the altare, that it may be an altare moost holy.
And thou shalt anoynte also the lauer and hys fote, and sanctifye it.
And thou shalt brynge Aaron and hys sonnes vnto the dore of the Tabernacle of witnesse, and washe them with water.
And thou shalt put vpon Aaron the holy vestymentes, and anoynte him, and sanctifye hym that he maye mynistre vnto me.
And thou shalt bringe his sonnes, and clothe them with garmentes,
and anoynte them as thou dyddest anoynt theyr father, that they maye minystre vnto me. For theyr anoyntynge shall be an euerlastynge presthode vnto them thorowe out theyr generacyons.
And Moses dyd accordynge to all that the Lorde commaunded hym: euen so dyd he.
Thus was the Tabernacle reared vp the fyrst daye in the fyrst moneth in the seconde yere.
And Moses reared vp the Tabernacle and fastened hys sockettes, and set vp the bordes therof, and put in the barres of it and reared vp hys pyllers,
and sprede abrode the tent ouer the habitacion, Ꟶ put the couerynge of the tent an hye aboue it: as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And he toke the testimonye, and put it in the arcke, Ꟶ set the barres to the arcke, Ꟶ put the mercyseate an hye vpon the arcke,
Ꟶ brought the arcke into the habitacyon, Ꟶ hanged vp the vayle, Ꟶ couered the arcke of witnesse, as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And he put the table in the Tabernacle of witnesse in the north syde of the habitacyon, (but without the vayle)
and set the bread in ordre before the Lorde, euen as the Lord had commaunded Moses.
And he put the candelsticke in the tabernacle of witnesse oueragaynst the table towarde the south syde of the habitacyon,
and set vp the lampes before the Lorde: as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And he put the golden alter in the tabernacle of witnesse before the vayle,
and brent swete cens theron, as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And he hanged vp the hangynge at the dore of the habitacyon,
and set the burntofferynge alter by the entrynge in of the habitacyon of the tabernacle of witnesse, and offred burntofferynges and meateofferynges theron, as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And he set the lauer betwene the tabernacle of witnesse and the alter, and poured water therin, to wash withall.
And Moses Aaron Ꟶ his sonnes wasshed their handes and their fete therat:
when they went into the tabernacle of witnesse, Ꟶ when they went to the alter they wasshed them selues as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And he reared vp the courte rounde aboute the habitacyon and the alter, Ꟶ set vp an hangynge at the courte gate: and so Moses fynysshed the worcke.
And the clowde couered the tabernacle of witnesse, and the glorye of the Lorde fylled the habitacyon.
And Moses coulde not entre into the tabernacle of witnesse, because the clowde abode theron, and the glorye of the Lorde fylled the habitacyon.
And when the clowde was taken vp from of the habitacyon, the chyldren of Israel toke theyr iorneys thorowe out theyr armyes.
And whan the clowde was not taken vp, they iorneyed not tyll it was taken vp:
for the clowde of the Lorde was vpon the habitacyon by daye, and fyre by nyght: in the syghte of all the house of Israel thorow out all theyr armyes.
And the Lorde called Moses, Ꟶ spake vnto hym oute of the tabernacle of witnesse sayinge.
Speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, and thou shalt saye vnto them. Yf a man of you brynge a sacrifyce vnto the Lorde, ye shall brynge youre sacrifyce from amonge these catell, euen from amonge the oxen and the shepe.
Yf hys sacrifyce be a burntofferynge, let hym offre a male of the oxen without blemyshe, and brynge hym (of hys own voluntary wyll) vnto the dore of the Tabernacle of witnesse before the Lorde.
And he shal put hys hande vpon the heade of the brent sacrifyce, and it shalbe accepted for him, to be hys attonement.
And he shall kyll the calfe of the droue before the Lord. And the prestes Aarons sonnes, shall brynge the bloude, and sprynckle it rounde aboute vpon the altare, that is by the dore of the Tabernacle of witnesse.
And then shall he slaye the burntofferynge, and hewe hym in peces.
And the sonnes of Aaron the preaste shall put fyre vpon the altare,
and put wodd vpon the fyre. And the preastes Aarons sonne shall laye the partes (euen the heade and the fatt) vpon the wodd that is on the fyre in the altare.
But the inwardes and the legges ther of shall he wasshe in water, and the preast shall burne all in the altare, that they maye be a burnt sacrifyce for a swete odoure vnto the Lorde.
And yf his sacrifyce be of the flockes (namely of the shepe or goates) let hym brynge a male without blemysh for a burntoffering.
And let hym kyll it on the northsyde of the alter, before the Lorde. And the Preastes Aarons sonnes shall spryncle the bloude of it rounde aboute vpon the alter.
And it shall be cut in peces: euen with hys heed and hys fatt, and the Preaste shall put them vpon the wodd that lyeth vpon the fyre in the alter.
But he shall washe the inwardes and the legges with water, and the preste shall bringe all together, and burne it vpon the alter for a burntofferynge of a swete sauoure vnto the Lorde.
If the burntofferynge for the sacrifyce of the Lorde be of the foules, he shal bring hys sacrifice of the turtill doues or of the yong pygeons.
And the preaste shall brynge it vnto the alter, and wrynge the necke a sundre of it, and burne it on the alter. But the bloud therof shall runne oute vpon, by the syde of the alter.
And he shal plucke awaye his croppe with hys fethers, and cast them besyde the alter on the easte parte in the place of asshes.
And he shall breke the wynges of it, but plucke them not asundre. And the Preaste shall burne it vpon the alter, euen vpon the wodd that is vpon the fyre, that it maye be a burnt sacrifyce for a swete sauoure vnto the Lord.
The soule that wyll offer a meateofferynge vnto the Lorde, the same offerynge shalbe of fyne floure, and he shall poure oyle, vpon it, and put franckencens theron,
and shall brynge it vnto Aarons sonnes the preastes. And he shall take therout his handfull of the floure, and of the oyle wyth all the franckencens, and the preaste shall burne it for a memoriall of hym vpon the alter: to be an offerynge for a swete sauoure vnto the Lorde.
And the remnaunt of the meateofferynge shalbe Aarons and his sonnes, a thynge most holy of the sacrifyces of the Lorde:
If thou bringe also a meatofferynge that is baken in the ouen, let it be a swete cake of fyne floure myngled with oyle, or an vnleuened wafer anoynted wt oyle.
If thy meateofferynge be baken in the fryenge pan, it shalbe of swete floure myngled with oyle.
And thou shalt mynce it small, Ꟶ powre oyle theron, that it maye be a meateofferynge.
And yf thy meateofferynge be a thynge broyled vpon the gredyren, let it be of floure myngled with oyle.
And thou shalt brynge the meateofferynge (that is made of these thynges) vnto the Lorde, and shalt delyuer it vnto the preaste, that he maye offre it vpon the alter,
and the preaste shall take of the meateofferynge a memoriall, and shal burne it vpon the alter: that it maye be a burntofferyng for a swete sauoure vnto the Lorde.
And that whyche is lefte of the meatofferynge shall be Aarons and hys sonnes, It is a thynge most holy of the offerynges of the Lorde.
All the meateofferynges which ye shall brynge vnto the Lord, shalbe made without leuen. For ye shal nether burne leuen nor honye in any offerynge of the Lorde:
Notwithstandynge ye shall brynge the fyrstlynges of them vnto the Lorde: but they shall not come vpon the alter for a swete sauoure.
All the meatofferynges also shalt thou season with salt: neyther shalt thou suffre the salt of the couenaunt of thy God to be lackynge from thy meateofferyng: but vpon all thyne offerynges thou shalt brynge salt.
And if thou offre a meateofferynge of thy fyrst rype frutes vnto the Lorde, thou shalt offre for the meateofferynge of thy fyrst frutes, eares of corne dryed by the fyre, and corne beaten as meale.
And thou shalt put oyle vpon it, and laye franckencens theron, that it maye be a meateofferynge.
And the preaste shall burne parte of the beaten corne Ꟶ parte of that oyle wyth all the franckencens, for a remembraunce. And it shalbe a sacrifyce vnto the Lorde.
And yf his sacrifyce be a peaceofferynge, and he take it from amonge the droues, (whether it be male or female) he shall brynge soch as is without blemyshe, before the Lorde:
Ꟶ put his hande vpon the heed of his offeringe, and kyll it at the dore of the tabernacle of witnesse. And Aarons sonnes the Preastes shall sprincle the bloude vpon the alter rounde aboute.
And he shall offre som what of the peaceofferynge to be a sacrifyce vnto the Lorde: euen the fatt that couereth the inwardes, and all the fatt that is aboute the inwardes:
and the two kydneys, Ꟶ the fatt that is on them and vpon the loynes: and the abundaunce that is on the lyuer shall he take awaye wyth the kydneyes.
And Aarons sonnes shal burne them on the alter vpon the burntsacrifyce whyche is vpon the wodd that is on the fyre to be a burnt sacrifyce for a swete sauoure vnto the Lorde.
If he brynge a peaceofferynge vnto the Lorde from of the flocke, let hym offre male or female: but without blemysh.
As yf he offre a shepe for hys sacrifyce, he shall brynge it before the Lorde,
and put hys hande vpon hys offerynges heed, and kyll it before the doore of the tabernacle of witnesse, and Aarons sonnes shall sprynkle the bloude therof rounde aboute the alter.
And of the peaceofferynge, let hym bryng a sacrifyce vnto the Lorde: the fatt therof, Ꟶ the rompe all together, whiche they shall take off, harde by the backe bone: and the fatt that couereth the inwardes, and all the fatt that is vpon the inwardes,
and the two kydneyes, and the fatt that is vpon them Ꟶ vpon the loynes, and the abundaunce that is vpon the lyuer shall he take awaye with the kydneyes.
And the preaste shall burne them vpon the alter, to be the foode of a sacryfyce vnto the Lorde.
If hys offerynge be a goate, he shall bringe it before the Lorde,
Ꟶ put his hande vpon the heade of it, and kyll it before the Tabernacle of the couenaunt, and the sonnes of Aaron shall sprinkle the bloude therof vpon the alter rounde about.
And he shall bryng therof, his offering, euen a sacrifyce vnto the Lorde: the fatt that couereth the in wardes, and all the fatt that is vpon the inwardes,
and the two kydneyes, Ꟶ the fatt that is vpon them and vpon the loynes, Ꟶ the abundaunce vpon the lyuer shall he take awaye with the kydneyes.
And the preaste shall burne them vpon the alter for the food of the sacrifyce:
that all the fat maye be a swete sauoure vnto the Lorde. Let it be a perpetuall statute for youre generacyons thorowe oute youre dwellynges, that ye eate nether fatt nor bloude.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge:
speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, and saye: Yf a soule synne thorowe ignoraunce, and hath done any of those thynges whyche the Lorde hath forbydden in hys commaundementes to be done.
As yf the Preast that is anoynted do synne, (accordynge to the synne of the people) let hym brynge for hys synne whyche he hath synned a yonge oxe without blemyshe vnto the Lorde for a synneofferynge.
And he shall brynge the yonge oxe vnto the dore of the tabernacle of witnesse before the Lorde, and shall put hys hande vpon the yonge oxe heade, and kill the yonge oxe before the Lorde.
And the Preaste that is anoynted shall take of the yonge oxe bloude, and brynge it into the tabernacle of witnesse,
and the preaste shall dyppe hys fynger in the bloude and sprynkle therof seuen tymes before the Lorde: euen before the hangynge of the holy place.
And he shall put some of the bloude before the Lorde, vpon the hornes of the alter of swete cens, which is in the tabernacle of witnesse, and shall powre all the bloude of the yonge oxe vnto the botome of the alter of burntofferynge, whyche is at the dore of the tabernacle of witnesse.
And he shall take awaye all the fat of the oxe that is for synne, the fatt that couereth the inwardes, and all the fatt that is aboute the inwardes,
and the two kydneyes, and the fatt that is vpon them, and vpon the loynes, and the abundaunce of the lyuer shall he take awaye with the kydneyes:
as it was taken awaye in the oxe of the peaceofferynges, and let the preaste burne them vpon the altare of burntofferyng.
But the skyne of the yong oxe, and all hys fleshe, with hys heed, and hys legges, wyth hys in wardes, and hys donge,
shall he beare oute and carye the yong oxe altogether oute of the hoste vnto a clene place: euen where the asshes are powred out, and burne hym there on wodd in the fyre: euen by the place where the asshes are cast oute, shall he be brent.
If the hole congregacyon of Israel synne thorowe ignoraunce, and the thynge be hyd from theyr eyes, so that they haue committed any of those thynges which the Lorde hath forbydden to be done in hys commaundementes, and haue offended.
Whan the synne which they haue synned in, is knowne, the congregacyon shall brynge a yonge oxe for the synne, and brynge hym before the tabernacle of witnesse,
and the elders of the multytude shall put theyr handes vpon the heed of the yonge oxe before the Lorde. And the yonge oxe shalbe slayne before the Lorde.
And the Preast that is anoynted, shall bringe of hys bloude into the tabernacle of witnesse,
and the Preaste shall dyppe hys fynger in the bloude, and sprinkle it seuen tymes before the Lorde: euen before the vayle.
And shall put of the bloud vpon the hornes of the alter, whiche is before the Lord in the tabernacle of witnesse, and shall poure all the bloude vnto the botome of the alter of burntofferynge whyche is before the dore of the tabernacle of witnesse,
and shall take all hys fatt from hym, and burne it vpon the alter,
and shall do with thys yonge oxe, as he dyd with the yonge oxe for synne: euen so shall he do wt thys. And the Preaste shall make an attonement for them, and it shalbe forgeuen them.
And he shall bringe thys yonge oxe without the hoste, and burne hym as he burned the fyrst. For it is an oblacyon for the synne of the congregacyon.
When a Lorde synneth, and commytteth thorow ignoraunce any of these thinges (which the Lorde hys God hath forbydden to be done in hys commaundementes) and hath offended.
And yf his synne be shewed vnto him which he hath done, he shall brynge hys offerynge: euen an he goate without blemyshe,
and laye hys hande vpon the heed of the he goat, and kill it in the place where the burntofferinge is vsed to be kylled before the Lord
For it is a synne offering. And let the preaste take of the bloude of the offerynge with hys fynger, and put it vpon the hornes of the burntofferinge alter, and powre hys bloude vnto the botome of the burntofferyng alter,
Ꟶ burne all his fatt vpon the alter, as the fat of the peaceofferynges. And the Preast shall make an attonement for hym, as concernynge his synne, and it shalbe forgeuen hym.
If one of the comen people of the lande synne thorowe ignoraunce, and commytte any of the thynges whiche the Lorde hath forbydden in hys commaundementes to be done, and so hath trespaced:
Yf hys synne whyche he hath synned, come to his knowlege, he shall bring for his offering, a she goate from amonge the flockes, without blemyshe for hys synne which he hath synned,
and laye hys hande vpon the heed of the offeringe, and slee it in the place of burntofferynges.
And the preaste shall take of the bloude therof wt hys fynger, and put it vpon the hornes of the burntofferinge alter, and poure all the bloud vnto the botome of the alter,
and shall take awaye all hys fatt, as the fatt of the peace offerynges is taken awaye. And the preaste shall burne it vpon the alter, that it maye be a swete sauoure vnto the Lord, and the preaste shall make an attonement for hym, and it shalbe forgeuen hym.
And yf he brynge a shepe for a synne offeryng, he shall bringe a female without blemyshe,
and laye hys hande vpon the heed of the offerynge, and slee it for a synofferynge in the place where they kyll the burntofferyng.
And the preaste shall take of the bloude of the offerynge with hys fynger, and put it vpon the hornes of the burntofferinge alter, Ꟶ shall poure the bloude therof vnto the botome of the alter.
And he shall take a waye all the fatt therof, as the fat of the shepe of the peace offerynge is wont to be taken a waye. And the preaste shall burne it vpon the alter, that it maye be the Lordes burntsacrifyce, and the Preaste shall make an attonemente for hys synne, that he hath committed, and it shalbe forgeuen him.
Yf a soule synne and heare the voyce of swerynge, and is a witnesse: whether he hath sene or knowne of it, yf he haue not vttered it, he shall bere hys synne.
Ether yf a soule touche any vnclene thynge: whether it be the caryon of an vnclene beest, or of vnclene catell, or vnclene worme, and is not ware of it: beholde, he is vnclene and hath offended.
Ether yf he touche any vnclennesse of man (whatsoeuer vnclenesse it be that a man is wont to be defiled withall) and is not ware of it, and commeth to the knowledge of it, he hath trespased.
Ether yf a soule sweare and pronounceth with hys lyppes to do euell or to do good (whatsoeuer it be that a man vseth to pronounce with an othe) and the thynge be hyd from hym, and commeth to the knowledge of it, and hath offended in one of these.
And it shall come to passe that when he hath synned in one of these thynges. he shall confesse that he hath synned in that thynge.
Therfore shall he brynge hys trespace offerynge vnto the Lorde, for hys synne whiche he hath synned. A female from the flocke, a lambe or a she goate, for a synne offerynge. And the Preaste shall make an attonement for hym concernynge hys synne.
And yf he be not able to brynge soche a shepe, he shall brynge for hys trespace which he hath synned, two turtyll doues or two yonge pygeons vnto the Lord, one for a synne offerynge, and the other for a burntofferynge.
And he shall brynge them vnto the Preaste, whiche shall offer the synneoffering fyrst, and wringe the necke a sundre of it, but plucke it not clene of.
And he shall sprynkle of the bloude of the synne offerynge vpon the syde of the alter, and the reste of the bloude shall he powre by the botome of the alter: for it is a synneofferynge.
And he shall offer the seconde for a burntofferynge as the maner is: and so shall the Preaste make an attonement for hym (for the synne whiche he hath synned) and it shalbe forgeuen hym.
And yf he be not able to brynge two turtyll doues or two younge pygeons, then he that hath synned shall brynge for hys offerynge: the tenth parte of an Epha of fyne floure for a synofferynge, but put none oyle there to, nether put any franckencence theron, for it is a synneofferynge.
And let the preaste offre it, and the preaste shall take hys handfull of it, for a remembraunce therof, and burne it vpon the alter, to be a sacrifyce for the Lorde, it is a synneofferynge.
And the Preaste shall make an attonement for hym as touchynge his synne that he hath synned in one of these, Ꟶ it shalbe forgeuen. And the remnaunte shalbe the Preastes, as a meatofferynge.
And the Lord spake vnto Moses, saying:
Yf a soule trespace and synne thorowe ignoraunce in thynges that are consecrated vnto the Lorde, let hym brynge for hys trespace vnto the Lorde a ram without blemyshe out of the flockes, valued in money at two sycles after the sycle of the sanctuary, that it maye be for a trespaceofferinge.
And he shall make amendes for the harme that he hath done in the holy thing, and let him put the fyfte parte more therto, and geue it vnto the Preast. And the Preaste shall make an attonement for him with the ram that is for the trespace. and it shalbe forgeuen hym.
Yf a soule synne, and commyt any of these thynges whyche are forbydden to be done by the commaundementes of the Lorde: and wyst it not, and hath offended, he shall beare hys synne,
and shall brynge a ram withoute blemyshe out of the stocke that is estemed to be worthe a trespace offering, vnto the preaste. And the Preaste shall make an attonement for hym concernynge hys ignoraunce, wherin he erred and was not ware, and it shalbe forgeuen hym.
Thys is a trespaceofferinge, whyche he offred vnto the Lorde for the trespace.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses saying:
yf a soule synne and trespace agaynst the Lorde, and denye vnto hys neyghboure that which was taken hym to kepe, or that was put into hys hande, or doth violent robbery or wronge vnto hys neyghboure,
or yf he haue founde that whych was loste, and denyeth it, and swereth falsely, vpon whatsoeuer thynge it be that a man doth, Ꟶ synneth therin:
Yf he haue so synned or trespaced, he shall restore agayne that he toke violently awaye, or the wronge whych he dyd, or that whych was delyuered him to kepe, or the lost thinge which he founde,
and all that, aboute whych he hath sworne falsely, he shall restore it agayne in the whole summe, and shall adde the fyfth parte moare thereto, and geue it vnto hym to whome it pertayneth the same daye that he offereth for his trespace,
and let hym brynge for hys trespace vnto the Lord, a Ram wythout blemishe out of the flocke (that is estemed worth a trespace offrynge) vnto the preaste.
And the preast shall make an attonement for hym, before the Lorde, Ꟶ it shall be forgeuen hym, whatsoeuer thynge it be that he hath done Ꟶ trespaced therin.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
Commaunde Aaron and hys sonnes sayinge: this is the lawe of the burntoffring. The burntoffrynge shall be vpon the harth of the alter all nyght vnto the mornynge, Ꟶ the fyre shall be kyndled on the alter.
And the Preaste shall put on hys lynen albe, and hys lynen breches vpon hys fleshe, and take awaye the asshes vpon the whych the fyre consumed the burnt sacrifyce in the alter, and he shall put them besyde the alter,
and put of his rayment, and put on other and carye the asshes out wythout the host vnto a clene place.
The fyre vpon the alter shall burne styll and neuer be put out. But the preaste shall laye wodd on it euery daye in the mornyng, Ꟶ put the burntsacrifice vpon it, and he shall burne theron the fatt of the peaceoffrynges.
The fyre shall euer burne vpon the alter, and neuer go out.
Thys is the lawe of the meatoffrynge: whych Aarons sonnes shall brynge before the Lorde, euen before the alter:
Ꟶ one of them shall take hys handfull of the floure of the meatoffrynge and of the oyle and all the franckencens whych is vpon the meatoffrynge, and shall burne it vnto a remembraunce vpon the alter for aswete sauoure, euen a memoriall of it vnto the Lord.
And of the rest therof, shall Aaron and hys sonnes eate: vnleuened shall it be eaten in the holy place: euen in the courte of the tabernacle of witnesse they shall eate it.
It shall not be baken wyth leuen. I haue geuen it vnto them for theyr porcion of my sacrifyces. It is most holye, as is the synne offrynge and trespaceoffrynge.
All the males amonge the chyldren of Aaron shall eate of it: It shalbe a statute for euer in youre generacyons concernynge the sacrifyces of the Lorde let euery one that toucheth it, be holy.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses saying:
this is the offringe of Aaron and of hys sonnes which they shall offer vnto the Lorde in the daye when he is anoynted: the tenth parte of an Epha of floure, for a meatoffrynge perpetuall: halfe in the mornynge and halfe at nyghte:
In the fryenge pan it shalbe made wyth oyle. And when it is fryed, thou shalt brynge it in, and the baken offrynges of this oblacyon mynsed small, shalt thou offer for a swete sauoure vnto the Lorde.
And that Preast of his sonnes that is anoynted in hys steade, shall offer it: It is the Lordes dutye for euer: it shall be burnt all together.
For euery meateoffrynge that is made for the Preaste, shalbe burnt all together, and shall not be eaten.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
speake vnto Aaron, and vnto hys sonnes and saye: Thys is the lawe of the synne offring. In the place where the burntoffrynge is kylled, shall the synne offryng be kylled before the Lorde, for it is moost holy.
The Preast that offreth it, shall eate it: In the holy place shall it be eaten: euen in the courte of the tabernacle of wytnesse.
No man touche the fleshe therof, saue he that is halowed. And who so sprenkleth of the bloude therof vpon any garment thou shalt washe it in the holy place, there as it is sprenkled vpon.
But the erthen pot that it is soden in, shall be broken. And yf it be sodden in a brasen pot, it shalbe scowred, and rynsed in the water.
All the males amonge the Preastes shall eate therof, for it is most holy.
And no synneoffrynge, whose bloude is brought into the tabernacle of wytnesse to reconcyle wyth all in the holy place, shall be eaten: but shalbe burnt in the fyre.
Thys is the lawe of the trespaceoffrynge: it is most holy.
In the place where they kyll the burntoffringe, shall they kyll the trespaceoffring also: and hys bloude shall he sprynkle rounde aboute vpon the alter.
All the fat ther of shall they offer: the roumpe and the fat therof that couereth the inwardes,
and the .ii. kydneys, and the fatt that is on them and vpon the loynes: and the aboundaunce that is on the lyuer shalt thou take awaye wyth the kydneyes:
Ꟶ the Preast shall burne them vpon the altare, to be a sacrifyce vnto the Lorde: for it is a trespace offerynge.
All the males amonge the preastes shall eate therof in the holy place, for it is most holy.
As the synne offrynge is, so is the trespaceoffringe, one lawe serueth for both, and it shall be the Preastes that reconcyleth ther wt.
And the Preaste that offereth any mans burntoffringe, shall haue the skynne of the burntoffringe which he hath offred.
And all the meatoffrynge that is baken in the ouen, and that is dressed vpon the gredyren, Ꟶ in the fryenge pan, shalbe the Preastes that offreth it.
And euery meateofferinge that is myngled with oyle and that is drye, shall pertayne vnto all the sonnes of Aaron, and one shall haue as moche as another.
Thys is the lawe of the peaceoffringe, whan it is offred vnto the Lorde.
If he offer it to geue thanckes, he shall bringe vnto hys thanckoffrynge, swete kakes myngled wyth oyle, Ꟶ swete wafers anoynted wt oyle, and kakes myngled with oyle of fyne floure fryed.
He shall brynge hys offerynge vpon kakes of leuended bread for hys peaceoffringes to geue thankes:
and of all the sacrifice he shall offer one for an heue offringe vnto the Lorde, and it shall be the Preastes that sprynckled the bloude of the peaceoffringes.
And the fleshe of the thankoffrynge in hys peaceoffrynges shalbe eaten the same daye that it is offred. And let hym laye vp nothynge of it vntyll the morowe.
But yf he offre hys sacrifyce by reason of a vowe, or of hys awne frewyll, it shall be eaten the same daye that he offreth hys sacrifyce. And yf ought remayne vntyll the morowe, it maye be eaten:
but as moche of the offered fleshe as remayneth vnto the thyrde daye, shalbe burnt wyth fyre.
And yf any of the fleshe of hys peaceoffrynges be eaten in the thyrde daye, then shall he that offreth it, obtayne no fauoure nether shall it be rekened vnto hym: but shalbe an abhomynacyon. Therfore the soule that eateth of it, shall beare hys synne.
And the flesh that toucheth any vncleane thynge shall not be eaten, but burnt wyth fyre: and all that be cleane, shall eate the flesh.
But yf any soule eate of the flesh of the peaceoffrynge that pertayneth vnto the Lorde hauynge hys vnclennesse vpon hym: the same soule shall peryshe from amonge hys people.
Moreouer, the soule that doth touche any vnclene thynge, that is of the vnclennesse of man or of any vnclene beast or any abhomynacyon that is vnclene: and then eate of the flesh of the peaceoffrynge whych pertayneth vnto the Lorde, that soule shall perysh from hys people.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, saying:
speake vnto the chyldren of Israel and saye. Ye shall eate no maner fatt of oxen of shepe and of goates:
neuerthelater the fatt of the beaste that dyeth alone, and the fatt of that whych is torne wyth wylde beastes, shall be occupied in any maner of vse, but ye shall in no wise eate of it.
For whosoeuer eateth the fatt of the beaste of whych men vse to brynge an offrynge vnto the Lorde, that soule that eateth it, shall perysh from his people.
Moreouer, ye shall eate no maner of bloude, whether it be of foule or of beast.
Whatsouer soule it be that eateth any maner of bloude, the same soule shall perishe from hys people.
And the Lorde talked wt Moses, sayinge:
speake vnto the chyldren of Israel and saye: he that bryngeth hys peaceoffringe vnto the Lorde, let hym brynge hys gyfte vnto the Lorde of hys peaceoffrynge:
let his awne handes brynge the offrynges of the Lorde: euen the fatt wyth the brest shall he brynge: that the brest maye be waued for a waue offringe before the Lorde.
And the Preast shall burne the fatt vpon the alter, and the brest shalbe Aarons Ꟶ hys sonnes.
And the ryght shoulder shall ye geue vnto the Preaste, for an heueoffrynge, of youre peaceoffrynges.
The same that offreth the bloude of the peaceoffringes and the fatt, amonge the sonnes of Aaron, shall haue the ryght shoulder for his parte,
for the wauebrest and the heueshoulder haue I taken of the chyldren of Israel, euen of their peaceoffringes, and haue geuen it vnto Aaron Ꟶ vnto hys sonnes: by a statute for euer of the chyldren of Israel.
Thys is the anoyntynge of Aaron and the anoyntynge of his sonnes in the sacrifices of the Lorde, in the daye when he offered them to be Preastes vnto the Lorde.
And these be the sacrifyces which the Lord commaunded to be geuen them (in the daye of theyr anoyntynge) of the chyldren of Israel, by a statute for euer in theyr generacyons.
Thys is the lawe of the burntoffrynge and of the meatoffrynge, and of the sacrifyce for synne and trespace, for consecracyon Ꟶ for the peaceoffrynge:
which the Lorde commaunded Moses in the mount of Synai, when he commaunded the chyldren of Israel to offer their sacrifyces vnto the Lorde in the wyldernesse of Synai.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge:
take Aaron Ꟶ hys sonnes with him, and the vestures Ꟶ the anoyntynge oyle, and a yonge oxe for synne, Ꟶ two rammes, and a basket wyth swete breed:
and gether thou all the congregacyon together vnto the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse.
And Moses dyd as the Lorde commaunded hym, and the people were gathered together vnto the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse.
And Moses sayde vnto the congregacyon: this is the thynge which the Lorde commaunded to be done.
And Moses brought Aaron Ꟶ hys sonnes, and wasshed them with water,
and put vpon hym the albe, Ꟶ gyrded him wt a girdle, Ꟶ put vpon hym the tunycle, and put the Ephod theron, which he gyrded wyth the broderd gyrdell that was in the Ephod, and bounde it vnto hym therwyth.
And he put the brestlappe theron, and put in the brestlappe Urim Ꟶ thumim.
And he put the myter vpon hys heed, and put vpon the myter (euen vpon the forefront of hys face) the golden plate or the holy croune, as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And Moses toke the anoyntynge oyle, and anoynted the Tabernacle, and all that was therin, and sanctified them,
and sprynkled therof vpon the alter seuen tymes, and anoynted the alter, and all hys vessels, the lauer Ꟶ his fote, to sanctifye them.
And he powred of the anoyntynge oyle vpon Aarons heed, and anoynted hym, to sanctifye hym.
And Moses brought Aarons sonnes, Ꟶ put albes vpon them, and gyrded them with gyrdels, Ꟶ put bonettes vpon their heedes: as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And he brought the yonge oxe for synne, And Aaron and hys sonnes put theyr handes vpon the heed of the yonge oxe that was for synne.
And Moses slewe hym, Ꟶ toke of the bloude, which he put vpon the hornes of the alter rounde about wt hys fynger, Ꟶ purifyed it, and powred the bloude vnto the botome of the alter, Ꟶ sanctifyed it, and reconcyled it.
And he toke all the fatt that was vpon the inwardes, and the abundaunce of the lyuer and the two kydneyes, and theyr fatt, Ꟶ Moses burned it vpon the alter.
But the yonge oxe and hys hyde, his flesh and his donge, he burnt wyth fyre without the hoste, as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And he brought the ram for the burntoffrynge, and Aaron and hys sonnes put theyr handes vpon the heed of the ram,
which Moses kylled, and sprynkled the bloude vpon the alter rounde about,
and Moses cut the ram in peces and burnt the heed, the peces and the fatte,
and wasshed the inwardes Ꟶ the legges in water, and Moses burnt the ram euery whyt vpon the alter, for a burntsacrifyce, that it myght be a swete sauoure, and an offrynge vnto the Lorde, as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And he brought the other ram, namely the ram of consecracyon Ꟶ Aaron and his sonnes put theyr handes vpon the heed of the ram:
which Moses slewe, and toke of the bloude of it, and put it vpon the typpe of Aarons ryghte eare, Ꟶ vpon the thombe of hys ryght hande, Ꟶ vpon the gret too of his ryght fote.
And Moses brought Aarons sonnes, Ꟶ put of the bloude on the typpe of the ryghte eare of them, Ꟶ vpon the thombes of theyr ryghte handes, and vpon the greate tooes of theyr righte fete, and Moses sprinkled the bloude vpon the alter rounde aboute.
And he toke the fatte and the roumpe, and all the fat that was vpon the inwardes, and the aboundaunce of the lyuer, and the .ij. kydneyes wt theyr fatt, Ꟶ the ryghte shoulder.
And out of the basket of swete bread that was before the Lorde, he toke one swete cake of oyled bred, Ꟶ one wafer, Ꟶ put them on the fatt Ꟶ vpon the ryghte shoulder:
Ꟶ put altogether vpon Aarons handes, Ꟶ vpon hys sonnes handes, Ꟶ waued it a waue offrynge before the Lorde.
And Moses toke them from of their handes, Ꟶ burnt them vpon the alter, euen vpon the burntoffrynge alter: for it was the sacrifyce of consecracyon, for a swete sauoure Ꟶ a sacrifyce vnto the Lorde.
And Moses toke the breaste and waued it for a waue offrynge before the Lord, for it was of the ram of the consecration, and it was Moses parte, as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And Moses toke of the anoyntynge oyle, and of the bloude whych was vpon the alter, and sprynkled it vpon Aaron and vpon hys vestimentes, vpon hys sonnes Ꟶ on hys sonnes vestimentes wyth him, and sanctyfyed Aaron, his vestures Ꟶ hys sonnes, Ꟶ hys sonnes vestures wyth hym.
And Moses sayde vnto Aaron and hys sonnes: boyle the fleshe in the dore of the tabernacle of witnesse, and there eate it wyth the bread that is in the basket of consecracyon, as I commaunded, sayinge: Aaron and hys sonnes shall eate it:
Ꟶ that whych remayneth of the bread, shall ye burne wyth fyre.
And ye shall not departe from the doore of the tabernacle of wytnesse .vij. dayes, vntyll the dayes of youre consecracyon be at an ende. For .vij. dayes shall he fyll youre hand
as he dyd thys daye: euen so the Lorde hath commaunded to do, to reconcyle you wyth all.
Therfore shall ye abide in the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse daye and nyght seuen dayes longe: Ꟶ kepe the watche of the Lord, and ye shall not dye: for so I am commaunded.
And so Aaron Ꟶ his sonnes dyd all thynges whych the Lorde commaunded by the hande of Moses.
And it fortuned that in the eight daye, Moses called Aaron and hys sonnes, and the elders of Israel:
and sayde vnto Aaron: take the a calfe, a yonge one out of the droue, for synne, Ꟶ a ram for a burntoffrynge: both wythout blemysh, and brynge them before the Lorde.
And vnto the chyldren of Israel thou shalt speake, sayinge: take ye an he goote for synne, Ꟶ a calfe and a lambe bothe two of a yeare olde, wythout blemysh for a burnt sacrifyce,
and an oxe and a Ram for peaceoffrynges, to offer before the Lord, and a meateoffrynge myngled with oyle, for to daye the Lord will appere vnto you.
And they brought that (which Moses commaunded) before the tabernacle of wytnesse, and all the congregacyon came and stode before the Lord.
And Moses sayd: this is the thing, whych the Lorde commaunded that ye shulde do: and the glorye of the Lorde shall appeare vnto you.
And Moses sayde vnto Aaron: go vnto the alter and offer thy sacrifyce for synne, and make an attonement for the and for the people: Ꟶ thou shalt offer the offrynge of the people, to reconcyle them, as the Lorde commaunded.
Aaron therfore went vnto the alter, and slewe the calfe whych he had for synne.
And the sonnes of Aaron broughte the bloude vnto hym, and he dypte hys fynger in the bloude, and put it vpon the hornes of the alter, and powred the bloude vnto the botome of the alter.
But the fatt and the two kydneyes and the abundaunce of the lyuer of the synne offrynge, he burnt vpon the alter, as the Lorde commaunded Moses:
The fleshe and the hyde, he burnt wyth fyre without the hoste.
And he slewe the burnt offrynge and Aarons sonnes brought vnto hym the bloude, whych he sprynkled rounde about vpon the alter.
And they brought the burntoffrynge vnto hym with the peces therof, and the head: and he burnt it vpon the alter,
and dyd wasshe the inwardes and the legges, and burnt them vpon the burntoffrynge in the alter.
And then he broughte the peoples offryng, takinge the goote that the people had for the sacrifyce of synne, and slewe it and offered it for synne, as he dyd the fyrst.
And brought the burntoffrynge, and offered it as the maner was
and brought the meatoffrynge, and fylled hys hande therof, and burnt it vpon the alter, besyde the burntsacrifice of the mornynge.
He slewe also the oxe Ꟶ the Ram for the peace offrynge, that the people had for them selues: and Aarons sonnes brought vnto hym the bloude, whych he sprynkled vpon the alter rounde about,
and toke the fatt of the oxe and of the Ram, the roumpe, and the fatt that couereth the inwardes and the kydneyes Ꟶ the abundaunce of the lyuer:
and they put the fatt vpon the brestes, and he burnt the fatt vpon the alter:
but the brestes and the ryght shoulders Aaron waued for a waueoffrynge before the Lorde, as the Lord commaunded Moses.
And Aaron lyfte vp hys hande ouer the people, and blessed them, and came doune from offrynge of the synne offringe, burntoffringes Ꟶ peace offrynges.
And Moses Ꟶ Aaron went in to the tabernacle of witnesse, Ꟶ came out, and blessed the people, and the glorye of the Lorde appered vnto all the people.
And there came a fyre out from before the Lorde, Ꟶ consumed vpon the alter the burntoffryng Ꟶ the fatt. Whych whan all the people sawe, they gaue thankes, and felle on theyr faces.
And Nadab and Abihu the sonnes of Aaron toke ether of them his censor, Ꟶ put fyre therin, Ꟶ put cens ther vpon, Ꟶ offred straunge fyre before the Lord whych he commaunded them not,
Ꟶ there went a fyre out from the Lorde, and consumed them, Ꟶ they dyed before the Lord.
Then Moses sayde vnto Aaron: thys is it that the Lorde spake sayinge: I wyll be sanctifyed in them that come nye me and before all the people I wilbe glorifyed. And Aaron helde hys peace.
And Moses called Misael and Elsapham the sonnes of Oziel the vncle of Aaron, and sayde vnto them: come on, carye youre brethren from the holy place out of the hoste.
And they went to them, and caryed them in theyr albes out of the hoste, as Moses had sayde.
And Moses sayde vnto Aaron and vnto Eleazar and Ithamar his sonnes vncouer not youre heedes, nether rent youre clothes, lest ye dye, and lest wrath come vpon all the people: But let youre brethren the hole housse of Israel bewepe the burnynge whych the Lord hath kyndled.
And go not ye out from the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse, lest ye dye: for the anoyntynge oyle of God is vpon you. And they dyd as Moses sayde.
And the Lorde spake vnto Aaron, saying:
Thou shalt not drincke wyne Ꟶ stronge dryncke, thou and thy sonnes that are wyth the: when ye go into the tabernacle of wytnesse, lest ye dye. Let it be a lawe for euer thorowe out youre generacyons,
and that ye may put difference betwene holy Ꟶ vnholy, betwene vncleane Ꟶ cleane,
Ꟶ that ye may teach the children of Israel all the statutes whych the Lorde hath spoken vnto them by the hande of Moses.
And Moses sayde vnto Aaron and vnto Eleazar and Ithamar hys sonnes that were lefte: take the meatoffrynge that remayneth of the sacrifyces of the Lorde, and eate it wythout leuen besyde the alter, for it is most holy:
ye shall eate it in the holy place, because it is thy dutye and thy sonnes dutye of the sacrifyces of the Lorde: for so I am commaunded.
And the wauebrest and heueshoulder shall ye eate in a cleane place: thou and thy sonnes and thy daughters with the. For they be thy dutye and thy sonnes dutye geuen out of the peaceoffrynges of the chyldren of Israel.
The heueshoulder and the wauebrest shall they brynge in wyth the sacryfyces of the fatt, to waue it before the Lorde, and it shalbe thyne and thy sonnes wyth the: by a lawe for euer, as the Lorde hath commaunded.
And Moses sought the goate that was offred for synne, and se, it was burnt. And he was angrye with Eleazar and Ithamar the sonnes of Aaron, whyche were lefte alyue, sayinge:
wherfore haue ye not eaten the synne offerynge in the holy place, seynge it is moost holye: and God hath geuen it you, to bere the synne of the congregacyon, to make agrement for them before the Lord?
Beholde, the bloud of it was not brought in within the holy place. Ye shulde haue eaten it in the holy place, as I commaunded.
And Aaron sayde vnto Moses: beholde, thys daye haue they offered theyr synneoffrynge and theyr burntoffrynge before the Lorde, and it is chaunced me after thys maner. And yf I had eaten the sacrifyce to daye, shulde it haue bene accepted in the syght of the Lorde?
And when Moses hearde that, he was content.
And the Lord spake vnto Moses and Aaron and sayde vnto them:
speake vnto the children of Israel, Ꟶ saye these are the beastes whych ye shall eate, amonge all the catell that are on the earth:
whatsoeuer parteth the hoofe, and deuydeth it into two clawes, and chaweth cud amonge the beastes, that shall ye eate.
Neuerthelesse, these shall ye not eate, of them that chewe cud, Ꟶ deuydeth the hoofes: as is the camell, whych chaweth cud, but he deuydeth not the hoofe, therfore is he vncleane vnto you,
euen so the conye, whych chaweth the cud but deuydeth not the hoofe: He is vncleane to you.
And the hare though he chawe the cud, yet because he deuideth not the hoofe, he is therfore vncleane to you.
And agayne, the swyne, though he deuyde the hoffe in to two clawes, yet he chaweth not the cud. He is vncleane to you.
Of theyr fleshe shall ye not eate, Ꟶ theyr carkasses shall ye not touche, but let them be vncleane to you.
These shall ye eate of all that are in the waters: whatsoeuer hath synnes and skales in the waters, sees and ryuers, that shall ye eate.
And all that haue not fynnes and skales in the see and ryuers, of all that moue and lyue in the waters, let them be abhominacyon vnto you:
Ye shall not eate of theyr flesh, but abhorre theyr carkases.
Let all that haue no fynnes nor scales in the waters, be abhomynable vnto you.
These are they whych ye shall abhorre amonge the foules, and that ought not to be eaten, for they are an abhomynacyon. The egle, the goshauke, Ꟶ the cormoraunte,
the vultur and the kyte after hys kynde,
and all rauens after theyr kynde,
the estrych, the nyghtcrowe, the coockowe, and the owle after hys kynde,
the falcon, the storcke, the great oule,
the backe, the pellycane, the pye,
the heron, the Iaye after his kynde, the lapwynge: and the swalowe.
Let all foules that crepe Ꟶ goo vpon all foure, be an abominacyon vnto you.
Yet these maye ye eate, of euery crepynge thynge that hath wynges and goo apon foure fete: euen those that haue knees aboue vpon theyr fete, to lepe wyth all vpon the erthe,
euen these of them ye maye eate the. Arbe after hys kynde: the Selaam after hys kynde: the Hargol after hys kynde, and the Hagab after hys kynde.
All other foules that moue and haue foure fete, shalbe abhominacyon vnto you.
In soche ye be vncleane, and whosoeuer toucheth the carkas of them, shalbe vncleane vnto the euen:
and whosoeuer bereth the carkasse of them, shall washe hys clothes, and be vncleane vntyll euen.
And euery beast that hath hoofe and deuydeth it not into two clawes, ner chaweth cud, suche are vnclene vnto you: euery one that toucheth them, shalbe vncleane.
And what soeuer goeth vpon hys handes amonge all maner beastes that goo on all foure fete, such are vnclene vnto you: Ꟶ who so doth touche theyr carkasse shalbe vnclene vntyll the euen.
And he that beareth the carkasse of them, shall wasshe hys clothes Ꟶ be vncleane vntyll the euen, for soche are vncleane vnto you.
And let these also be vncleane to you, amonge the thynges that crepe vpon the erth, the weasell, and the mouse, Ꟶ the toade, after theyr kynde,
the hedgehogge, the stellio, the lacerte, the snayle, and the molle:
these are vncleane to you amonge all that crepe: whosoeuer doth touche them when they be dead, shalbe vncleane vntyll the euen.
And whatsoeuer any of the dead carkasses of them doth fall vpon, shalbe vncleane: whether it be vessell of wodd, or rayment, or skynne, or bagge, or what soeuer vessell it be that any worke is wroughte in. And it must be plunged in the water, Ꟶ it shall be vncleane vntyll the euen, and so shall it be clensed.
All maner of erthen vessell wherinto any of them falleth, shalbe vncleane, wyth all that ther in is: and it shall be broken.
All maner meate also that is vsed to be eaten yf any soche water come vpon it, it shalbe vncleane. And all maner dryncke that is vsed to be droncke in all maner soche vessels, shalbe vncleane.
And euery thynge that theyr carcase falleth vpon, shalbe vncleane: Whether it be ouen or kettell, let it be broken. For they are vncleane, and shalbe vncleane vnto you:
Neuerthelater, yet the fountaynes and welles Ꟶ collection of waters shalbe cleane still. And whoso toucheth theyr carkasse, shall be vncleane.
If the dead carkasse of any soche fall vpon any seed vsed to sowe, it shall yet be cleane styll:
but and yf any water be powred vpon the seed, Ꟶ a deed carkesse fall theron, it shalbe vncleane vnto you.
If any beast of whych ye maye eate, dye and any man touche the dead carkasse therof, he shalbe vncleane vntyll the euen.
He that eateth of the dead carkasse of it, shall wasshe hys clothes and be vncleane vntyll the euen. And he also that beareth the carkasse of it, shall wasshe his clothes, and be vncleane vntyll euen.
Let euery crepinge thynge that crepeth vpon the erth be an abhominacyon, and not be eaten.
Whatsoeuer goeth vpon the brest, and whatsoeuer goeth vpon foure, or that hath moo fete amonge all crepynge thynges that crepe vpon the erth, of that se ye eate not for they are abhomynable.
Ye shall not make youre soules abhominable wyth nothing that crepeth, nether make your selues vncleane wyth them: that ye shulde be defyled therby.
For I am the Lorde youre God. Be sanctifyed therfore, and ye shall be holy for I am holy: and ye shall not defyle youre soules wyth any maner of crepynge thynge, that crepeth vpon the erth.
For I am the Lorde, that brought you out of the lande of Egypt, to be youre God: ye shall be holy therfore, for I am holy.
Thys is the lawe of beastes and foules Ꟶ of euery lyuynge creature that moueth in the waters, and of euery creature that crepeth vpon the erth,
that there maye be a difference betwene the vncleane Ꟶ clene, and betwene the beaste that maye be eaten, Ꟶ the beaste that ought not to be eaten.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
speake vnto the chyldren of Israel and saye: yf a woman hath conceaued, Ꟶ borne a manchylde, she shalbe vncleane seuen dayes: euen in lyke maner as when she is put a parte in tyme of hyr naturall dysease.
And in the eyght daye the fleshe of the chyldes foreskynne shalbe cut awaye.
And she shall then contynue in the bloude of hyr puryfyenge thre and thyrtye dayes. She shall touche no halowed thynge, nor come into the sanctuary, vntyll the tyme of hyr purifyenge be out.
If she bere a maydechylde, she shalbe vnclene two wekes, as when she hath hyr naturall dysease. And she shall contynue in the bloude of hyr purifyenge thre score and syxe dayes.
And when the dayes of hyr purifyenge are out: whether it be for a sonne or for a daughter, she shall brynge a lambe of one yeare olde for a burntoffringe, and a younge pigeon or a turtyll doue for synne vnto the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse and vnto the Preaste:
whych shall offer them before the Lorde, and make an attonement for her, and she shalbe pourged of the yssue of hyr bloude. And thys is the lawe for her that hath borne a male or female.
But and yf she be not able to brynge a lambe, she shall brynge two turtyls or two younge pygeons: the one for the burntoffringe, and the other for synne. And the Preaste shall make an attonement for her, and she shalbe clene.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses and Aaron sayinge:
when there appeareth a rysynge in any mans fleshe, ether a scabbe, or a glystrynge whyte: and the plage of leprosye be in the skynne of hys fleshe, he shall be brought vnto Aaron the Preaste, or vnto one of hys sonnes the Preastes:
and the Preaste shall loke on the sore in the skynne of hys fleshe. And whan the heere in the sore is turned vnto whyte, and the sore also seme to be lower then the skynne of his flesh, it wyll be a plage of leprosye, and the Preaste shall loke on hym, and iudge hym vnclene.
If there be but a whyte plecke in the skynne of hys flesh, and seme not to be lower then the skynne, nor the heere therof is turned vnto whyte, the Preaste shall shut him vp seuen dayes.
And the Preaste shall loke vpon hym agayne the seuenth daye: And yf the plage seme to him to abyde still, Ꟶ the plage growe not in the skynne the Preast shall shutt him vp yet .vij. dayes moo.
And the Preast shall loke on hym agayne the .vij. daye. Then yf the plage be darcker, Ꟶ not growen in the skynne, the Preast shall iudge hym clene, for it is but a skyrf. And he shall washe his clothes, Ꟶ be clene,
But Ꟶ yf the scabbe growe in the skynne after that he is sene of the Preast, Ꟶ iudged clene, he shalbe sene of the prest agayne.
If the preast se that the scabbe be growen abrode in the skynne, the prest shall make hym vnclene: for it is a leprosye.
When the plage of leprosye is in a man he shall be brought vnto the Preast,
and the Preast shall se hym. And yf the rysynge be white in the skynne, and haue made the heare whyte, and there be rawe fleshe in the sor
it wylbe an olde leprosye in the skynne of his flesh. And the Preast shall make hym vnclene, and shall not shutte hym vp seynge he is vnclene.
If a leprosye breake out abrode in the skynne, Ꟶ couer all the skynne, from hys heed to hys foote, whersouer the Preast loketh,
and the Preast loke vpon him. And yf the leprosye haue couered all hys flesh, he shall iudge the plage to be clene because it is all turned into whytnesse, Ꟶ he shalbe cleane.
But and yf ther be rawe fleshe on him when he is sene, he shalbe vncleane.
And the Preast shall se the rawe flesh, and declare him to be vnclene. For the rawe flesh is vnclene seynge it is a leprosye.
Or yf the rawe flesh departe agayne Ꟶ chaunge vnto whyte, he shall come to the preste,
and the preast shall se him Ꟶ beholde: If the soore be chaunged vnto whyte the Preast shall iudge the plage cleane Ꟶ he shalbe cleane:
The flesh also in whose skinne there is a byle Ꟶ is healed,
Ꟶ in the place of the byle there appeare a whyte rysynge, ether a shynynge whyte Ꟶ som what reddish, it shall be sene of the Preast.
And yf when the Preast seyth hym, it appeare lower than the skynne, Ꟶ the heare therof be chaunged vnto whyte, the Preast shall iudge hym vncleane: for it is a plage of leprosye, broken out of the byle.
But Ꟶ yf the Preast loke on it and there be no whyte heares therin, Ꟶ yf it be not lower then the skynne, but be darcker, the Preast shall shutt hym vp .vij. dayes.
And yf it sprede abrode in the flesh, the prest shall make hym vncleane, seynge it is the plage.
But and yf the spot stonde styll, Ꟶ growe not, it is the prynte of an hote byle, and therfore the prest shall declare hym to be cleane.
Yf there be any flesh, in whose skynne there is a hote burnynge, and the flesh that burneth haue a whyte spott, som what reddysh or whyte,
the prest shall loke vpon it. And yf the heare in that bryght spot be chaunged to whyte, and it appeare lower then the skynne, it is a leprosye broken out of the burnynge. And therfore the Preaste shall iudge hym vncleane, seynge it is the plage of leprosye.
But yf the preast loke on it Ꟶ there be no whyte heare in the bryghte spott, and be no lower then the other skynne, but be darcker, the preast shall shut him vp seuen dayes.
And the preast shall loke on hym the seuenth daye: And yf it be growen abroad in the skynne, the preast shall iudge hym vncleane, seynge it is the plage of leprosye.
And yf the spot stonde styll in it, Ꟶ growe not in the skynne, but is darcke, it is a rysynge of the burnynge, Ꟶ the Preast shall therfore declare hym cleane, seynge it is the prynte of the burnynge.
Yf man or woman hath a sore vpon the heed or the beard, the preast shall se it.
And yf it appeare lower than the skynne, Ꟶ ther be in it a yalowe heare: Ꟶ thynne the Preast shall iudge him vncleane, seynge that the same fretynge is a token of leprosye vpon the heed or berde.
And yf the preast loke on the sore of the prynt, and it seme not lower then the skynne, and that the heare is not blacke, the Preast shall shut vp the frettynge sore seuen dayes.
And in the seuenth daye the preste shall loke on the sore: and yf the sore be not growen, and there be in it no yalowe hayre, and the sore seme not lower then the skynne,
he shalbe shauen: but the place of the sore shall he not shaue, Ꟶ the prest shall shut vp the sore seuen dayes moo.
And in the seuenth daye the preste shall loke on the sore: And if the sore be not growen in the skynne, ner seme lower then the other skynne, the preste shall clense hym, Ꟶ he shall washe hys clothes, and be clene.
But yf the sore growe in the fleshe after hys clensynge,
the preste shall loke on hym. And yf the sore be growne in the skynne, the preste shall not seke for yelowe heare, for he is vnclene.
But if he se the prynte stonde styll, and that there is blacke heare growne vp therin, the sore is healed, and he shalbe cleane, and the prest shall declare hym to be cleane.
Yf there be whyte spottes in the skynne of the fleshe of man or woman,
the preast shall loke vpon it. And yf the spottes in the skynne of theyr fleshe be som what darcke Ꟶ whyte wythall, it is a frekell growynge in the fleshe: Therfore is he cleane.
And the man (whose heade is destitute of heare, wherby he is made balde) is cleane.
And he that hath hys heare out in his foreheede, is foreheed balde and cleane.
If there be in the baulde heed or baulde foreheed a whyte reddysh sore scabbe, there is leprosye spronge vp in hys baulde heed or baulde foreheede.
And the preast shall loke vpon him, and yf the rysynge of the sore be whyte reddysh in hys baulde heed or balde foreheed after the maner of a leprosye which is in the skynne of the fleshe,
then he is a leperous man and vncleane. And the Preaste shall make hym vncleane, for the plage therof is in hys heed.
The leper in whome the plage is, shall haue hys clothes rent, and hys heed bare and shall put a couerynge vpon hys lyppe, and shalbe called vnclene and defyled.
And as longe as the dysease lasteth vpon hym, he shalbe defyled and vncleane: he shall dwell alone, euen wythout the host shall hys habitacyon be.
The cloth that the plage of leprosye is in, whether it be lynen or wollen,
whether it be in the warpe or woofe of lynen or of wollen: ether in a skynne or any thynge made of skynne,
yf the dysease be pale or som what reddysh in the cloth or skynne: whether it be in the warpe or woofe or any thynge that is made of skynne, then it is a plage of leprosye, and shall be shewed vnto the preaste.
The preaste therfore shall se the plage, and shut it vp seuen dayes,
and loke on the plage the seuenth daye. Whych yf it be increased in the cloth (whether it be in the warpe or woofe, or in a skynne) or in any thynge that is made of skynne it is the leprosy of a fretinge sore: it is vncleane:
Ꟶ that cloth shalbe burnt, ether warpe or woofe whether it be wollen or lynnen, or any thynge that is made of skynne, where in the plage is, for it is a frettynge leprosye, it shalbe burnt in the fyre.
If the Preaste se that the plage is not growen in the cloth: ether in the warpe or woofe or in whatsoeuer thynge of skynne it be,
the preast shall commaunde them to wasshe the thynge wherin the plage is, and he shall shut it vp seuen dayes moo.
And the preaste shall loke on the plage agayne, after that it is washed. And yf the plage haue not chaunged hys coloure, and is sprede no further abrode, it is vncleane. Thou shall burne it in the fyre, for it is freat in warde: in parte or in all together.
And yf the Preaste se that the plage is darcker after that it is wasshed, he shall rent it out of the cloth, or out of the skynne, or out of the warpe or out of the woofe.
And yf it appeare any moare in the cloth (ether in the warpe or in the woofe or in any thynge made of skynne) it is a waxinge plage. Thou shalt burne the plage that is in it.
Moreouer the cloth, ether warpe or woofe or whatsoeuer thynge of skynne it be whych thou hast wasshed, yf the plage be departed there from, it shalbe wasshed once agayne: and then shall it be cleane.
Thys is the lawe of the plage of leprosye in a cloth whether it be wollen or lynnen: eyther in the warpe or woofe, or in any thynge of skynnes, to make it cleane or vncleane.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses,
sayinge: thys is the lawe of the leper in the daye of hys clensynge: He shalbe brought vnto the preaste,
and the preaste shall go out wythout the hoste, and loke vpon hym. And yf the plage of leprosye be healed in the leper,
then shall the Preaste commaunde that he whych is to be clensed, brynge two lyuynge byrdes and cleane, and cedar wodd, and purple cloth, and ysope.
And the Preaste shall commaunde that one of the byrdes be kylled in an erthen vessell Ꟶ vpon rennynge water.
And he shall take the lyuynge byrde with the cedar wodd, the purple and the ysope, and shall dyppe them and the lyuynge byrde in the bloude of the slayne byrde, vpon the rennynge water,
and sprynkle vpon hym (that must be clensed of hys leprosye) seuen tymes, and clense hym, and shall let the lyuynge byrde goo fre into the felde.
And he that is clensed, shall wasshe hys clothes, and shaue of all hys heere, and wash hym selfe in water, that he maye be cleane. And after that shall he come into the hoste, Ꟶ shall tarye wythout hys tent seuen dayes:
but in the seuenth daye he shall shaue of all hys heere, namely, hys head, hys berde and hys browes: euen all hys heere shalbe shauen of. And he shall wasshe hys clothes Ꟶ hys fleshe in water and he shalbe cleane.
In the eyght daye he shall take two lambes wythout blemyshe, and an yewe lambe of a yeare olde without blemysh, and thre tenthdeales of fyne floure for a meatoffrynge myngled wyth oyle and a logge of oyle.
And the Preaste that maketh hym cleane, shall brynge the man that is to be made cleane and those thynges, before the Lorde, euen before the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse.
And the Preaste shall take one lambe, and offer hym for trespace, Ꟶ the logge of oyle, and waue them before the Lorde.
And he shall slee the lambe in the place where the synneoffrynge and the burntoffrynge are slayne: euen in the holy place. For as the synne offryng is, euen so is the trespace offrynge the preastes: seyng it is moost holy.
And the preaste shall take of the bloude of the trespace offrynge, Ꟶ put it vpon the typpe of the ryght eare of hym that is to be clensed, Ꟶ vpon the thombe of hys ryght hande, and vpon the great too of hys ryghte foote.
The preaste shall take of the logge of oyle, Ꟶ powre it into the palme of hys lefte hande,
and dyppe hys ryght fynger in the oyle that is in hys left hande, and sprynkle of the oyle wyth hys fynger seuen tymes before the Lorde.
And of the rest of the oyle that is in hys hande, shall the Preaste put vpon the typpe of the ryghte eare of hym that is for to be clensed, and vpon the thombe of hys ryghte hande, and vpon the great too of hys ryghte fote: euen vpon the bloude of the trespace offrynge.
And the remnaunte of the oyle that is in the Preastes hande, he shall powre vpon the heed of hym that is for to be clensed: and the Preaste shall make an attonement for hym before the Lorde.
And the Preaste shall offer the synne offrynge, and make an attonement for hym that is to be clensed, for hys vnclennesse. And then shall he kyll the burntoffrynge,
and the Preaste shall offre the burntoffrynge and the meatoffrynge vpon the alter: Ꟶ the preste shall make an attonement for hym, and he shalbe cleane.
If he be poore, and can not gett so moche, he shall take one lambe for a trespace offrynge to waue it for hys clensynge, and a tenth deale of fyne floure myngled wyth oyle for a meatoffrynge, and a logge of oyle,
and two turtyll doues or two yonge pigeons, suche as he is able to gett, wherof the one shalbe for synne, and the other for a burntoffrynge.
And he shall brynge them the .viij. daye for hys clensynge vnto the Preaste before the dore of the tabernacle of witnesse before the Lorde.
And the Preaste shall take the lambe that is for the trespace, and the logge of oyle, and waue them before the Lorde.
And he shall kyll the lambe for the trespace, and the Preaste shall take of the bloude of the trespaceoffrynge, and put it vpon the typpe of hys ryghte eare that is to be clensed, and vpon the thombe of hys ryghte hande, and vpon the greate too of hys ryght fote.
And the preaste shall powre of the oyle into hys ryghte hande,
and the preste shall wyth hys fynger sprynkle of the oyle that is in hys lefte hande, seuen tymes before the Lorde.
And the Preaste shall put of the oyle that is in hys hande vpon the typpe of the ryghte eare of hym that is to be clensed, and vpon the thombe of hys ryghte hande, and vpon the great too of hys ryghte fote: euen in the place where the bloude of the trespaceoffringe was put.
And the reste of the oyle that is in the prestes hande, he shall put vpon the heed of hym that is to be clensed: that he maye make on attonement for him before the Lorde.
And he shall offer one of the turtyll doues or of the yonge pigeons, soche as he can gett:
the one for a synne offerynge and the other for a burntoffrynge wyth the meatofferynge. And the Preaste shall make an attonement for hym that is to be clensed before the Lorde.
Thys is the lawe of hym in whom is the plage of leprosye, and whose hande is not able to gett that whych pertayneth to hys clensynge.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses and Aaron sayinge:
when ye be come vnto the lande of Canaan whych I geue you in possessyon. And yf I put the plage of leprosye in a house of the lande of youre possessyon,
he that oweth the house shall come, and tell the preaste, sayinge: me thynke that there is as it were a leprosy in the house.
And the preaste shall commaunde them to emptie the house, before the Preaste goo into it to se the plage: that all that is in the house be not made vncleane, and then must the Preaste go in to se the house.
If the Preaste also se that the plage is in the walles of the house, and that there be holowe strakes pale or rede whych seme to be lower then the wall it selfe,
the Preaste shall go out at the house dores, and shut vp the house seuen dayes.
And the Preaste shall come agayne the seuenth daye, and yf he se that the plage be increased in the walles of the house,
the Preaste shall commaunde them to take awaye the stones in which the plage is, Ꟶ let them cast them into a foule place without the cytie,
and he shall commaunde the house to be scraped wythyn rounde aboute, and powre out the dust (that they scrape of) wythout the cytie into a foule place.
And they shall take other stones, and put them in the places of those stones, and other morter, to plaster the house wythall.
And yf the plage come agayne and breake out in the house, after that he hath taken awaye the stones Ꟶ scraped the walles of the house, and after that he hath playstered the house anewe:
the preaste shall come and se it. And yf he perceaue that the plage hath growne further in the house, it is a fretynge leprosye in the house. It is therfore vncleane.
And he shall breake downe the house. And the stones of it, Ꟶ the tymbre therof, Ꟶ all the morter of the house, shall he carye out of the cytye vnto a foule place.
Moreouer he that goeth into the house all the whyle that it is shut vp, shalbe vncleane vntyll the euen:
He that slepeth in the house, shall wasshe hys clothes: he lykewyse that eateth in the house, shall wasshe hys clothes.
And yf the Preaste come and se, that the plage hath sprede no further in the house (after that it is newe plastered) the preste shall iudge that house cleane, because the plage is healed.
And let hym take to clense the house wythall: two byrdes, cedar wodd, purple clothe and ysope.
And he shall kyll one of the byrdes in an erthen vessell and vpon runnynge water:
Ꟶ take the cedar wodd, Ꟶ the ysope, Ꟶ the purple wt the lyuynge byrde, Ꟶ dyppe them in the bloude of the slayne byrde, and in the runnynge water, and sprynkle the house seuen tymes,
Ꟶ clense the house with the bloud of the byrde and wyth the runnynge water, with the lyuinge byrde, with the cedar wodd, and the ysope, and the purple clothe.
But he shall lett the lyuynge byrde flee oute of the towne into the brode feldes, and so make an attonement for the house, and it shalbe cleane.
Thys is the lawe for all maner plage of leprosye and breakynge out,
and of the leprosye of clothe and house:
for a swellynge for a scabbe, and for a whyte blyster.
To teache whan it must be made vncleane and cleane. Thys is the lawe of leprosye.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses and Aaron sayinge:
Speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, and saye vnto them: Whosoeuer hath a runnynge yssue out of hys fleshe, is vncleane by reason of that yssue.
And this shall be the token of hys vnclennesse in hys yssue: when he is vncleane. If hys fleshe runne, or yf hys fleshe congele by the reason of hys yssue, then is it vncleanesse.
Euery couche wheron he lyeth that hath the yssue, is vncleane: and euery thynge wheron he sytteth, is vncleane:
Whosoeuer toucheth is couche, shall washe his clothes, Ꟶ bath him selfe in water, Ꟶ be vncleane vntyll the euen.
And he that sytteth on any thynge wheron he satt that hath the yssue, shall washe hys clothes, and bathe hym selfe in water, Ꟶ be vncleane vntyll the euenynge.
He that toucheth the fleshe of him that hath the yssue, shall wasshe hys clothes, and bathe hym selfe in water, and be vncleane vnto the euen.
If he also that hath the yssue, spyt vpon hym that is cleane, he shall washe his clothes, Ꟶ bathe hym selfe in water, and be vncleane vntyll euen.
And what horse harnesse soeuer he rydeth vpon that hath the yssue, shalbe vncleane.
And whosoeuer toucheth any thinge that was vnder hym, shalbe vncleane vnto the euen. And he that beareth any soche thinges, shall washe hys clothes, and bathe hym selfe in water, and be vncleane vnto the euen.
And whosoeuer he toucheth that hath the yssue (Ꟶ haue not fyrst wasshed hys handes in water) shall washe hys clothes, Ꟶ bathe hym selfe in water, and be vncleane vnto the euen.
The vessell of erth that he toucheth, whych hath the yssue, shalbe broken: and all vessels of wodd shalbe rynsed in water.
When he also that hath an yssue, is clensed of hys yssue, he shall nombre .vij. dayes for hys clensynge, and wasshe hys clothes, Ꟶ bathe hys fleshe in runnynge water, and so shall he be cleane.
And the .viij. daye he shall take to him two turtyll doues or two younge pygeons, and come before the Lorde vnto the dore of the tabernacle of witnesse, Ꟶ geue them vnto the Preaste.
And the Preaste shall offer them: the one for a synne offrynge, and the other for a burntoffrynge: and the preast shall make an attonement for hym before the Lorde, as concernynge hys yssue.
If any mans seede departe from hym in hys slepe, he shall wasshe his fleshe in water, and be vncleane vntyll euen.
And all the clothes and all the furres wherin is suche seede of slepe, shalbe wasshed with water, and be vncleane vnto the euen.
And yf he that hath suche an yssue of sede, do lye wyth a woman, they shall both wasshe them selues with water, and be vncleane vntyll euen.
Yf a womans naturall course of bloude do runne, she shalbe put aparte .vij. dayes: whosoeuer toucheth her, shalbe vncleane vnto the euen.
And all that she lyeth vpon, in the tyme of hyr naturall disease, shalbe vncleane,
lyke as euery thynge also that she sytteth vpon, is vncleane. Whosoeuer toucheth her bedd, shall wasshe hys clothes, and bathe him selfe with water, and be vncleane vnto the euen.
And whosoeuer toucheth any thinge that she sat vpon, shall washe hys clothes, and bathe him selfe in water, and be vncleane vnto the euen:
so that whether he touche her couche or any vessell where on she hath sytten, he shalbe vnclene vnto the euen.
And yf a man lye wt her, and hyr vnclennesse come vpon hym, he shalbe vncleane .vij. dayes, and all the couche wheron he lyeth shalbe vncleane.
When a womans bloude runneth longe tyme: out of the tyme of her naturall course: or yf it runne beyonde hyr naturall course, let all the dayes of the yssue be iudged vncleane, euen as the dayes of hyr naturall disease,
And she shalbe vncleane. All her couches wheron she lyeth (as longe as her yssue lasteth) shalbe as her couche when she hath hyr naturall dysease. And whatsoeuer she sytteth vpon, shalbe vncleane, as is her vnclennesse when she is put a parte.
And whosoeuer toucheth any of these, shalbe vncleane, and shall wasshe hys clothes, and bathe hym selfe in water and be vncleane vnto euen.
And after that she is cleansed of hyr yssue, she shall counte her seuen dayes, and after that, she shall be cleane.
In the .viij. daye she shall take vnto her two turtils or two younge pigeons, and brynge them vnto the preaste before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse.
And the Preaste shall offer the one for a synne offrynge, and the other for a burntofferynge: and make an attonement for her before the Lorde, as concernynge the yssue of her vnclennesse.
Therfore shall ye separate the chyldren of Israel from their vnclennesse, that they dye not in their vnclennesse: yf they defyle my habitacyon that is amonge them.
Thys is the lawe of hym that hath a runnynge yssue, and of hym whose seed runneth from hym in hys slepe, and is defyled therin,
and other, that (for hys naturall disease) is put a parte, and of whosoeuer hath a runnynge yssue, whether it be man or woman, and of hym that lyeth wyth her whych is vncleane.
And the Lord spake vnto Moses after the deeth of the two sonnes of Aaron, when they offered before the Lorde, and dyed: And he sayde vnto Moses:
speake vnto Aaron thy brother, that he come not at all tymes into the holy place wythin the vayle before the mercyseate, whych is vpon the arke, that he dye not. For I will appeare in the clowde vpon the mercyseate.
But with thys thynge shall Aaron come into the holy place: euen wt a bullock for synne, and wyth a ram for a burntofferynge.
He shall put the holy lynen albe vpon him, and shall haue a lynen breche vpon hys fleshe, and shall be gyrded wyth a lynen gyrdell, Ꟶ put the lynen mytre vpon hys heede: These are holy garmentes: therfore shall he washe his fleshe in water, whan he doth put them on.
And he shall take of the multitude of the chyldren of Israel, two he goates for synne, and a ram for a burntofferynge.
And Aaron shall offer hys bullock for synne, and make an attonement for hym, and for hys house.
And he shall take the two goates, and present them before the Lorde at the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse.
And Aaron shall cast lottes ouer the .ij. goates: one lotte shalbe for the Lorde, and the other for the scapegoate.
And Aaron shall brynge the goote vpon whych the Lordes lotte fell, and offer hym for synne.
But the goate on whych the lotte fell to scape, shall be sett alyue before the Lorde, to reconcyle wyth, and to let hym goo (as a scape goate) fre, into the wyldernesse.
And Aaron shall brynge hys bullock for synne, and reconcyle for him selfe, and for hys house, and shall kyll hys bullock for synne.
And he shall take a censer full of burnynge coles out of the alter before the Lord, and shall fyll hys handfull of swete cens, beaten small, and brynge them wythyn the vayle,
and put the cens vpon the fyre before the Lorde: that the cloude of the cens maye couer the mercy seate that is vpon the wytnesse, and that he dye not.
And he shall take of the bloude of the bullock, and sprynkle it wyth hys fynger vpon the mercyseate eastwarde: and before the mercyseate shall he sprynkle of the bloude wyth hys fynger seuen tymes.
Then shall he kyll the goate that is the peoples synne offrynge, Ꟶ brynge hys bloude wythin the vayle, Ꟶ doo wyth that bloude, as he dyd wt the bloude of the bullock, sprynklynge it vpon the mercyseate, and before the mercyseate.
And he shal reconcyle the holy place from the vnclennesses of the chyldren of Israel, and from their trespaces in all theyr synnes. And so shall he doo for the tabernacle of witnesse that is set amonge them, euen amonge their vnclennesses.
And let there be no bodye in the tabernacle of wytnesse, when he goeth in to make an attonement in the holy place, vntyll he come out. And let hym make an attonement for hym selfe and for hys housholde, and for all the multitude of Israel.
And he shall go out vnto the alter that is before the Lorde, Ꟶ reconcyle vpon it, and shall take of the bloude of the bullock, and of the bloude of the goate, and put it vpon the hornes of the altare rounde aboute,
and sprynckle of the bloude vpon it with his fynger seuen tymes, and clense it, and halowe it from the vnclennesses of the chyldren of Israel.
And when he hath made an ende of reconcylinge the holy place, and the tabernacle of wytnesse, and the alter, he shall brynge the lyue goate:
and Aaron shall put both hys handes vpon the heed of the lyue goate, and confesse ouer hym all the mysdeades of the chyldren of Israell, and all their trespaces, in all their synnes: puttynge them vpon the heed of the goate, and sende hym awaye (by the hande of a conuenient man) into the wyldernesse.
And the goate shall bere vpon hym all theyr mysdeades vnto the wyldernesse, and he shall let the goate goo fre into the wyldernesse.
And Aaron shall come into the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and put of the lynen clothes whych he put on (when he went in into the holy place) and leaue them there.
And lett hym wasshe hys fleshe with water in the holy place, and put on hys owne rayment, and then come out, and offer hys burntoffrynge and the burntoffrynge of the people, and make an attonement for hym selfe and for the people,
and the fatt of the synofferynge shall he burne vpon the alter.
And he that caryed forth the goate to Azazell, shall wasshe hys clothes, and bathe hys fleshe in water, and then come into the hoste.
And the bullock whych is for synne, and the goate that is for synne, (whose bloude was brought in, to clense the holy place) shall one carye out wythout the hoste to be burnt in the fyre, wyth theyr skynnes, their fleshe Ꟶ their donge.
And he that burneth them, shall wasshe hys clothes, and bathe hys fleshe in water, and then come into the hooste.
And thys shalbe an ordinaunce for euer vnto you: that in the tenth daye of the seuenth moneth, ye humble youre soules, and do no worke at all: whether it be one of youre selues or a straunger that soiourneth amonge you,
for that daye shall the prest make an attonement for you to clense you, and that ye maye be cleane from all youre synnes before the Lorde.
Let it be a Sabboth of rest vnto you, and ye shall humble youre soules, by an ordinaunce for euer.
And the Preaste that is anoynted, and whose hande was consecrated (to mynistre in hys fathers steade) shall make the attonement, and shall put on the lynen clothes Ꟶ holy vestimentes,
and reconcyle the holy sanctuary and the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and shall clense the alter, and make an attonement then for the preastes and for all the people of the congregacyon.
And this shalbe an euerlastynge ordinaunce vnto you, that he make an attonement for the chyldren of Israel for all their synnes once a yere: Ꟶ he dyd as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
speake vnto Aaron Ꟶ vnto hys sonnes and vnto all the chyldren of Israel and saye vnto them: Thys is the thynge which the Lord hath charged, sayinge:
what man soeuer of the house of Israel kylleth an oxe, or lambe or goate in the hoste, or that kylleth it out of the hoste,
and bryngeth it not vnto the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse, to offer an offerynge vnto the Lorde before the dwellynge place of the Lorde, bloude shalbe imputed vnto that man, as though he had shed bloude, and that man shall be roted out from amonge his people.
Wherfore whan the chyldren of Israel brynge their offeringes, that they offer in the wyde felde, they shulde brynge them vnto the Lorde: euen vnto the doore of the tabernacle of wytnesse to the preaste, to offer them for peace offerynges vnto the Lord.
And the preaste must sprynkle the bloude vpon the alter of the Lorde whych is before the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse, and burne the fatt for a swete sauoure vnto the Lorde.
And lett them no moare offer their offeringes vnto deuyls, after whom they haue gone a whorynge. Thys shalbe an ordynaunce for euer vnto them in their generacyons.
And thou shalt saye vnto them: whatsoeuer man it be of the house of Israel or of the straungers whych soiourne amonge you that offereth a burntofferynge or sacrifyce,
Ꟶ bryngeth it not vnto the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse to offer it vnto the Lorde, that man shall peryshe from amonge hys people:
And whatsoeuer man it be of the house of Israel or of the straungers that soiourne amonge you, that eateth any maner of bloude, I will sett my face agaynst that soule that eateth bloude, and will destroye hym from amonge hys people:
for the lyfe of the fleshe is in the bloude, and I haue geuen it vnto you vpon the alter,
to make an attonement for youre soules, for bloude shall make an attonement for the soule. And therfore I sayde vnto the chyldren of Israel: let no soule of you eate bloude. Neyther let any straunger that soiourneth amonge you, eate bloude.
And whatsoeuer man it be of the chyldren of Israel or of the straungers that soiourne amonge you, whych hunteth and catcheth any beest or foule that maye be eaten, let him powre out the bloude therof, Ꟶ couer it wyth erthe,
for the lyfe of all fleshe is in the bloude of it, therfore I sayde vnto the chyldren of Israel ye shall eate the bloude of no maner of fleshe, for the lyfe of all fleshe is the bloude therof: whosoeuer eateth it, shall peryshe.
And euery soule that eateth it whych dyed alone, or that which was torne wyth wylde beastes: whether it be one of youre selues or a straunger, he shall wasshe hys clothes, and bathe hym selfe in water, and be vncleane vnto the euen, and then shall he be cleane.
Yf he wasshe them not, nor bathe hys flesshe, he shall beare hys synne.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, and saye vnto them: I am the Lorde youre God.
After the doynges of the lande of Egypte wherin ye dwelt, shall ye not doo: and after the doynges of the lande of Canaan, whether I wyll brynge you, shall ye not doo, nether walke in their ordinaunces,
but do after my iudgementes, and kepe my ceremonyes, to walke therin: I am the Lorde youre God:
Ye shall kepe therfore myne ordinaunces, Ꟶ my iudgementes whiche yf a man doo, he shall lyue in them. I am the Lorde.
Se that none go to his nyghest kynred, for to vncouer their secrettes. I am the Lorde.
The secrettes of thy father, and the secrettes of thy mother, shalt thou not vncouer: for she is thy mother, therfore shalt thou not discouer her secrettes.
The secrettes of thy fathers wyfe shalt thou not discouer, for it is thy fathers secrettes.
Thou shalt not discouer the preuite of thy syster, the daughter of thy father or of thy mother: whether she be borne at home or without.
Thou shalt not vncouer the secrettes of thy sonnes daughter or thy daughters daughter, for that is thyne awne preuyte.
Thou shalt not vncouer the secrettes of thy fathers wyues daughter, which was begotten of thy father, and is thy syster: thou shalt not discouer her secrettes.
Thou shalt not vncouer the secrettes of thy fathers syster, for she is thy fathers nexte kynswoman.
Thou shalt not discouer the secrettes of thy mothers syster, for she is thy mothers nexte kynswoman.
Thou shalt not vncouer the secrettes of thy fathers brother: that is, thou shalt not go into hys wyfe, which is thyne awnte.
Thou shalt not discouer the secrettes of thy daughter in lawe: For she is thy sonnes wyfe: therfore shalt thou not vncouer her secrettes.
Thou shalt not vnheale the secrettes of thy brothers wyfe, for that is thy brothers preuitie.
Thou shalt not discouer the preuyties of the wyfe and her daughter, nether shalt thou take her sonnes daughter or her daughters daughter, to vncouer their secrettes: For they are her nexte kyn, and it were wykidnesse.
Thou shalt not take a wyfe and her syster also, to vexe her, that thou woldest vncouer her secrettes, as longe as she lyueth.
Thou shalt also not go vnto a woman to vncouer her preuytie, as longe as she is put a parte for her vnclennesse.
Moreouer thou shalt not lye with thy neyghbours wyfe, to defyle her wt sede.
Thou shalt also not geue of thy seed to offer it vnto Moloch: neyther shalt thou defyle the name of thy God. I am the Lorde.
Thou shalt not lye wyth mankynde as wt womankynde, for it is abominacyon.
Thou shalt lye wyth no maner of beaste to defyle thy selfe therwith, nether shall any woman stonde before a beast, to lye doune therto, for it is abhominacyon.
Ye shall not defyle youre selues in any of these thynges, wherin all the nacyons are defyled whyche I cast out before you:
Wherthorowe the lande is defyled, and I will vysett the wykednesse therof vpon it, yea Ꟶ the lande it selfe hath cast out her inhabiters.
Ye shall kepe therfore myne ordinaunces, Ꟶ my iudgementes, and commyt none of these abhominacyons: nether any of you nor any straunger that soiourneth amonge you
(for all these abhominacions haue the men of the lande done whyche were there before you, Ꟶ the lande is defyled.)
Shall not the lande spewe you out also (yf ye defyle it) as it spewed out the people that were before you?
For whosoeuer shall commytt any of these abhominacyons, the same soules that commyt them, shall peryshe from amonge their people.
Therfore shall ye kepe my watche, that ye committ not one of these abhominable customes whych were commytted before you: and that ye defyle not youre selues therin. I am the Lorde youre God.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge:
speake vnto all the multitude of the chyldren of Israel, and saye vnto them: Ye shalbe holy, for I the Lorde youre God am holye.
Ye shall feare euery man hys father Ꟶ hys mother, and kepe my Sabothes, I am the Lorde youre God.
Ye shall not turne vnto ydolles nor make you Goddes of metall: I am the Lorde youre God.
Yf ye offre a peace offerynge vnto the Lorde, ye shall offer it that ye maye be accepted.
It shalbe eaten the same daye ye offer it Ꟶ on the morowe. And yf ought remayne vntyll the thyrde daye, it shalbe burnt in the fyre.
And yf it be eaten the thyrde daye, this vncleane, and not accepted.
He that eateth it, shall bere his synne, because he hath defyled the halowed thynge of the Lorde, Ꟶ that soule shall peryshe from amonge his people.
When ye reape doune the rype corne of youre lande, ye shall not repe doune the vtmost border of youre felde, nether shalt thou gather that whych is lefte be hynde in thy haruest.
Thou shalt not plucke in all thy vyneyarde clene, nether gather in the grapes that are ouerscaped. But thou shalt leaue them for the pore and straunger. I am the Lorde youre God.
Ye shall not steale, nether lye, nether deale falsely one with another.
Ye shall not swere by my name in vayne: neyther shall thou defyle the name of thy God. I am the Lorde.
Thou shall not do thy neyghboure wronge, nether robbe hym violently nether shall the workmans laboure abyde wyth the vntyll the mornynge.
Thou shalt not curse the deaffe nether put a stomblynge blocke before the blynde: but shalt feare thy God. I am the Lorde.
Ye shall doo no vnryghteousnes in iudgement. Thou shalt not fauoure the poore nor honoure the myghtye, but in ryghteousnes shalt thou iudge thy neyghboure.
Thou shalt not goo vp Ꟶ doune as a preuy accuser amonge thy people, nether shalt thou stonde agaynst the bloude of thy neyghboure: I am the Lorde.
Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thyne hart, but shalt in any wyse rebuke thy neyghbour: that thou bere not synne for hys sake.
Thou shalt not auenge thy selfe nor be myndfull of wronge agaynst the chyldren of my people but shalt loue thy neyghboure euen as thy selfe. I am the Lorde.
Ye shall kepe myne ordinaunces. Thou shalt not let catell gendre wyth a contrary kynde, nether sowe thy felde wyth myngled seed, nether shalt thou put on any garment of lynen and wollen.
Whosoeuer lyeth and medleth with a woman that is a bondmayde, neuertheles appoynted to a husbande, but not redemed, ner fredome geuen her, she shalbe scourged wyth a lethren whyppe, and they shall not dye, because she was not fre.
And he shall brynge for his trespace vnto the Lorde: before the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse, a ram for a trespace offrynge.
And the Preaste shall make an attonement for him wt the ram whych is for the trespace before the Lorde, concernynge his synne which he hath done: Ꟶ the synne which he hath done shalbe forgeuen hym.
When ye come to the lande, Ꟶ haue planted all maner of trees conuenient to be eaten of ye shall put a waye the foreskynne of euery one with the frute therof: euen thre yere shall they be vncircumcised vnto you, Ꟶ shall not be eaten of.
But in the fourth yere all the frute of them shalbe holy and commendable to the Lorde.
In the fyfth yere shall ye eate of the frute of them, and ye maye gether in the increase of them: I am the Lorde youre God.
Ye shall not eate vpon bloude, neyther shall ye vse wytchecrafte, nor obserue tymes.
Ye shall not rounde the lockes of youre heedes, nether shalt thou marre the tuftes of thy beerde.
Ye shall not rent youre fleshe for any soules sake, nor printe any markes vpon you: I am the Lorde.
Thou shalt not make thy daughter commen, that thou woldest cause her to be an whoore: lest the lande also fall to whoredome, and be full of wykednesse.
Ye shall kepe my sabbathes, and feare my sanctuary: I am the Lorde.
Ye shall not regarde them that worke with sprytes, nether seke after sothsayers to be defyled by them, I am the Lorde youre God.
Thou shalt ryse vp before the horehed, and reuerence the face of the olde man, and dread thy God. I am the Lorde.
If a straunger soiourne with the in youre lande, ye shall not vexe him.
But the straunger that dwelleth wyth you, shall be as one of youre selues, and thou shalt loue hym as thy selfe, for ye were straungers in the lande of Egypt. I am the Lorde youre God.
Ye shall do no vnryghteousnes in iudgement, in meteyerde, in weyght or in measure.
True balaunces, true weyghtes. A true Epha Ꟶ a true Hin shall ye haue. I am the Lorde youre God whych broughte you out of the lande of Egypt.
Therfore shall ye obserue all my ordinaunces and all my iudgementes, and do them. I am the Lorde.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge.
Thys shalt thou saye to the chyldren of Israel, whosoeuer he be of the chyldren of Israel or of the straungers that dwell in Israel, that geueth of his seed vnto. Moloch, let him be slayne: the people of the lande shall stone hym.
And I wyll sett my face agaynst that man, and wyll destroye hym from amonge his people: because he hath geuen of hys seed vnto Moloch, for to defyle my sanctuary, and to polute my holy name.
And though that the people of the lande hyde their eyes from the man that geueth of hys seed vnto Moloch, and kyll hym not:
I wyll put my face agaynst that man, and agaynst hys kynred, and wyll destroye hym, and all that goo a whorynge after him to commyt whordome with Moloch, from amonge their people.
If a soule turne hym selfe after such as worke wyth spretes, and after sothsayers, to goo a whorynge after them, I wyll put my face agaynst that soule, Ꟶ wyll destroye hym from amonge hys people.
Sanctifye youre selues therfore and be holye, for I am the Lorde youre God,
kepe ye myne ordinaunces, and doo them. I am the Lorde which doth sanctifye you.
Whosoeuer he be, that curseth his father or hys mother, let hym dye: for he hath cursed hys father and mother, hys bloude be vpon him.
And the man that breaketh wedlocke with another mans wyfe: euen he that breketh wedlocke wt hys neyghbours wyfe let him be slayne, both the aduoutrer and the aduoutresse.
And the man that lyeth with hys fathers wyfe, Ꟶ vncouereth hys fathers secrettes, let them both dye, their bloude be vpon them.
If a man lye with his daughter in lawe, let them dye both of them: they haue wrought abhominacion, their bloud be vpon them.
If a man also lye wyth mankynde after the maner as wyth woman kynde, they haue both commytted an abhominacyon: let them dye. Their bloude be vpon them.
And If a man take a wyfe and her mother also, it is wykednesse. They shall be burnt wyth fyre both he and she, that there be no wykednesse amonge you.
And If a man lye wyth a beast, let hym dye, and ye shall slee the beast also.
If a woman go vnto any beast, Ꟶ lye downe therto: thou shalt kyll the woman and the beast also, let them dye, their bloude be vpon them.
If a man take hys syster, hys fathers daughter or his mothers daughter, and se her secrettes and she his secrettes, it is a shamefull thinge. They shall perysh in the syghte of their people, he hath uncouered hys systers secrettes, he shall beare his synne.
If a man lye with a woman hauynge her naturall dysease, and vncouer her secrettes, Ꟶ open her fountayne, and she also open the fountayne of her bloude they shall both peryshe from amonge theyr people.
Thou shalt not vncouer the secrettes of thy mothers syster nor of thy fathers syster, for he that doth so, hath vncouered hys nexte kyn: they shall beare theyr mysdoynge.
If a man lye with hys vncles wyfe, and vncouer his vncles secrettes: they shall beare their synne, and shall dye chyldlesse.
If a man take his brothers wyfe, it is an vncleane thynge, he hath vncouered his brothers secrettes, they shalbe chyldlesse.
Ye shall kepe therfore all myne ordinaunces and all my iudgementes, and doo them: that the lande whether I brynge you to dwell therin, spewe you not out.
Ye shall not walke in the maners of thys nacyon whyche I cast oute before you: For they comytted all these thynges, Ꟶ therfore I abhorred them.
But I haue sayde vnto you: ye shall enioye their lande, and I will geue it vnto you to possesse it, euen a lande that floweth with mylke Ꟶ honye. I am the Lorde youre God, whyche haue separated you from other nacyons,
and therfore shall ye put difference betwene cleane beastes Ꟶ vncleane, betwene vncleane foules and cleane. Ye shall not defyle youre soules in beastes and foules, and in all maner crepynge thynges that the grounde bryngeth furth, whych I haue separated from you as vncleane.
Therfore shall ye be holy vnto me, for I the Lorde am holy, and haue seuered you from other nacyons: that ye shulde be myne.
If there be a man or woman that worketh wyth a spryte, or that is a sothsayer, let them dye. Men shall stone them wyth stones, their bloude be vpon them.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: speake vnto the Preastes the sonnes of Aaron, and saye vnto them. Let none be defyled vpon a soule amonge hys people,
but vpon hys kynsman, that is nye vnto hym: vpon his father, Ꟶ his mother, vpon sonne and daughter, and his brother,
and on his syster a mayde that is nye vnto him, whom no man hath knowen: vpon her shall he be defyled.
But he shall not be defyled vpon him that hath auctoryte amonge hys people, to polute him selfe for him.
Let them not make baldnesse vpon their heed, nor shaue of the lockes of their bearde, nor make any markes in their fleshe.
They shalbe holy vnto their God, and not polute the name of their God, for the sacrifyces of the Lorde which are as the bread of their God they do offer: therfore they shall be holy.
Let them not take a wyfe that is an aduoutresse, or polluted, nor put from her husbande: for suche a one is holy vnto his God.
Thou shalt sanctifye hym therfore, for he offereth vp the bread of thy God: he shall therfore be holy vnto the, for I the Lorde whyche sanctifye you am holy.
If a Preastes daughter fall to playe the whore, she poluteth her father: therfore must she be burnt with fyre.
He that is the hye Preaste amonge hys brethren, vpon whose heed the anoyntynge oyle was powred, and that consecrated hys hande to put on the vestimentes, shall not vncouer his heade, nor rent his clothes
nether goo to any deed body, nor make hym selfe vncleane on hys father or hys mother,
nether shall go out of the sanctuarye, ner polute the holy place of hys God, for the croune of the anoyntynge oyle of hys God, is vpon him. I am the Lord.
He shall take a mayde vnto hys wyfe:
but a wedowe, a deuorsed woman, or an harlot, shall he not mary: But shall take a mayde of hys awne people to wyfe.
Neyther shall he defyle hys seed amonge hys people: for I am the Lord which sanctifye him.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
speke vnto Aaron, and saye: Whosoeuer of thy seed in their generacions hath any deformyte, let hym not preace for to offer bread vnto his God
for whosoeuer hath any blemyshe, shall not come nere: as yf he be blynde or lame, or that hath a brused nose, or that hath any mysshapen membre,
or is broken foted, or broken handed,
or haue no heere on his eye browes, or haue a webbe or other blemishe in his eye, or be mawnge, or skaulde, or hath hys stones broken.
No man that hath a blemyshe, and is of the seed of Aaron the preaste, shall come nye to offer the sacrifyces of the Lorde. Whan he hath a deformyte, let him not preace to offer the bread of hys God.
Let him eate the bread of hys God: euen of the most holy and of the holy:
Onely let him not goo in vnto the vayle, nor come nye the alter, when he is deformed, that he polute not my sanctuary, for I am the Lorde that sanctifye them.
And Moses tolde it vnto Aaron and to hys sonnes, and vnto all the chyldren of Israel.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
Speake vnto Aaron and hys sonnes, that they be separated from the holy thynges of the chyldren of Israel, and that they polute not my holy name in those thynges whych they halowe vnto me: I am the Lorde.
Saye vnto them: whosoeuer he be of all youre seed amonge youre generacyons after you, that goeth vnto the holy thynges whych the chyldren of Israel halowe vnto the Lorde, hauynge hys vnclennes vpon hym: that soule shall peryshe from out of my syght. I am the Lorde.
What man soeuer of the seed of Aaron is a leper or hath a runnynge yssue, he shall not eate of the holy thynges vntyll he be cleane. And whoso toucheth any man that is vncleane ouer the soule of the deed, or a man whose seed runneth from him in hys slepe,
or whosoeuer toucheth any worme, wherby he maye be made vncleane, or a man, of whom he maye take vnclenness
(whatsoeuer vnclennesse he hath) the same soule that hath touched any soche, shalbe vncleane vntyll euen, and shall not eate of the holy thinges, vntyll he haue wasshed his flesshe with water.
And when the sonne is doune, he shalbe cleane, Ꟶ shall afterwarde eate of the holy thinges: for asmoche as it is hys fode.
Of a beast that dieth alone, or is rent wyth wylde beastes (wherby he maye be defyled) he shall not eate: I am the Lorde.
Let them kepe therfore myne ordynaunce, lest they for the same lade synne vpon them, and dye for it, yf they defyle it. I the Lorde sanctifye them.
There shall no straunger eate of the holy thynge, nether a gest of the preastes, neyther shall an hyred seruaunte eate of the holy thinge.
But yf the Preaste bye any soule wyth money, he shall eate of it, lyke as he that is borne in hys house, shall they eate of hys bread.
If the Preastes daughter also be maryed vnto a straunger, she maye not eate of the halowed heue offrynges.
Notwythstandynge yf the Preastes daughter be a wedowe or deuorsed Ꟶ haue no chylde, but is returned vnto her fathers house agayne, she shall eate of her fathers bread, as well as she dyd in her youth. But there shall no straunger eate therof.
If a man eate of the holy thynge vnwittingly, he shall put the fyfthe parte ther vnto, and geue it vnto the Preaste wyth the halowed thynge.
And the Preastes shall not defyle the holy thynges of the chyldren of Israel (which they offer vnto the Lord)
to lade them selues wt mysdoynge Ꟶ trespace whyle they eate their holy thynges, for I the Lorde do halowe them.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge:
speake vnto Aaron and hys sonnes and vnto all the chyldren of Israel, and saye vnto them: whatsoeuer he be of the house of Israel or straunger in Israel, that will offer hys sacrifyce for all his vowes, and for all hys frewyllofferinges which they will offer vnto the Lord for a burntofferynge,
ye shall offre (to reconcyle youre selues) a male without blemyshe of the oxen, of the shepe, or of the goates.
But whatsoeuer hath a blemyshe, that shall ye not offre, for ye shall gett no fauoure therwith.
And whosoeuer bringeth a peace offringe vnto the Lorde (accordynge as he is apoynted) or a vowe, or a frewyll offeringe, in oxe or shepe, that is without deformyte, he shall be accepted.
There shalbe also no blemyshe therin: blinde, or broken, or wounded, or haue a wen, or be mawnge, or scabbed. Ye shall not offre soche vnto the Lorde, nor put an offerynge of any soche vpon the alter vnto the Lorde.
An oxe or a shepe that hath any membre out of proporcion, mayst thou offer for a frewillofferynge: but for a vowe it shall not be accepted.
Ye shall not offer vnto the Lorde that which is broosed, or broken, or plucked out, or cut awaye, nether shall ye make any soch in youre lande,
nether of a straungers hande shall ye offer bread vnto youre God of any soche. Because their corrupcyon is in them, and they haue deformite in them selues, and therfore shall they not be accepted for you.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge:
when an oxe, or a shepe, or a goate is brought forth, it shalbe seuen dayes vnder the damme. And from the .viij. daye forth, it shalbe accepted, for a sacrifice vnto the Lorde.
And whether it be oxe or shepe, ye shall not kill it and her yonge both in one daye.
When ye wyll offre a thank offerynge vnto the Lorde, offre it that ye maye be accepted.
And the same daye it must be eaten vp, so that ye leaue none of it vntyll the morowe. I am the Lorde.
Therfore shall ye kepe my commaundementes and do them, I am the Lorde.
Neyther shall ye polute my holy name, but I will be halowed amonge the chyldren of Israel. I am the Lord which halowe you,
and that brought you out of the lande of Egypte, to be youre God: I am the Lorde.
And the Lord spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, Ꟶ saye vnto them: These are my feastes, euen the feastes of the Lorde, whych ye shall call holy conuocacyons.
Syxe dayes ye shall worke, but the seuenth daye is the Sabboth of reast, an holy conuocacyon: so that ye doo no worke therin, it is the Sabboth of the Lorde, in all youre dwellynges.
These are the feastes of the Lorde, euen holy conuocacyons, whyche ye shall proclayme in their ceasons.
In the .xiiij. daye of the fyrst moneth at euen is the Lordes Passeouer.
And in the fyfteneth daye of the same moneth is the feast of swete bread vnto the Lorde: seuen dayes ye must eate vnleuended bread.
In the fyrst daye ye shall haue an holy conuocacyon: ye shall do no laborious worke therin.
But ye shall offer sacrifyces vnto the Lorde thorow out those seuen dayes, and in the seuenth daye is an holy conuocacyon: ye shall do no laborious worke therin.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayenge:
speake vnto the chyldren of Israel Ꟶ saye vnto them when ye be come into the lande (whyche I geue vnto you) Ꟶ repe doune the haruest therof, ye shall brynge a shefe of the fyrst frutes of youre haruest vnto the preast,
whych shall waue the shefe before the Lorde to be accepted for you: Ꟶ euen the morowe after the Sabboth the Preaste shall waue it.
And ye shall offer that daye when ye waue the shefe, an he lambe wythout blemish of a yeare olde, for a burntoffrynge vnto the Lorde:
and the meatofferynge therof, shalbe made of two tenth deales of fyne floure mengled with oyle, to be a sacrifyce vnto the Lorde for a swete sauoure: and the drynkoffring therof shalbe of wyne, euen the fourth deale of an Hyn.
And ye shall eate nether bread, nor parched corne, nor furmentye, nor newe corne, vntyll the selfe same daye that ye haue brought an offrynge vnto youre God. Let thys be a lawe for euer in youre generacions and in all youre dwellynges.
And ye shall counte from the morowe after the Saboth: euen from the daye that ye brought the shefe of the waueoffrynge .vij. Sabbathes complete:
euen vnto the morowe after the seuenth Sabbath shall ye nombre fyftye dayes. And ye shall brynge a new meatoffrynge vnto the Lorde.
And ye shall brynge out of youre habitacions two waue loues made of two tenth deales of fyne floure and that are made wyth leuen for fyrst frutes vnto the Lord.
And ye shall brynge with the breed seuen lambes wythout deformite of one yeare of age, and one yonge oxe Ꟶ two rammes, whych shall serue for a burntoffrynge vnto the Lorde, wyth meatoffringes and theyr drynkoffrynges, to be a sacrifyce for a swete sauoure vnto the Lorde.
Then ye shall offer an he goate for a synne offrynge: and two lambes of one yeare olde for a peace offrynge.
And the preast shall waue them wyth the breed of the fyrst frutes before the Lorde, and wyth the two lambes. And these holy thynges of the Lorde, shalbe the preastes.
And ye shall proclayme the same daye, that it maye be an holy conuocacyon vnto you: ye shall do no laborious worke therin: let it be a lawe for euer in all your dwellynges, and in all youre generacyons.
And when ye reepe doune your haruest, thou shalt not make cleane ryddaunce of thy felde, nether shalt thou make any aftergatherynge of thy haruest: but shalt leaue it vnto the poore and the straunger. I am the Lorde youre God.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge:
speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, and saye: In the seuenth moneth, in the fyrst daye of the moneth shall ye haue rest, euen the remembraunce of blowynge, an holy conuocacyon:
ye shall do no laborious worke therin, but offer sacrifyce vnto the Lorde.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
the tenth daye also of the selfe seuenth moneth, is a daye of reconcilynge, therfore shall it be an holy conuocacion vnto you, and ye shall humble your soules, and offer sacrifyce vnto the Lorde.
Ye shall do no worke the same daye, for it is a daye of reconcylynge, to make an atonement for you before the Lorde your God.
For whatsoeuer soule it be that humbleth not hym selfe that daye, he shalbe destroyed from amonge hys people.
And whatsoeuer soule do any maner worke that daye, the same soule will I destroye from amonge his people.
Ye shall do no maner worke therfore: Let it be a lawe for euer in youre generacyons and in all your dwellynges.
Let it be vnto you a Sabboth of reste, and ye shall humble your soules in the nynth daye of the moneth at euen: from euen to euen shall ye rest in your Sabboth.
And the Lord spake vnto Moses sayeng:
speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, and saye: the fyftenth daye of the same seuenth moneth is the feast of tabernacles, seuen dayes vnto the Lord.
The fyrst daye is an holy conuocacyon: ye shall do no laboryous worke.
Seuen dayes ye shall offer sacryfyce vnto the Lord, and in the eyght daye shalbe an holy conuocacyon vnto you, and ye shall offer sacryfyces vnto the Lorde. It is the colleccyon, and ye shall do no laborious worke therin.
These are the feastes of the Lord, whiche ye shall call holy conuocacyons, for to offer sacrifyce vnto the Lord, burntoffrynge, meatoffrynge, peaceoffrynge, and drynkeoffrynges, euery daye hys due sacrifyc
besyde the Sabbothes of the Lorde, Ꟶ besyde youre gyftes, besyde all your vowes, and all your frewylloffrynges, whyche ye geue vnto the Lorde.
Moreouer in the fyftenth daye of the seuenth moneth whan ye haue gathered in the frute of the lande, ye shall kepe holy daye vnto the Lorde seuen dayes. The fyrst daye shall be as a Sabboth: lykewise in the eyght daye shalbe the rest of the Sabboth.
And ye shall take you in the fyrst daye, the frutes of goodly trees, braunches of palme trees, and the bowes of thycke trees, and wyllowes of the brooke, and shall reioyse before the Lord your God seuen dayes.
And ye shall kepe this feast vnto the Lorde seuen dayes in the yeare. It shalbe a lawe for euer in youre generacyons, that ye kepe it in the seuenth moneth.
Ye shall dwell in boothes seuen dayes: euen all that are Israelites borne, shall dwell in boothes,
that youre chyldren after you maye knowe, howe that I made the chyldren of Israel to dwell in boothes, when I brought them out of the lande of Egypt: I am the Lord youre God.
And Moses spake vnto the chyldren of Israel concernynge the feastes of the Lorde.
And the lord spake vnto Moses sayinge:
commaunde the chyldren of Israel that they brynge vnto the, pure oyle olyue beaten for lyghtes, to cause the lampes to burne allwaye:
wythout the vayle of wytnesse in the tabernacle of wytnesse shall Aaron dresse them both euen and mornynge before the Lorde allwayes. Let it be a lawe for euer in youre generacyons.
He shall dresse the lampes vpon the pure candelstycke before the Lorde perpetually.
And thou shalt take fyne floure, and bake twelue wastels therof, two tenthdeales shalbe in one wastell.
And thou shalt set them in two rowes, syxe on a rowe vpon the pure table before the Lorde,
and put pure frankencens vpon the rowes, that they maye be bread of remembraunce, and an offrynge to the Lorde.
Euery Sabboth he shall put them in rowes before the Lorde euermoare: of the chyldren of Israel shall they be offred for an euerlastynge couenaunte.
And they shall be Aarons and hys sonnes, whych shall eate them in the holy place. For they are most holy vnto hym of the offerynges of the Lorde by a perpetuall statute.
And the sonne of an Israelitish wife whose father was an Egypcian, went out amonge the chyldren of Israel. And thys sonne of the Israelitish wyfe Ꟶ a man of Israel, stroue together in the hoste.
And the Israelitish womans sonne blasphemed the name of the Lorde, and cursed, and they broughte hym vnto Moses. Hys mothers name was Salomyth, whych was the daughter of Dibry, of the trybe of Dan:
and they put hym in warde, that the mynde of the Lorde myght be shewed them.
And the Lord spake vnto Moses sayinge:
brynge the cursed speaker wythout the hoste, and lett all that hearde hym, put theyr handes vpon hys heed, and let all the multitude stone hym.
And thou shalt speake vnto the chyldren of Israel sayinge: Whosoeuer curseth hys God, shall bere his synne:
And he that blasphemeth the name of the Lorde, let hym be slayne, and all the multitude shall stone hym to deeth. Whether he be borne in the londe or a straunger, whan he blasphemeth the name of the Lorde, let hym be slayne.
And he that kylleth any man, let hym dye the death.
And he that kylleth a beast, let hym make hym good, soule for soule.
And yf a man mayme hys neyghboure, as he hath done, so shall it be done to hym:
broke for broke eye for eye, and toth for toth: euen as he hath maymed a man, so shall he be maymed agayne.
And he that kylleth a beast, let him paye for it: and he that kylleth a man, let hym dye.
Ye shall haue one maner of lawe: euen for the straunger as well as for one of youre selues, for I am the Lorde youre God.
And Moses tolde the chyldren of Israel, and they brought hym (that had cursed) out of the hoste, and stoned hym wyth stones. And the chyldren of Israel dyd as the Lord commaunded Moses.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses in mount Sinai sayinge:
speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, and saye vnto them: when ye be come into the lande whych I geue you, the lande shall rest, Ꟶ kepe Sabboth vnto the Lorde.
Syxe yeares thou shalt sowe thy felde, and syxe yeare thou shalt cut thy vinyarde, and gether in the frute therof.
But the seuenth yeare shall be a Sabboth of rest vnto the lande. The Lordes Sabboth it shalbe: thou shalt nether sowe thy felde, nor cut thy vyneyarde.
That which groweth of the owne accorde thou shalt not reape, nether gather the grapes that thou hast left behynde, for it is a yeare of rest vnto the lande.
And the rest of the lande shalbe meat for you: euen for the, for thy seruaunte, and for thy mayde, for thy hyred seruaunte, and for the straunger that sogeourneth wyth the:
and for thy catell, and for the beastes that are in thy lande, shall all the encrease therof be meat.
And thou shalt nombre seuen Sabbathes of yeares vnto the, euen seuen tymes seuen yeare: and the space of the seuen Sabbathes of yeares will be vnto the .xlix. yeare.
And then thou shalt make a trompe blowe: in the tenth daye of the seuenth moneth, euen in the daye of attonement shall ye make the trompe blowe, thorowe out all youre lande.
And thou shalt halowe that yeare: euen the fyftyth yeare, Ꟶ proclayme lybertye thorowe out the lande vnto all the inhabiters therof, for it shalbe a yeare of iubelye vnto you, and ye shall retourne: euery man vnto hys possessyon, and euery man vnto hys kynred agayne.
A yeare of iubelye shall that fiftieth yeare be vnto you. Ye shall not sowe nether repe that which groweth of it selfe, nor gether the grapes that are left.
For that yeare of iubelie shalbe holy vnto you: but ye shall eate of the encrease therof out of the felde.
In the yeare of thys iubelye ye shall retourne euery man vnto hys possessyon agayne.
It thou sellest oughte vnto thy neyghboure, or byest of thy neyghboures hande, ye shall not disceaue one another:
but accordynge to the nombre of yeares after the iubelye yeare thou shalt bye of thy neyghboure, and accordynge vnto the nombre of yeares Ꟶ of the frutes, he shall sell vnto the.
Accordinge vnto the multitude of yeares, he shall encrease the pryse therof and accordyng to the fewnesse of yeares, he shall minyshe the pryce of it: for the nombre of frutes doth he sell vnto the.
Disceaue not ye therfore euery man his neyghboure, but thou shalt feare thy God. For I am the Lorde youre God:
wherfore ye shall do after myne ordinaunces and kepe my lawes, and do them, and ye shall dwell in the lande in safetye.
And the lande shall geue her frute, and ye shall eate youre fyll, and dwell therin in safetye.
And yf ye shall saye: what shall we eate the seuenth yeare, for we shall not sowe, nor gether in oure encrease?
I will sende my blessynge vpon you in the syxt yeare,
and it shall brynge forth frute for thre yeares: Ꟶ ye shall sowe the eyght yeare, and eate yet of olde corne vntyll the .ix. yeare: euen vntyll her frutes come, ye shall eate of olde stoare.
The lande shall not be solde to be wast: for the lande is myne, and ye but straungers and soiourners with me.
In all the lande of youre possessyon, ye shall graunt a redempcion for the lande.
Yf thy brother be waxed poore, and hath solde awaye of hys possessyon: and yf any of his kyn come to redeme it, let him bye out that whyche hys brother solde.
And yf he haue no man to redeme it, let hys hande get asmuch as maye be suffycyent to bye it oute agayne,
and let hym counte howe longe it hath bene solde, Ꟶ delyuer the rest vnto the man to whome he solde it, that he maye retourne to hys possessyon agayne.
But and yf hys hande cannot gett suffycient to restore to the other agayne, then that whyche is solde shall remayne in the hande of hym that hath boughte it, vntyll the yeare of iubelye: and in the Iubelye it shall come out, and he shall retourne vnto hys possessyon agayne.
And yf a man sell a house or a dwellynge wythin the walles of a cytie, he maye bye it out agayne wythin a whole yeare after it is solde: euen any daye of the yeare shall he redeme it agayne.
But and yf he bye it not out agayne wythin the space of a full yeare, then the house that is in the walled citie, shalbe stablisshed, and be his owne that boughte it, and hys successoures after him, and shall not go out in the iubelie.
But the houses of vyllages which haue no walles rounde aboute them, are counted as the felde of the countre, Ꟶ therfore they maye be boughte out agayne, and shall returne in the iubelye.
Notwithstandinge the cyties of the leuytes, and the houses of the cyties of their possession, maye the leuites redeme at all ceasons.
And yf a man purchase ought of the Leuites, the house that was solde, and the cite of their possession shall go out in the yeare of iubelie: for the houses of the cyties of the leuites, are their possession amonge the chyldren of Israel.
But the felde of the suburbe that is besyde their cyties, maye not be solde: but is theyr perpetuall possession.
If thy brother be waxen poore, and fallen in decaye with the, thou shalt releue him, both the straunger and soiourner, that he maye lyue with the.
And thou shalt take none vsurye of him, or vantage. But thou shalt feare thy God, that thy brother maye lyue with the.
Thou shalt not geue hym thy money vpon vsurye, nor lende him thy corne for increace.
I am the Lorde youre God, which brought you out of the lande of Egypte to geue you the lande of Canaan, Ꟶ to be youre God.
If thy brother that dwelleth by the, be waxen poore, and be solde vnto the, thou shalt not compell him to the bondage of seruauntes:
but as an hyred seruaunte and as a soiourner he shalbe with the, and shall serue the vnto the yeare of iubelie,
Ꟶ then shall he departe from the: both he and his children with him, and shall retourne vnto his awne kynred agayne, and vnto the possession of his fathers:
for they are my seruauntes, whych I brought out of the lande of Egypte, and shall not therfore be solde as bondmen.
Thou shalt not raygne ouer hym cruelly, but shalt feare thy God.
Thy bondseruaunte, and thy bondmayde which thou shalt haue, shalbe of the heythen that are rounde aboute you:
of them shall ye purchace seruauntes and maydes, and of the chyldren of the straungers that are soiourners amonge you, Ꟶ of theyr generacyons that are wyth you, which they begate in youre lande.
These shalbe youre possessyon, and ye shall take them as inheritaunce for youre chyldren after you, to possesse them, they shalbe youre bondmen for euer. But ouer youre brethren the chyldren of Israel, ye shall not raygne one ouer another cruelly.
Yf a soiourner or straunger waxe ryche by the, and thy brother that dwelleth by him waxe poore, and sell hym selfe vnto the straunger or sogeourner by the, or to any of the straungers kyn:
after that he is solde, he maye be redemed agayne: one of his brethren
ether his vncle or his vncles sonne may bye hym out: or any that is nye of kynne vnto hym of his kynred, maye redeme hym: ether yf his hande can get so moch, he maye be loosed.
And he shall reken wyth hym that boughte hym, from the yeare that he was solde in, vnto the yeare of iubelye Ꟶ the pryce of hys byenge shalbe valued accordynge vnto the nombre of yeares. As a hyred seruaunte shall he be wyth hym.
If there be yet many yeares behynde, accordynge vnto them let hym geue agayne for hys delyueraunce, of the money that he was bought for.
Yf there remayne but fewe yeares vnto the yeare of iubelye, let hym counte wyth him agayne, and accordynge vnto his yeares geue hym agayne for hys redempcyon,
and he shalbe with hym yeare by yeare as an hyred seruaunte Ꟶ the other shall not raygne cruelly ouer him in thy sighte.
If he be not redemed thus, he shall goo out in the yeare of iubelie, both he and his chyldren with hym:
for the chyldren of Israel are my seruauntes, whych I broughte out of the lande of Egypte. I am the Lorde youre God.
Ye shall make you no ydolles nor grauen ymage, nether reare you vp any stone, nether shall ye sett vp any ymage of stone in your land to worshippe it: for I am the Lord youre God:
ye shall kepe my Sabbothes, Ꟶ feare my sanctuary: for I am the Lorde.
If ye walke in myne ordinaunces and kepe my commaundementes, and do them,
I wyll sende you rayne in the ryght ceason and the lande shall yelde her encrease, and the trees of the felde shall geue theyr frute.
And the thresshynge shall reach vnto wyne haruest, and the wyneharuest shall reach vnto sowynge tyme, and ye shall eate your bread in plenteousnes, and dwell in youre lande peasably.
And I wyll sende peace in the lande, Ꟶ ye shall slepe without any man to make you a frayde. And I wyll rydd euell beastes out of the lande, and there shall no swerde goo thorow out youre lande.
And ye shall chase youre enemyes, and they shall fall before you vpon the swerde.
And fyue of you shall chace an hundred, Ꟶ an hundred of you shall put ten thousande to flyghte, and youre enemyes shall fall before you vpon the swerde.
For I will haue respect vnto you, and make you encrease and multiplye you, and sett vp my couenaunt with you.
And ye shall eate olde stoare, and carye out olde for the newe.
And I wyll make my dwellynge place amonge you, Ꟶ my soule shall not lothe you.
I wyll walke amonge you, and wylbe youre God, and ye shalbe my people.
I am the Lorde youre God, whyche broughte you out of the lande of Egypte, that ye shulde not be theyr bondemen, and I haue broken the cheynes of your yoke, and made you go vp ryghte.
But and yf ye wyll not harken vnto me, nor wyll do all these my commaundementes:
And yf ye shall despise myne ordinaunces, ether yf youre soule abhorre my lawes, so that ye wyll not do all my commaundementes, but breake myne appoyntment,
I also will do thys vnto you. For I will bring vpon you fearfulnesse, swellynge of body, and the burnynge agewe, to consume youre eyes, Ꟶ gendre sorowe of hert. And ye shall sowe youre seed in vayne, for youre enemyes shall eate it,
And I wyll set my face agenste you, and ye shall fall before youre enemyes, Ꟶ they that hate you, shall raygne ouer you and ye shall flee, when no man foloweth you.
And yf ye will not yet for all this herken vnto me, then will I punysh you seuen tymes more for youre synnes,
and wyll breake the pryde of youre stubburnesse. And I wyll make youre heauen as yron, and youre erth as brasse.
And youre laboure shalbe spent in vayne. For youre lande shall not geue hyr encrease, nether shall the trees of the lande geue theyr frutes.
And yf ye walke contrary vnto me, and wyll not herken vnto me, I wyll brynge seuen tymes moo plages vpon you, accordinge to youre synnes.
I will also sende in wilde beastes vpon you, which shall robbe you of youre children, and destroye youre catell, and make you fewe in nombre, and cause youre hye wayes to growe vnto a wyldernesse.
And yf ye maye not be refourmed by these thynges but shall walke contrarye vnto me,
then wyll I also walke contrarye vnto you, and wyll punish you yet seuen tymes for youre synnes.
And I wyll sende a swerde vpon you, that shall auenge my testament And when ye are gathered together wythin youre cyties, I wyll sende the pestilence amonge you, and ye shalbe delyuered into the hande of the enemye.
And when I haue broken the staffe of youre bread: ten wyues shall bake youre bread in one ouen, and they shall delyuer you youre bread agayne by weyght ye shall eate, and not be satisfyed.
And yf ye wyll not yet for all thys herken vnto me, but shall walke agaynst me,
I will walke contrarye vnto you also in indignacyon, and wyll chastice you seuen tymes for youre synnes.
And ye shall eate the flesh of youre sonnes and the fleshe of youre daughters shall ye deuoure.
I wyll destroye youre hye places, and roote out youre ymages, and cast youre carkasses vpon the bodyes of youre ydolles, and my soule shall abhorre you.
And I wyll make your cyties desolate, and brynge youre sanctuarye vnto nought, and wyll not smell the swetnesse of youre odoures.
I wyll brynge the lande vnto a wyldernesse, and youre enemyes which dwell therin, shall wondre at it.
And I will strawe you amonge the hethen, and will drawe out a swerde after you, and youre lande shalbe wast, and youre cyties desolate.
Then shall the lande enioye her Sabbothes, as longe as it lyeth voyde, and ye shalbe in your enemyes lande: euen then shall the lande rest, and reioyse in her Sabbothes.
As longe as it lyeth voyde it shall rest, because it dyd not reste in youre Sabbothes, when ye dwelt vpon it.
And vpon them that are left alyue of you, I wyll sende a fayntnesse into theyr hertes in the lande of theyr enemyes: Ꟶ the sounde of a shakyng leef, shall chace them, and whan they flee the swerde, they shall fall: no man folowinge vpon them.
They shall fall one vpon another, as it were before a swerde, euen no man folowynge vpon them, and ye shall haue no power to stande before your enemyes:
And ye shall perish amonge the hethen, Ꟶ the lande of youre enemyes shall eate you vp.
And they that are left of you, shall pyne awaye in their vnryghteousnes, euen in their enemyes lande, and in the mysdeades of their fathers shall they consume.
And they shall confesse their misdeades and the mysdeades of their fathers for their trespace, which they haue trespaced agaynst me, and for that also that they haue walked contrarye vnto me.
Therfore I also wyll walke contrary vnto them, and wyll brynge them into the lande of their enemyes. And then at the leest waye their vncircumcysed hertes shall be tamed, and they shall make an attonement for their mysdeades.
And I will remembre my couenaunt, with Iacob, and my bonde with Isahac, and myne appointment with Abraham, and will thynke on the lande.
The lande shall be lefte of them, and shall enioye her Sabbothes, whyle she lyeth wast without them. And they shall make an attonement for their misdeades, because they despised my lawes, and because their soule refused myne ordinaunces:
And yet for all that when they be in the lande of their enemyes, I will not cast them awaye, neyther will abhorre them, to destroye them vtterly, and to breake myne appoyntment with them: for I am the Lorde their God.
I wyll for their sakes remembre the couenaunt made vnto their fathers, whom I brought out of the lande of Egypte in the syghte of the hethen, that I myght be their God: I am the Lorde.
These are the ordinaunces, and iudgementes, and lawes, which the Lorde made betwene him and the children of Israel in mount Sinai, by the hande of Moses.
And the Lord spake vnto Moses sayinge:
speake vnto the children of Israel, and saye vnto them: If any man will geue a synguler vowe vnto the Lord accordynge to the value of the soules,
the value of the male from twentye yeare olde vnto sixtye shalbe fyftie sycles of siluer, after the weyght of the sanctuary.
And yf it be a female, the value shalbe thyrtye sicles.
And from fyue yeares to twentye, the male shalbe set at twentye sicles, and the female at ten sycles.
And from a moneth vnto fyue yeare, the male shalbe set at fyue sycles of syluer, and the female at thre.
And he that is syxtie yeare olde, and aboue, shalbe valued at fiftene sicles, and the woman at ten.
But If he be to poore so to be set, he shall present himselfe before the preast: Ꟶ the preast shall value him, accordinge as the hande of him that vowed is able to gett, euen so shall the prest value him.
If it be a beaste of which men bringe an offrynge vnto the Lorde: all that any man geueth of soche vnto the Lorde, shalbe counted holy.
He shall not alter it nor chaunge it: a good for a bad, or a bad for a good. And yf he chaunge beast for beast, then both the same beast and it also wherwith it was chaunged shalbe holy.
If it be any maner of vnclene beast, of which men do not offer a sacrifyce vnto the Lord, he shall set the beast before the preast,
and the preast shall value it, whether it be good or bad. And as the preast setteth it, so shall it be.
But yf he will bye it agayne, he shall geue the fyft parte moare about that it was set at.
If any man dedicate his house, to be holy vnto the Lord, the preast shall set it, whether it be good or bad: and as the preast hath set it, so shall the value be.
And whan he that sanctifyed it wyll redeme hys house, lett hym geue the fyft parte of the money that it was iudged at therto, and it shalbe hys.
If a man halowe a pece of hys enhereted lande vnto the Lorde, it shalbe set accordynge to the sede therof. If it beare an homer of barlye, it shalbe set at fyftie sycles of syluer.
If he halowe his felde immediatly from the yeare of iubely, it shalbe worth accordinge as it is estemed.
But and yf he halowe hys felde after the Iubelye, the preast shall recken the money accordinge to the nombre of the yeares that remayne vnto the yeare of Iubely folowynge, Ꟶ there after it shall be lower sett.
If he that consecrated the felde, wyll redeme it agayne, let hym put the fyft parte of the pryce that it was set at there vnto,
and it shalbe hys, And yf he wyll not redeme the felde, but selleth the felde to another man, he maye redeme it nomore.
But when the felde goeth out in the yeare of iubelye, it shalbe made holy vnto the Lord: euen as a felde that is vtterly put awaye, and it shall be the preastes possessyon.
If a man sanctyfye vnto the Lord a felde, whych he hath boughte, and is not of his enheritaunce,
the preast shall reken vnto hym what it is worth vnto the yeare of iubelye, Ꟶ he shall geue the pryce that it is set at, the same daye, as a thynge consecrated vnto the Lorde.
And in the yeare of iubelye, the felde shall returne vnto him of whome he boughte it, euen to him, whose enheritaunce of land it is.
And all settynge shalbe accordynge to the cycle of the sanctuary. One sycle conteyneth twenye halfpens.
But the fyrst borne of the beastes that is appoynted vnto the Lorde, maye no man sanctifye: whether it be oxe or shepe, for it is the Lordes allredy.
If it be an vncleane beast, he shall redeme it, as it is sett at, and geue the fyfth parte moare therto: Or, yf it be not redemed, it shalbe solde, accordynge to the value.
Notwithstandynge, no damned thynge that a man putteth from hym and dedycateth vnto the Lorde, of all his good (whether it be man or beast or lande of hys enheritaunce) maye be sold or redemed: for euery thinge so put awaye, is most holy vnto the Lorde.
Let no damned thynge that a man separateth, be redemed, but dye the death.
Euery tyth of the lande whych is of the sede of the lande, or of the frute of the trees, is the Lordes, and is sanctified vnto the Lord.
And yf a man wyll redeme ought of hys tythes, let him adde the fifth parte therto.
And euery tyth of oxe and of shepe and of euery beest that goeth vnder the rodd euen euery tenth shalbe holy vnto the Lord.
He shall not loke yf it be good or bad, ner chaunge it. Els, yf he chaunge it, both it, and that it was chaunged withall, shalbe halowed vnto the Lorde, and maye not be redemed.
These are the commaundementes, whych the Lorde commaunded by Moses vnto the chyldren of Israel in mount Sinai.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses in the wildernesse of Sinay, in the tabernacle of wytnesse, the fyrst daye of the seconde moneth in the seconde yeare after they were come out of the lande of Egypte, sayinge:
take ye the summe of all the multitude of the chyldren of Israel, after theyr kynredes Ꟶ housholde of theyr fathers wyth the nombre of theyr names, all that are males, heed by heed,
from .xx. yeare Ꟶ aboue: euen all that go forthe to the warre in Israel, thou and Aaron shall nombre them thorowe out theyr armyes,
and wyth you shalbe men of euery trybe, wherof euery one is heed man of the house of hys fathers.
And these are the names of the men that shall stande with you: of Ruben, Elizur the sonne of Sedeur:
of Simeon, Selumiel the sonne of Suri Sadai:
of Iuda, Nahesson the sonne of Aminadab:
of Isachar, Nathanael the sonne of zuar:
of zabulon, Eliab the sonne of Helon.
Amonge the chyldren of Ioseph: of Ephraim, Elisama the sonne of Amihud: of Manasse, Gamaliel the sonne of Peda zur:
of Ben Iamin, Abidan the sonne of Gedeoni:
of Dan, Ahiezer the sonne of Ammi Sadai:
of Aser, Pagiel the sonne of Ocran:
of Gad, Elisaph the sonne of Deguel:
of Nephthali, Ahira the sonne of Enan.
These were of greate fame in the congregacyon, Lordes of the trybes of their fathers, and heades ouer thousandes in Israel.
And Moses and Aaron toke these men (which are expressed by theyr names)
and gethered all the congregacyon together, the fyrst daye of the seconde moneth, and they were rekened thorowe out their kinredes Ꟶ houses of their fathers by name from .xx. yeare and aboue, heed by heed.
As the Lorde commaunded Moses, euen so he nombred them in the wyldernesse of Sinai.
And the chyldren of Ruben Israels eldest sonne thorowe out theyr generacions, Ꟶ their kynredes, Ꟶ houses of their fathers in the nombre of names, heed by heed (all males from .xx. yeare Ꟶ aboue) as many as dyd goo forth to the warre:
the nombre of them that were of the tribe of Ruben, was .xlvi. thousande Ꟶ .v. hundred.
Of the chyldren of Simeon thorowe out theyr generacyons and theyr kynredes and houses of theyr fathers, the summe of them in the nombre of names, heed by heed, all the males from .xx. yeares and aboue, whosoeuer myght go forth to the warre:
the summe of them that were of the trybe of Simeon .lix. thousande and .iij. hundred.
Of the chyldren of Gad thorowe out their generacyons and theyr kynredes and housholdes of theyr fathers, the nombre of the names from .xx. yeare Ꟶ aboue, all that wente forth to the warre:
the nombre of them that were of the tribe of Gad, was .xlv. thousande, syxe hundred and fyftye.
Of the chyldren of Iuda thorowe out their generacyons and their kynredes and houses of their fathers, the nombre of names from .xx. yeare and aboue, all that were able to go furth to the warre:
The nombre of them that were of the tribe of Iuda was .lxxiiij. thousande and syxe hundred.
Of the chyldren of Isachar thorowe out theyr generacions Ꟶ theyr kynredes and houses of theyr fathers: the nombre of names from .xx. yeare and aboue which went all furth to warre,
the nombre of them that were of the tribe of Isachar, was .liiij. thousande Ꟶ .iiij. hundred.
Of the chyldren of zabulon: thorowe out theyr generacyons and theyr kynredes, and houses of their fathers, the nombre of names from .xx. yeare Ꟶ aboue, whych were all able to go furth in the hoost:
The nombre of them that were of the trybe of zabulon, was .lvij. thousande and foure hundred.
Of the chyldren of Ioseph: Namely, of the chyldren of Ephraim thorowe out theyr generacyons and theyr kynredes and houses of theyr fathers, the nombre of names from .xx. yeares Ꟶ aboue,
all that went out to the warre: the nombre of them that were of the tribe of Ephraim was .xl. thousande, Ꟶ fyue hundred.
Of the chyldren of Manasse thorow out their generacions, Ꟶ theyr kynredes, and houses of their fathers, the nombre of names from twentye yeare olde Ꟶ aboue, all that went out to the warre:
The nombre of them that were of the tribe of Manasse, was .xxxij. thousande Ꟶ two hundred.
Of the chyldren of Ben Iamin thorowe out their generacyons, and theyr kynredes Ꟶ houses of theyr fathers, the nombre of names from twentye yeare Ꟶ aboue, all the wente furth to the warre:
The nombre of them that were of the trybe of BenIamin was .xxxv. thousande, and .iiii. hundred.
Of the chyldren of Dan thorowe out their generacyons and their kynredes and houses of theyr fathers: the nombre of names from twentye yeare olde and aboue, all that went furth to the warre:
The nombre of them that were of the trybe of Dan was .lxii. thousande and .vii. hundred.
Of the children of Aser thorowe out their generacyons and their kynredes and houses of theyr fathers, the nombre of the names from .xx. yeares and aboue, all that wente out to warre:
The nombre of them that were of the trybe of Aser was .xli. thousande and .v. hundred.
Of the chyldren of Nephthali: thorowe out theyr generacyons and theyr kynredes Ꟶ houses of theyr fathers, the nombre of names from .xx. yeares and aboue, all that myght go furth to the warre:
The nombre of them that were of the trybe of Nephthali, was thre and fyftye thousande and .iiii. hundred.
These are the summes whych Moses Ꟶ Aaron nombred and the princes of Israel: those twelue men, which were euery one ouer the house of theyr fathers.
And all the nombres of the chyldren of Israel, thorowe out the houses of theyr fathers, from twentie yeare Ꟶ aboue, all that went furth to the warre in Israel,
drewe all vnto the summe of syxe hundred thousande and thre thousande, fyue hundred and fyftye.
But the Leuites after the trybe of theyr fathers were not nombred amonge them.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, saying:
Thou shalt not nombre the trybe of Leui, nether take the somme of them from amonge the chyldren of Israel.
But thou shalt appoynte the leuites ouer the habytacyon of witnesse, and ouer all the vessels therof, and ouer all thynges that are in it. Yea they shall beare the tabernacle and all the vessels therof, Ꟶ they shall ministre in it, Ꟶ shall dwell rounde aboute the tabernacle.
And when the tabernacle goeth forth, the leuites shall take it downe: and when the tabernacle is to be pitched, they shall sett it vp: and yf any straunger come nye, he shall dye.
And the chyldren of Israel shall pytch theyr tentes, euery man in hys owne companye, and eueryman vnder his awne standerd thorowe out theyr hostes.
But the leuites shall pytche rounde aboute the tabernacle of wytnesse, that there be no wrath vpon the congregacyon of the chyldren of Israel, and the leuites shall kepe the watch of the tabernacle of witnesse.
And the children of Israel dyd accordynge to all that the Lord commaunded Moses, euen so dyd they.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses and Aaron sayinge:
euery man of the children of Israel shall pytch vnder his owne standerd Ꟶ vnder the armes of theyr fathers houses: on the other syde Ꟶ rounde aboute the tabernacle of wytnesse shall they pytch.
On the eastsyde to warde the rysynge of the sonne, shall they of the standerd of the hoste of Iuda pytch thorowe out theyr armyes: And Nahesson the sonne of Aminadab was captayne of the sonnes of Iuda.
And his hoste and the nombre of them .lxxiiii. thousande Ꟶ .vi. hundred.
Next vnto him shall they that be of the trybe of Izachar pytche: Ꟶ Nathaneel the sonue of zuar was captayne of the chyldren of Izachar:
hys hoste Ꟶ the summe of the nombre therof .liiii. thousande Ꟶ foure hundred.
And then the trybe of zabulon: and Eliab the sonne of Helon, captayne ouer the chyldren of zabulon,
Ꟶ his hoste Ꟶ the nombre of them .lvii. thousande and .iiii. hundred:
so that the whole nombre of the whole hoste of Iuda are an hundred thousande .lxxxvi. thousande. Ꟶ .iiii. hundred thorowe out theyr armyes: and these shall go before.
On the southsyde shall the standerd of the hoste of Ruben kepe thorowe theyr companyes: Ꟶ the captayne ouer the sonnes of Ruben, was Elizur the sonne of Sedeur.
And hys hoste and the nombre of them .xlvi. thousande, and .v. hundred.
And fast by hym shall the trybe of Symeon pytche, and the captayne ouer the sonnes of Simeon, was Salumiel the sonne of zuri Sadai,
and his hoste and the nombre of them .lix. thousande Ꟶ .iii. hundred.
And the trybe of Gad also: and the captayne ouer the sonnes of Gad, was Eliasaph the sonne of Deguel:
And his hoste and the nombre of them .xlv. thousande .vi. hundred and .l.
All that were nombred wyth the trybe of Ruben: an hundred thousande .li. thousande .iiii. hundred Ꟶ .l. thorowe out their armyes, and they shall go in the seconde place.
And the tabernacle of wytnesse shall go wyth the hoste of the leuites, in the myddes of the hostes: And as they lye in their tentes, euen so shall they procede in the iourney, euery man in hys degree, and vnder theyr owne standerdes.
The westsyde shall the standard of the hoste of Ephraim kepe wyth theyr armyes, Ꟶ the captayne ouer the sonnes of Ephraim, was Elisama the sonne of Amihud:
Hys hoste and the nombre of them .xl. thousande and fyue hundred.
And fast by hym, shalbe the trybe of Manasse, and the captayne ouer the sonnes of Manasse was Gamaleel the sonne of Pedazur.
Hys hoste and the nombre of them .xxxii. thousande and .ii. hundred.
And the trybe of Ben Iamin also: and the captayne ouer the sonnes of Beniamin was, Abidan the sonne of Gedeoni.
Hys hoste and the nombre of them .xxxv. thousande and .iiij. hundred.
All that were appoynted with the hoste of Ephraim, were an hundred thousande .viij. thousande and an hundred, thorowe out their armyes Ꟶ they shall goo in the thyrde place.
The standerd of the hoste of Dan shall kepe the northsyde with their armyes: Ꟶ the captayne ouer the children of Dan, was Ahiezer the sonne of Ammi Sadai.
His hoste and the nombre of them .lxxij. thousande and .vi. hundred.
And fast by hym shall the trybe of Aser pitche: and the captayne ouer the sonnes of Aser was Pagiel the sonne of Ocran.
Hys hoste and the nombre of them .xlj. thousande Ꟶ .v. hundred.
And the trybe of Nephthali also, and the captayne ouer the chyldren of Nephthali: was Ahira the sonne of Enan.
Hys hoste and the nombre of them .liij. thousande and .iiij. hundred.
All they that were appoynted wyth the hoste of Dan, was an hundred thousande .lvij. thousande and .vj. hundred. And they shall go hynmost wyth their standerdes.
These are the summes of the chyldren of Israel thorowe out the houses of their fathers. euen all the nombres that pytched thorowe out their hostes .vi. hundred thousande .iii. thousande .v. hundred and fyftie.
But the Leuites were not nombred amonge the chyldren of Israel, as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And the chyldren of Israel dyd accordynge to all that the Lorde commaunded Moses, for so they pytched with their standerdes, Ꟶ so they iourneyd thorowe out their kynredes, Ꟶ thorowe out the housholdes of their fathers.
These are the generacyons of Aaron and Moses, in the daye that the Lord spake wt Moses in mount Synai,
Ꟶ these are the names of the sonnes of Aaron: Nadad the eldest sone, Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
These are the names of the sonnes of Aaron which were Preastes anoynted, Ꟶ whose hande was consecrated to minystre.
And Nadab and Abihu dyed before the Lorde whan they offred straunge fyre before the Lorde in the wyldernesse of Synai, and had no chyldren. And Eleazar and Ithamar mynistred in the syght of Aaron their father.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
brynge the trybe of Leui, and set them before Aaron the Preast that they maye serue hym and wayte vpon hy
and vpon all the multitude, before the tabernacle of witnesse, to do the seruyce of the habitacyon.
They shall kepe all the apparell of the tabernacle of wytnesse, and wayte vpon the chyldren of Israel, to do the seruyce of the habitacion.
And thou shalt geue the Leuites vnto Aaron and hys sonnes, for they are geuen and delyuered vnto him of the chyldren of Israel.
And thou shalt appoynte Aaron Ꟶ hys sonnes to wayte on their Preastes offyce: and the straunger that commeth nye, shall be slayne.
And the Lord spake vnto Moses sayinge:
beholde I haue taken the Leuites from amonge the chyldren of Israell for all the fyrst borne that openeth the matrice amonge the chyldren of Israel, and the Leuites shalbe myne:
because all the fyrst borne are myne: for the same daye that I smote all the fyrst borne in the lande of Egypte, I halowed vnto me all the fyrstborne in Israel, both man Ꟶ beast, and myne they shalbe: I am the Lorde.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses in the wyldernesse of Synai sayinge:
Nombre the chyldren of Leui after the houses of their fathers in their kynredes. All that are males, from a moneth olde and aboue shalt thou nombre.
And Moses nombred them, accordynge to the commaundement of the Lord, and as he had commaunded.
And these were the chyldren of Leui in their names: Gerson, Ꟶ Cahath and Merari.
And these are the names of the chyldren of Gerson in their kynredes: Libni and Semei.
The sonnes of Cahath in their kynredes: Amram, Iezehar, Hebron Ꟶ Oziel.
And the sonnes of Merari in their kynredes Maheli and Musi. These are the kynredes of the Leuites, accordynge to the houses of their fathers.
Of Gerson came the kynred of the Libnites and the kynred of the Semeites. These are the kynredes of the Gersonites.
And the summe of them (after the nombre of all the males from a moneth olde and aboue) was .vii. thousande and fyue hundred.
And the kynredes of the Gersonytes shall pitche behynde the habitacyon west warde.
The captayne Ꟶ most auncient of the house of the Gersonites, was Eliasaph the sonne of Lael.
And vnder the kepynge of the chyldren of Gerson in the tabernacle of witnesse was the habitacyon and the tente, the couerynge therof, and the hangynge of the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse,
and the hangynges of the courte, and the curtayne of the dore of the courte: which is rounde about the Tabernacle, and the alter, and the cordes of it for all the seruyce therof.
And of Cahath came the kynred of the Amramites, and the kynred of the Iezeharites: the kynred of the Hebronites, and the kynred of the Ozielites:
These are the kynredes of the Cahathites. And the nombre of all the males from a moneth olde and aboue, was .viij. thousande and syxe hundred: and these shall kepe the thynges that are to be kepte in the holy place.
And the kynred of the chyldren of Cahath shall pytche on the southsyde of the Tabernacle.
The captayne and most auncient of the house of the kynred of the Cahathites, was Elisaphan the sonne of Oziel,
and vnder their kepynge was the arcke, the table, the candelstyck, and the alters, and all the vessels of the sanctuary that they mynistre in, and the vayle, and whatsoeuer belonged to the mynistracyon therof.
And Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the Preaste, was captayne ouer all the captaynes of the Leuites, and had the ouersyghte of them that wayted vpon the sanctuary.
And of Merari came the kynred of the Mahelites, and the kynred of the Musites: These are the kynredes of Merari.
And the summe of them accordynge to the nombre of all the males, from a moneth olde and aboue was .vj. thousande and .ij. hundred.
The captayne and the most auncient of their house that were of the kynred of Merari, was zuriel the sonne of Abihael: and these shall pitche on the north syde of the tabernacle.
And vnder the custody of the sonnes of Merari shalbe the bordes of the dwellynge, and the barres, pyllers and sockettes therof, all the vessell therof, and all that serueth therto:
Ꟶ the pyllers of the courte rounde aboute with their sockettes, their pynnes Ꟶ their cordes.
But on the forefront of the habitacyon before the Tabernacle of wytnesse eastwarde, shall Moses Ꟶ Aaron and his sonnes pytche, and wayte to kepe the sanctuary, and to kepe the chyldren of Israel. And the straunger that commeth nye, shall be slayne.
And the hole summe of the Leuites whych Moses and Aaron nombred, at the commaundement of the Lorde thorowe out their kynredes (euen all the males from a moneth olde and aboue) was .xxij. thousande.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: Nombre all the fyrst borne that are males amonge tbe chyldren of Israel (from a moneth olde and aboue) and take the nombre of their names.
And thou shalt apoynte the Leuites to me (for I am the Lorde,) for all the fyrstborne of the chyldren of Israel, and the catell of the Leuites, for all the fyrst gendred of the catell of the chyldren of Israel.
And Moses nombred as the Lorde commaunded hym, all the fyrst borne of the chyldren of Israel.
And all the fyrst borne males rehearsed by their names, (from a moneth olde and aboue, accordynge to their nombre) were .xxij. thousande .ij. hundred and .lxxiij.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge:
take the Leuites for all the fyrst borne of the chyldren of Israel, and the catell of the Leuites for their catell: and the Leuites shalbe myne. I am the Lorde.
And for the redemynge of the two hundred and .lxxiij. (whych are moo then the Leuites in the fyrst borne of the chyldren of Israel,)
take .v. sycles of euery heade, after the weyght of the Sanctuary the Sycle conteynynge twenty halfpens.
And geue the money wher with the odde nombre of them is redemed, vnto Aaron and his sonnes.
And Moses toke the redempcyon money, of the ouerplus that were moo then the Leuites:
of the fyrst borne of the chyldren of Israel toke he thys money: euen a thousande .iij. hundred and .lxv. sycles, after the sycle of the Sanctuary.
And Moses gaue the money of them that were redemed, vnto Aaron and his sonnes accordynge to the worde of the Lord, euen as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses and Aaron sayinge:
Take the summe of the chyldren of Cahath from amonge the sonnes of Leui, after theyr kynredes and houses of their fathers,
(from .xxx. yere and aboue vntyll fyftie) all that are able to go furth to the warre, for to do the worke in the tabernacle of wytnesse.
The offyce of the chyldren of kahath in the tabernacle of wytnesse, is moost holy.
And when the hoste remoueth, Aaron Ꟶ hys sonnes shall come Ꟶ take doune the vayle, that hangeth betwene, Ꟶ wrappe the Arke of wytnesse in it:
and shall put theron a couerynge of taxus skynnes, Ꟶ shall sprede vpon it a cloth that is altogether of yelow silke, and put in the barres therof.
And vpon the shewe table, they shall sprede abrode a cloth of yelowe sylke, Ꟶ put theron the dysshes, spones, flatpeces, and pottes to powre wyth, and there shalbe breed theron continually:
Ꟶ they shall spreade vpon them a couerynge of purple, and couer the same with a couerynge of taxus skynnes, and put in the barres therof.
And they shall take a cloth of yelow silke, and couer the candelstycke of lyght, with his lampes, tonges, and snoffers, and all the oyle vessels which they occupye aboute it,
Ꟶ they shall put both it, and all the vessell therof within a couerynge of taxus skynnes, Ꟶ put it vpon a barre.
And vpon the golden alter they shall sprede a cloth of yelowe sylke, and couer it with a couerynge of taxus skynnes, Ꟶ put in the barres therof.
And they shall take all the thynges (whych they occupye to mynistre with in the holy place) and put a cloth of yelowe sylke vpon them, and couer them wt a couerynge of taxus skynnes, and put them on a barre.
And they shall take awaye the asshes from the alter, and sprede a purple cloth theron: and put vpon it all the vessels therof,
that they mynistre wythall: euen the cole pannes, the fleshe hokes, the shouels, the basens and the other vessels of the alter, and they shall sprede vpon it a couerynge of taxus skynnes, and put in the barres of it.
And when Aaron and hys sonnes haue made an ende of couerynge the holy thinges, and all the vessels of the sanctuarye (agaynst that the hoste remoue) then the sonnes of Cahath shall come in for to beare, but they shall not touche any holy thynge, least they dye. And thys is the charge of the sonnes of Cahath in the Tabernacle of wytnesse.
And to the offyce of Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the Preaste pertayneth the oyle for the lyghte, the swete cens, the dayly meatoffrynge, Ꟶ the anoyntynge oyle, and the ouersyghte of all the tabernacle, and of all that therin is, both in the sanctuary and in all the vessels therof.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses and Aaron, sayinge:
Ye shall not destroye the trybe of the kynred of the Cahathites, from amonge the Leuites.
But thus do vnto them, that they maye lyue and not dye, when they go vnto the most holy thynges: Let Aaron and his sonnes go in, and take them downe, to euery one after hys seruyce, and after hys charge.
But let them not go in, to se when the the holy thynges are folden vp, lest they dye.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge.
Take also the summe of the chyldren of Gerson, thorowe out the houses of their fathers, and thorowe out their kynredes:
from .xxx. yere and aboue, vntyll .l. shalt thou nombre them, all that are able to goo forth to the warre for to do seruyce in the tabernacle of wytnesse.
And this is the seruyce of the kynred of the Gersonites, to serue and to beare.
They shall beare the curtaynes of the dwellynge, and the rouffe of the Tabernacle of wytnesse, hys couerynge, Ꟶ the couerynge of taxus skynnes, that is an hye aboue vpon it, and the hangynge of the dore which is in the tabernacle of wytnesse:
Ꟶ the hangynges of the courte, Ꟶ the hangynge that is in the entrynge in of the gate of the courte rounde about the dwellynge Ꟶ the altare, with the cordes, Ꟶ all the instrumentes that serue vnto them, and all that is made for to serue them.
At the mouth of Aaron and hys sonnes, shall all the seruyce of the chyldren of the Gersonytes be done, in all their charges and in all their seruyce, and ye shall nombre vnto them all their burthens to kepe.
And thys is the seruyce of the kynred of the chyldren of Gerson in the Tabernacle of wytnesse, Ꟶ their watche shalbe vnder the hande of Ithamar the sonne of Aaron the Preaste.
And thou shalt nombre the sonnes of Merari after their kynredes, Ꟶ after the houses of their fathers:
from .xxx. yeres Ꟶ aboue vnto .l. shalt thou nombre them, euery one that is able to go forth to the warre, to do the seruyce of the Tabernacle of wytnesse.
And thys is the charge that they must wayte vpon, accordynge to all their seruyce in the tabernacle of wytnesse. The bordes of the dwellynge, with the barres, pyllers, Ꟶ sockettes therof,
and the pyllers that are rounde aboute the courte, wt their sockettes, pynnes Ꟶ cordes, Ꟶ withall the instrumentes of it, for all their seruyce. And by name ye shall reken the thynges that they must wayte vpon to beare.
This is the seruice of the kynredes of the sonnes of Merari accordynge to all their offyce in the Tabernacle of wytnesse vnder the hande of Ithamar the sonne of Aaron the Preaste.
And Moses Ꟶ Aaron Ꟶ the prynces of the multitude nombred the sonnes of the Cahathites, after their kynredes and houses of their fathers
from .xxx. yere Ꟶ aboue vnto fyftie, all that were able to go forth to the warre, to do seruyce in the tabernacle of wytnesse.
And the nombres of them thorowe out their kynredes were two thousande, seuen hundred Ꟶ .l.
This is the nombre of the kynredes of Cahath: namely, all that myght do seruyce in the tabernacle of wytnesse, which Moses and Aaron dyd nombre, accordynge to the commaundement of the Lorde by the hande of Moses.
These are the nombres of the sonnes of Gerson thorowe out their kynredes Ꟶ houses of their fathers,
from .xxx. yere vp vnto fyftie all that were able to go forth to the warre, for to do seruyce in the Tabernacle of witnesse.
And the nombres of them thorowe out their kynredes: and houses of their fathers, were two thousande .vj. hundred Ꟶ .xxx.
Thys is the nombre of the kynredes of the sonnes of Gerson, of all the dyd seruyce in the tabernacle of wytnesse, which Moses Ꟶ Aaron dyd nombre accordynge to the commaundement of the Lorde.
And these are the nombres of the kynredes of the sonnes of Merari thorowe out their kynredes Ꟶ houses of their fathers,
from .xxx. yere vp vnto fyftie: all that wente forth to the warre, Ꟶ seruyd in the tabernacle of wytnesse.
And the nombres of them after their kynredes were, thre thousande Ꟶ two hundred.
This is the summe of the kynredes of the sonnes of merari, whiche Moses Ꟶ Aaron nombred accordynge to the worde of the Lorde, by the hande of Moses.
And so all the nombres of the Leuites which Moses, Aaron, and the Lordes of Israell nombred, after their kynredes and housholdes of their fathers,
from .xxx. yere vp vnto .l. euery one that came to do hys offyce and seruyce and to beare hys burthen in the Tabernacle of wytnesse:
were (whan they were nombred.) .viij. thousande, fyue hundred and .lxxx.
Accordynge to the worde of the Lorde dyd (Aaron) nombre them by the hande of Moses, euery one accordynge to their seruyce and charge, and accordynge to their offyces: as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
commaunde the children of Israel that they put out of the hoste, euery leper and euery one that hath an yssue, and whosoeuer is defyled vpon a soule.
Both male Ꟶ female shall ye put out: euen out of the hoost shall ye put them, that they defyle not the tentes amonge which I dwell.
And the chyldren of Israel dyd so, and put them out of the hoste, euen as the Lorde spake vnto Moses, so dyd the chyldren of Israel.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
speake vnto the chyldren of Israel: whether it be man or woman. Yf they haue commytted any synne that a man doeth, and haue trespaced agaynst the Lorde, that soule hath done amisse:
Therfore they shall knowledge their synne, whyche they haue done, and let hym restore agayne the hurte that he hath done in the hole, and put the fyft parte of it moare thereto, Ꟶ geue it vnto hym whom he hath trespaced agenste.
But and yf there be not a man to restore the hurte vnto, ner a kynsman of hys, let the trespace be made good vnto the Lorde, and it shalbe the Preastes, besyde the ram of the attonement wherby an attonement shalbe made for him.
And euery heue offeringe that is made of the holy thynges of the chyldren of Israel whych they brynge vnto the Preaste, shall be hys:
and euery mans halowed thinges shalbe his: and whatsoeuer any man geueth the Preaste, it shalbe hys.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
Speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, and saye vnto them: If any mans wyfe goo asyde, and trespace agaynst hym,
so that another man lye wyth her fleshely, and it be hyd from the eyes of her husbande, and is not come to lyghte that she is defyled and ther is no wytnesse agaynst her, neyther she taken with the maner,
and the sprete of gelousye commeth vpon hym, so that he is gelouse ouer hys wyfe whych is defyled: or yf the sprete of gelousye come vpon hym, so that he is gelouse ouer his wyfe whych is yet vndefyled:
then let the man brynge his wyfe vnto the Preaste, and brynge wyth her an offerynge for her: the tenthe parte of an Epha of barlye meale, but let him powre none oyle vpon it, nor put frankencens theron: for it is an offerynge of gelousye, an offerynge for a remembrauce, causynge the synne to be thought vpon.
And the Preaste shall brynge her and set her before the Lorde,
and let him take holy water in an erthen vessell, Ꟶ of the dust that is in the floore of the habitacyon, and put it into the water.
And let the Preaste set the woman before the Lorde, and vncouer the womans head, and put the memoryall of the offerynge in her handes whyche is the gelousye offerynge, and the Preaste shall haue bytter and cursyd water in hys hande, Ꟶ the prest shall charge her,
and saye vnto the woman. If no man haue lyen wyth the, nether haste gone asyde to vnclennesse without thy husbande, then haue thou no arme of thys bytter, and cursyd waters.
But and yf thou hast gone asyde behynde thyne husbande, and art defyled, and some other man hath lyen with the besyde thyne husbande.
(Ꟶ the preaste shall charge the woman with an horible curse, Ꟶ the preste shall saye vnto the woman) the Lorde make the to be an abhominacyon and a curse amonge thy people: when the Lorde doth make thy thye rotte, and thy bely swell:
These cursyd waters goo into the bowels of the that they maye make thy bely swell, Ꟶ thy thye rotte, and let the woman saye, Amen Amen.
And let the Preaste wryte these curses: And whan they be clensed, let him cast them in to bytter waters,
Ꟶ geue the woman those bytter Ꟶ cursed waters to drincke,
that those cursed Ꟶ bytter waters maye entre into her, And then the Preaste shall take the gelousy offrynge out of the womans hande, Ꟶ waue it before the Lord, Ꟶ brynge it vnto the alter
Ꟶ the preste shall take an handefull of the offerynge for a memoryall, Ꟶ burne it vpon the alter, Ꟶ then make the woman drynke the water:
Ꟶ when he hath made the woman drinke the waters (yf she be defyled Ꟶ haue trespaced agaynst her husbande:) then shall the cursyd Ꟶ bytter waters goo into her, Ꟶ her bely shall swell, Ꟶ her thye shall rotte, Ꟶ the woman shalbe a curse amonge her people.
And yf the woman be not defiled but is cleane, she shall haue no harme, but shall conceaue and beare.
Thys is the lawe of gelousye, when a wyfe goeth a syde behynde hyr husbande, and is defyled,
or when the spryte of gelousye commeth vpon a man, Ꟶ he beynge gelouse ouer hys wyfe, doth brynge her before the Lorde, And the preaste shall do accordynge vnto all this lawe:
and the man shalbe gyltlesse, Ꟶ the woman shall beare her synne.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
speake vnto the children of Israel, and saye vnto them: when ether man or woman doth separate them selues to vowe a vowe of an absteiner, and appoynte them selues vnto the Lorde,
he shall separate hym selfe from wyne and stronge dryncke, and shall dryncke no vynagre of wyne nor of stronge drynke, nor shall drynke whatsoeuer is pressed out of grapes: Ꟶ shall eate no freshe grapes nether yet dryed. As longe as hys abstinence endureth,
shall he eate nothynge that is made of the vyne tre, or of the cornels, or of the huske of the grape.
And as longe as he voweth, and is separated, there shall no rasure come apon hys heed: But vntyll hys dayes be out, in the which he separateth him selfe vnto the Lorde, he shalbe holy, and shall let the lockes of hys heere growe.
As longe as he consecrateth hym selfe vnto the Lorde, he shall come at no deed bodye:
he shall not make hym selfe vncleane at the death of hys father, mother, brother or syster: because that the vowe of the abstinence of hys God is vpon hys heade.
All the dayes of hys abstinence he is holy vnto the Lorde.
And yf it fortune that any man by chaunce dye sodenly before hym, the heed of hys abstinence shalbe defyled, and he shall shaue hys heed the daye of hys clensynge: euen the seuenth daye he shall shaue it.
And the eyght daye he shall brynge two turtels or two yonge pigeons to the Preaste, before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse.
And the Preaste shall offer the one for synne and the other for a burnt offerynge, and make an attonement for hym, as concernynge that he synned vpon a soule, and shall halowe hys heed the same daye,
and he shall consecrate hym selfe vnto the Lorde (the tyme of hys abstinencye) and shall brynge a lambe of a yere olde for trespace: but the dayes that were before are lost, because hys abstinencie was defyled.
Thys is the lawe of the absteyner, when the tyme of hys abstinence is out, he shalbe broughte vnto the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse,
and he shall brynge hys offerynge vnto the Lorde: an he lambe of a yere olde without blemyshe for a burntofferynge, and a she lambe of a yere olde without blemyshe for synne, a ram wythout blemyshe also for a peace offerynge,
and a basket of swete breed, euen cakes of fyne floure myngled with oyle, and wafers of swete bread anoynted wyth oyle wyth their meatofferynges and drynk offerynges.
And the Preaste shall brynge hym before the Lord, and offer hys synofferynge and his burntofferynge,
and shall offer the ram for a peaceofferynge vnto the Lorde, wyth the basket of swete breed, and the Preaste shall offer also his meat offerynge and his drinckofferynge.
And he shall shaue the heed of the absteyner in the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse: euen the heed of his abstinence, and shall take the heere of his sober heed, and put it in the fyre, which is vnder the peaceofferynge.
And the preaste shall take the sodden shoulder of the ram, and one swete cake out of the basket, and one swete wafer also, and put them vpon the handes of the absteyner (after he hath shauen his abstinence of)
and the Preaste shall waue them before the Lorde. And these holy thynges shalbe the prestes, wyth the wauebrest and heue shoulder: and then the absteyner maye drynke wyne.
Thys is the lawe of the absteyner whych hath vowed his offrynge vnto the Lorde for his consecracyon: Besydes those thynges that hys hande can gett, accordynge to the vowe whych he vowed, euen so he must do after the lawe of hys abstinence.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
speake vnto Aaron and his sonnes sayinge: of thys wyse ye shall blesse the chyldren of Israel, and saye vnto them.
The Lorde blesse the, and kepe the.
The Lorde make hys face shyne vpon the, and be mercyfull vnto the.
The Lorde lyfte vp countenaunce vpon the, and geue the peace.
And they shall put my name vpon the chyldren of Israel, and I wyll blesse them.
And it fortuned in that daye, when Moses had full sett vp the habitacyon Ꟶ anoynted it Ꟶ sanctifyed it, Ꟶ all the apparell thereof, the alter also and all the vessels thereof: and had anointed them Ꟶ sanctifyed them,
then the princes of Israell heedes ouer the houses of their fathers whych were the Lordes of the trybes, stondynge in their offices,
offered Ꟶ brought their sacrifices before the Lorde: syxe couered charettes Ꟶ .xij. oxen: one charet for two Lordes, Ꟶ for one, an oxe, Ꟶ they broughte them before the habitacyon.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge
take it of them, that they maye be to do the seruice of the tabernacle of wytnesse, Ꟶ thou shalt geue them vnto the Leuites, to euery man accordynge vnto his offyce.
And Moses toke the charettes Ꟶ the oxen, Ꟶ gaue them vnto the leuites
.ij. charettes Ꟶ .iiij. oxen he gaue vnto the sonnes of Gerson accordynge vnto their office.
And .iiij. charettes Ꟶ eyght oxen he gaue vnto the sonnes of Merari (accordynge vnto their offices) vnder the hande of Ithamar the sonne of Aaron the Preaste.
But vnto the sonnes of Cahath he gaue none, because they had vpon them the offyce of holy thynges, whych they dyd beare vpon shoulders.
And the prynces offered for the dedycatynge of the alter (in the daye that it was anoynted) and brought theyr sacrifyces before the alter.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: The prynces shall brynge theyr offerynges, euery daye one prynce, for the dedycatynge of the alter.
And so on the fyrst daye dyd Nahesson the sonne of Aminadab of the trybe of Iuda offre hys sacrifyce:
And hys offerynge was a syluer charger, of an hundred and .xxx. sycles: a syluer boule of .lxx. sycles after the weyght of the Sanctuary: and they were both full of fyne wheten floure, myngled with oyle for a meat offerynge:
a spone of ten sycles of golde, full of cens:
a bullock, a ram, a lambe of a yere olde for a burnt offerynge:
an he goate for a synofferynge:
and (for a peace offerynge) two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates and fyue lambes of a yere olde: thys was the gyfte of Nahesson the sonne of Aminadab.
The seconde daye Nathanael, the sonne of zuar, captayne ouer Isachar dyd offre:
And he offred for hys gyfte: a syluer charger of an hundred and thyrtye sycles: a syluer boule of seuentye sycles after the sycle of the sanctuary: both full of fyne floure myngled wyth oyle for a meat offerynge:
a golden spone of ten sycles, full of cens:
a bullock, a ram, a lambe of a yere olde for a burnt offerynge:
and an he goate for synne:
and (for a peaceofferynge) two oxen .v. rammes, fyue he goates, fyue lambes of one yere olde. Thys was the offerynge of Nathanael the sonne of zuar.
The thyrde daye, Eliab the sonne of Helon captayne of the chyldren of zabulon dyd offre.
And hys gyfte was: a syluer charger of an hundred and thyrtye sycles: a syluer boule of seuentye sycles after the sycle of the sanctuary, and both were full of fyne floure myngled wyth oyle for a meatofferynge:
a golden spone of ten sycles full of cens:
a bullock, a ram, a lambe of a yere olde for a burntofferynge:
an he goate for synne:
and (for a peaceofferynge) two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, fyue lambes, of one yere olde. Thys was the offerynge of Eliab the sonne of Helon.
The fourth daye, Elizur the sonne of Sedeur captayne of the chyldren of Ruben, dyd offre.
And hys gyfte was: a syluer charger of an hundred and thyrtye sycles: a syluer boule of seuentye sycles, after the Sycle of the Sanctuary, and they were, both full of fyne floure myngled wyth oyle for a meatofferynge:
a golden spone of ten sycles full of cens:
a bullock, a ram, a lambe of a yere olde for a burntoffrynge,
an he goate for synne:
and (for a peace offeringe) two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates and fyue lambes, of one yere olde. Thys was the offerynge of Elizur the sonne of Sedeur.
The fyfte daye, Selumiel the sonne of zuri Sadai, captayne of the chyldren of Simeon, offred.
Hys gyfte was: a syluer charger of an hundred and thirtye sycles, a syluer boule of seuentye sycles: after the sycle of the Sanctuary, and they were both full of fyne floure myggled wyth oyle for a meatofferynge:
a golden spone of ten sicles full of cens:
a bullock, a ram, a lambe of a yere olde for a burntofferynge:
an he goate for sinne:
and for a peace offerynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, fyue lambes of a yere olde. Thys was the offerynge of Selumiel the sonne of zuri Sadai.
The syxte daye, Eliasaph the sonne of Deguel captayne of the chyldren of Gad, offered:
Hys gyfte was: a syluer charger of an hundred and thirtye sycles, a syluer boule of seuentye sicles: after the sycle of the sanctuary, both full of fyne floure myngled wyth oyle for a meatofferynge:
a golden spone of ten sycles full of cens:
a bullock, a ram, a lambe of a yere olde for a burntofferinge,
an he goate for synne.
And for a peace offerynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, fyue lambes of one yere olde. Thys was the offeringe of Eliasaph the sonne of Deguel.
The seuenth daye, Elisama the sonne of Amiud captayne of the chyldren of Ephraim, offered.
And hys sacrifyce was: a syluer charger of an hundred and thirtye sycles: a syluer boule of seuentye sycles: after the sycle of the Sanctuary, both full of fyne floure myngled with oyle, for a meatofferynge.
a golden spone of ten sycles, full of cens:
a bullock, a ram, a lambe of a yere olde for a burntofferynge:
an he goate for synne:
and for a peaceofferynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, fyue lambes of a yere olde. Thys was the offerynge of Elisama the sonne of Amiud.
The eyght daye, offered Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur, the captayne of the chyldren of Manasse.
And hys offerynge was: a syluer charger of an hundred and thirtye sycles: a syluer boule of seuentye sycles after the sycle of the Sanctuary, both full of fyne floure myngled wyth oyle for a meatofferynge:
a golden spone of ten sycles, full of cens:
a bullock, a ram, a lambe of a yere olde for a burntofferynge:
an he goate for synne:
and for a peace offerynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, fyue lambes of a yere olde. Thys was the offerynge of Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur.
The nynth daye, Abidan the sonne of Gedeoni captayne of the chyldren of Ben Iamin offered.
And hys gyfte was a syluer charger of an hundred and .xxx. sycles: a syluer boule of .lxx. sycles, after the sycle of the sanctuary, both full of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge:
a golden spone of ten sycles, full of cens:
a bullock, a ram, a lambe of one yere olde for a burntofferynge:
an he goote for synne:
and for a peace offerynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, fyue lambes of one yere olde. Thys was the offerynge of Abidan the sonne of Gedeoni.
The tenth daye: Ahiezer the sonne of Ammi Sadai, captayne of the chyldren of Dan offered.
And his offerynge was: a syluer charger of an hundred and thyrtye sycles: a syluer boule of seuentye sycles after the sycle of the sanctuary, both full of fyne floure myngled wyth oyle for a meatofferynge:
a golden spone of ten sycles full of cens:
a bullock, a ram, a lambe of a yere olde for a burntofferynge:
an he goate for synne:
and for a peaceofferynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, fyue lambes of a yere olde. Thys was the offrynge of Ahiezer the sonne of Ammi Sadai.
The eleuenth daye, Pagiel the sonne of Ocran captayne of the chyldren of Aser, offered.
And hys offerynge was: a syluer charger of an hundred and thyrtye sycles: a syluer boule of seuentye sycles after the sycle of the sanctuary, both full of fyne floure myngled wyth oyle for a meatofferynge:
a golden spone of ten sycles, full of cens:
a bullock, a ram, a lambe of one yere olde for a burntofferynge:
an he goate for synne:
and for a peace offerynge: two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, fyue lambes of one yere olde. Thys was the offerynge of Pagiel the sonne of Ocran.
The twelueth daye, Ahira the sonne of Enan, captayne of the children of Nephthali offered.
And hys offerynge was: a syluer charger of an hundred and .xxx. sycles: a syluer boule of .lxx. sycles after the sycle of the sanctuary, both full of fyne floure myngled wyth oyle for a meatofferynge:
a golden spone of ten sycles, full of cens:
a bullock, a ram, a lambe of one yere olde for a burntofferynge:
an he goate for synne:
and for a peace offerynge, two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, fyue lambes of one yere olde. This was the offerynge of Ahira, the sonne of Enan.
Thys was the dedicacyon of the alter in the daye when it was anoynted: vnto the whyche was brought of the prynces of Israel .xij. chargers of syluer .xij. syluer boules .xij. spones of golde:
euery charger contaynynge an hundred Ꟶ .xxx. sycles of syluer, euery boule .lxx. And all the syluer vessell conteyned two thousande and .iiij. hundred sycles after the sycle of the sanctuary.
And the golden spones were twelue full of cens, contaynynge ten sycles a pece after the sycle of the sanctuary: so that all the golde of the spones, was an hundred and .xx. sycles.
All the bullockes for the burntofferynge were twelue, the rammes twelue, the lambes of a yere olde twelue, with the meate offerynge: and the he goates for synne, twelue.
And all the oxen for the peaceofferynge were .xxiiij. the rammes syxtye, the he goates .lx. the lambes of a yere olde sixtye. Thys was the dedicacyon of the alter, after that it was anoynted.
And when Moses was gone into the tabernacle of wytnesse, to speke wyth hym, he harde the voyce of one speakynge vnto hym from of the mercyseate, that was vpon the arke of wytnesse betwene the two cherubyns, and he talked with hym.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
speake vnto Aaron, and saye vnto hym: when thou puttest on the lampes, the same seuen lampes shall geue lyght towarde the forefront of the candelstycke.
And Aaron dyd euen so, and lyghtted the lampes towarde the forefront of the candelstycke, as the Lorde commaunded Moses,
and the worke of the candelsticke was of styffe golde, both the shaft and the floures therof: accordinge vnto the visyon whiche the Lord had shewed Moses euen so he made the candelsticke.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
take the Leuites from amonge the chyldren of Israel, and cleanse them.
But thus shalt thou do vnto them, when thou cleansest them: sprynckle water of purifyenge vpon them, and let them make a rasure to runne alonge vpon all the fleshe of them, and let them washe their clothes, and so make them selues cleane.
Then let them take a bullocke with his meatoffrynge: euen fyne floure myngled wyth oyle: and another bullocke shalt thou take for synne.
And whan thou doest brynge the Leuites before the tabernacle of wytnesse, thou shalt gether the hole multitude of the chyldren of Israel together,
and brynge the Leuites before the Lorde, and the chyldren of Israel shall put their handes vpon the Leuites.
And Aaron shall waue the Leuites before the Lorde, for a waue offerynge of the chyldren of Israel, that they maye execute the minystracyon of the seruyce of the Lorde.
And the Leuytes shall put their handes vpon the heedes of the bullockes, and thou shalt offer the one for synne, and the other for a burnt offerynge vnto the Lorde, that thou mayest make an attonement for the Leuites.
And thou shalt sett the Leuites before Aaron and his sonnes, Ꟶ waue them for a waueofferynge before the Lorde.
And thus thou shalt separate the Leuites from amonge the chyldren of Israel, and the Leuites shall be myne:
after that, shall the Leuites go in, to do the seruyce of the tabernacle of wytnesse. And thou shalt cleanse them and waue them,
for they are geuen and delyuered vnto me from amonge the chyldren of Israel, for such as open euery wombe: euen for the fyrst borne of all the chyldren of Israel haue I taken them vnto me.
For all the fyrstborne of the chyldren of Israel are myne both man and beest: sens the daye that I smote euery fyrst borne in the lande of Egypte, I sanctifyed them for my selfe:
and I haue taken the Leuites for all the fyrst borne of the chyldren of Israel,
and haue geuen the Leuites as a gyfte vnto Aaron Ꟶ hys sonnes from amonge the chyldren of Israel, to do the seruyce of the chyldren of Israel in the Tabernacle of wytnesse, to make an attonement for the chyldren of Israel, that there be no plage amonge the chyldren of Israel, yf the chyldren of Israel come nye vnto the holy thynges.
And Moses and Aaron and all the congregacyon of che chyldren of Israel dyd with the Leuytes, accordynge vnto all that the Lorde commaunded Moses concernynge the Leuytes: euen so dyd the chyldren of Israel vnto them.
And the Leuites were purifyed, and washed their clothes. And Aaron waued them before the Lorde, and made an attonement for them, and cleansed them.
After that went the Leuytes into do theyr seruyce in the tabernacle of wytnesse, before Aaron and hys sonnes: as the Lord had commaunded Moses concernynge the Leuytes, euen so they dyd vnto them.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge:
thys is it that belongeth vnto the Leuytes: from .xxv. yere vpwarde they shall go in to wayte vpon the seruyce of the tabernacle of wytnesse,
and from the age of fyftye yeare, they shall ceasse waytynge vpon the seruice therof, Ꟶ shall serue no moare:
but shall mynistre vnto theyr brethren in the tabernacle of wytnesse, to wayte, but shall do no moare seruyce. Thus therfore shalt thou do vnto the Leuites in their watche.
And the Lorde vnto Moses in the wyldernesse of Synay, in the fyrste moneth of the seconde yere, after they were come out of the lande of Egypte, sayinge:
let the chyldren of Israel offre Passeouer in hys season:
euen the .xiiij. daye of thys moneth at euen let them kepe it in hys season, accordynge to all the ceremonyes of it, and accordynge to all the maners therof.
And Moses spake vnto the chyldren of Israel, that they shulde offer Passeouer,
and they offered Passeouer the .xiiij. daye of the fyrst moneth at euen in the wyldernesse of Synai: accordynge to all that the Lorde commaunded Moses, euen so dyd the chyldren of Israel.
And certayne men were defyled vpon the soule of a man, that they myght not offer Passeouer the same daye. And they came before Moses and Aaron the same daye.
And the men sayde vnto hym: We are defyled vpon the soule of a man: wherfore are we kepte backe, that we maye not offer an offerynge vnto the Lorde in the due season, amonge the chyldren of Israel?
And Moses sayde vnto them: Stond styll, Ꟶ I wyll heare what the Lorde will commaunde concernynge you.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge:
speake vnto the chyldren of Israell and saye: If any man amonge you or youre chyldren after you be vncleane by the reason of a coarse, or is in the waye farre from you, and will offer Passeouer vnto the Lorde:
the .xiiij. daye of the seconde moneth at euen let them offre it, and eate it with swete breed and sowre herbes:
let them leaue none of it vnto the mornynge nor breake any bone of it: But accordynge to all the ordinaunce of the Passeouer let them offer it.
But the man that is cleane and is not in a iourney, Ꟶ yet was negligent to offer Passeouer: the same soule shall peryshe from hys people, because he brought not the offerynge of the Lord in hys due season: that man shall bere hys synne.
And yf a straunger dwell amonge you, and wyll offer Passeouer vnto the Lorde, accordynge to the ordinaunce of Passeouer and maner therof, he shall offre it thus: Ye shall haue one lawe both for the straunger, and for hym that was borne at home in the lande.
And the same daye that the Tabernacle was reared vp, a cloude couered the habitacyon, whych was as a tabernacle of the wytnesse: and at euen there was vpon the habitacyon, as it were the similitude of fyre vntyll the mornynge.
So it was alwaye, the cloude couered it by daye, and the similitude of fyre by nyghte.
And when the cloude was taken vp from of the tabernacle, then the chyldren of Israel iourneyed: and where the cloude abode there the chyldren of Israel pitched theyr tentes.
At the mouthe of the Lorde the chyldren of Israell iourneyed, and at the mouth of the Lorde they pytched. And as longe as the cloude abode vpon the habitacyon they laye styll:
and when the cloude taryed styll vpon the habitacyon longe tyme, the chyldren of Israell kepte the watche of the Lorde, and iourneyed not.
And it chaunced that whan the clowde abode a few dayes vpon the habitacyon, they abode in their tentes, according to the commaundement of the Lorde: and they iorneyed also at the commaundment of the Lorde.
And it happened that whan the cloude abode vpon the habitacion from euen vnto the mornyng, and was taken vp in that morning, then they iorneyed. Whether it was by daye or by night that the cloude was taken vp, they iorneyed.
Or yf the cloud taryed two dayes or a moneth, or a longe ceason vpon the habitacyon, and remayned theron, the chyldren of Israel abode styll, and iorneyed not. And assone as the cloude was taken vp, they iorneyed.
At the mouth of the Lorde, they rested in the tentes, and at the commaundment of the Lord, they iorneyed, keping the watche of the Lord, at the commaundement of the Lorde by the hande of Moses.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, saying:
Make the two trompettes of syluer: of an whole pece shalt thou make them, that thou mayst vse them to call the congregacyon together, and when the hoost shall iorneye.
Therfore shall they blowe with them, that all the multitude maye resorte to the before the dore of the tabernacle of witnes.
And yf they blowe but one trompet, then the princes which are heedes ouer the thousandes of Israel shall come vnto the.
But yf ye trompe, the hostes that lye on the east partes shall go forward.
And ye trompe the second tyme, the hoost that lyeth on the south syde shall take their iorneye: for they shall trompe when they take their iorneyes.
But when the congregacion is to be gathred together they shall blowe only, and not trompe.
And the sonnes of Aaron the preast shal blowe wt their trompettes, Ꟶ ye shall haue them as a lawe for euer in your generacions.
And yf ye go to warre in your lande against your enemyes that vexe you, ye shall blowe with the trompettes: and ye shalbe remembred before the Lorde your God, to be saued from your enemies.
Also in the daye of your gladnes, and in your feaste dayes, and in the begynning of your monethes, ye shall blow the trompettes ouer your burntsacrifyces Ꟶ peaceoffringes, that they maye be a remembraunce for you before youre God. I am the Lorde youre God.
And it came to passe the twentyth daye of the second moneth in the second yeare, that the cloude was taken vp from of the habitacion of wytnesse.
And the chyldren of Israel toke their iorney out of the desert of Sinai, Ꟶ the cloude rested in the wyldernesse of Pharan.
And the fyrst toke their iorney at the mouth of the Lorde, by the hande of Moses.
In the first place went the standart of the hooste of Iuda, according to their armies, whose captayne was Nahasson the sonne of Aminadab.
And ouer the hoost of the tribe of the children of Isachar, was Nathanel the sonne of zuar.
And ouer the hooste of the trybe of the children of zabulon, was Eliab the sonne of Helon.
And the habitacyon was taken downe: and the sonnes of Gerson Ꟶ Merari went forth bearyng the habitacyon.
And the hoost of Ruben went forth with their standart and armyes, whose captayne was Elizur the sonne of Sedeur.
And ouer the hooste of the trybe of the chyldren of Simeon was Salamiel the sonne of Suri Saddai.
And ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of Gad was Eliasaph the sonne of Deguel.
The Cahathites also went forewarde and bare the sanctuarye, and the other dyd set vp the habitacion agaynst they came.
And the standart of the hoost of the children of Ephraim went forth accordynge to theyr armyes, whose captayne was Elisama the sonne of Amiud.
And ouer the hoost of the tribe of the sonnes of Manasse, was Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur.
And ouer the hoost of the trybe of the sonnes Ben Iamin was Abidan the sonne of Gedeoni.
And the standart of the hoost of the chyldren of Dan came forth (hauing all the hostes together) thorowout their armyes: whose captayne was Ahiezer the sonne of Ammi Saddai.
And ouer the hooste of the trybe of the chyldren of Aser, was Pagiel the sonne of Ochram.
And ouer the hooste of the trybe of the chyldren of Nephtali, was Ahira the sonne of Enan.
These are the iorneyes of the chyldren of Israel thorowout theyr armyes: and thus the hoostes remoued.
And Moses sayde vnto Hobab the sonne of Raguel the Madianite: which was Moses father in lawe: we go vnto the place of which the Lorde sayd: I wyll geue it you. Come thou therfore with vs, Ꟶ we wyll do the good: for the Lorde hath promysed good vnto Israel.
And he answered hym: I wyll not go: but will departe to myne awne land and to my kynred.
He sayde: Oh naye, leaue vs not: for thou knowest oure mansyons in the wyldernesse: and thou hast bene to vs in steade of eyes.
And yf thou go with vs loke what goodnesse the Lorde sheweth vnto vs, the same wyll we shewe vnto the.
And they departed from the mount of the Lorde, thre dayes iorneye: and the arcke of the testament of the Lord went before them in the thre dayes iorneye, to serche oute a restyng place for them.
And the Lorde made a shadowe for them thorowe the cloude by day, when they went out of the tentes.
And it fortuned, that whan the arck went forth, Moses sayde: Ryse vp Lorde, and let thyne enemyes be scatered: and let them that hate the, flye before the.
And when the arck rested, he sayde: Returne O Lorde vnto the many thousandes of Israel.
And it fortuned, that whan the people dyd wykedlye, it was a dyspleasure in the eares of the Lord. And when the Lord heard it, his countenaunce was prouoked to wrath, Ꟶ the fier of the Lord burnt among them, Ꟶ consumed them that were the vttemost of the hoste.
And the people cried vnto Moses. And whan Moses made intercession vnto the Lord, the fier quenched.
And the name of the place was called Thaberah, because the fier of the Lord burnt among them.
And the rascall people that was amonge them, fell a lustyng, and turned them selues and wepte (euen as dyd also the chyldren of Israel) and sayde: who shall geue vs flesh to eate?
we remembre the fyshe which we dyd eate in Egipt for naught, Ꟶ the Cucumbers, and melons, lekes, onyons Ꟶ garleke.
But nowe oure soule is dryed awaye, for we can se nothyng els, saue Manna.
The manna was as coriander seed, and (to se to) lyke Bedellion.
And the people went about and gathered it, and grounde it in milles, or bet it in morters, and baked it in pannes, and made kakes of it. And the taist of it was like vnto the taist of an oyle kake.
And whan the dewe fell downe vpon the hooste in the nyght, the Manna fell vpon it.
And whan Moses herde the people wepe thorowout theyr housholdes, euery man in the dore of his tent, the face of the Lord was prouoked vnto wrath exceadingly: Ꟶ it greued Moses also.
And Moses sayde vnto the Lord: wherfore hast thou dealt cruelly with thy seruaunt? And wherfore haue I not found fauour in thy syght, seyng that thou puttest the weyght of all this people vpon me?
haue I conceaued all thys people? Or haue I begotten them:? hat thou shuldest saye vnto me? carie them in they bosome (as a nurse beareth the suckynge chylde) vnto the lande, which thou swarest vnto their fathers?
where shulde I haue fleshe, to geue vnto all thys people, which wepe before me, saying: geue vs flesh that we maye eate?
I am not able to beare all thys people alone, seying it is to heuy for me.
If thou deale thus with me, kyll me, I praye the, yf I haue founde fauour in thy syght, that I se not my wrechednes.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses, gather vnto me .lxx. men of the elders of Israel, which thou knowest, that they are the elders of the people and officers ouer them: and thou shalt bryng them vnto the tabernacle of witnesse, that they maye stande there with the:
And I will come downe, and talke with the there, and take of the sprete which is vpon the, and put vpon them, and they shall beare the burthen of the people with the, lest thou be constrayned to beare it alone.
And saye thou vnto the people: be halowed agaynst tomorowe, and ye shall eate flesh: for your whyning is in the eares of the Lorde, seing ye sayd: who shall geue vs flesh to eate? we were happye in Egipt: therfore the Lorde wyll geue you flesh, and ye shall eate.
Ye shall not eate one daye nor two, nor fyue dayes, neyther ten, nor twentye dayes:
but euen a moneth longe, vntyll it come out at the nastrels of you: and make you to parbrake, because that ye haue cast the Lorde asyde which is amonge you: and haue wepte before hym, saying: why came we thus oute of Egipte?
And Moses sayde: syxe hundred thousande fotmen are there of the people, among which I am. And thou hast sayd: I wyll geue them flesh, that they maye eate a moneth longe.
Shall the shepe Ꟶ the oxen be slayne for them, to fynde them? ether, shall all the fysh of the see be gathered together for them to serue them?
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: Shall the Lordes hande be waxed shorte? Thou shalt se nowe whither my word shall come to passe vnto the, or not.
And Moses went out, and tolde the people the saying of the Lorde, and gathred the .lxx. elders of the people, and set them rounde aboute the tabernacle.
And the Lorde came downe in a cloud, and spake vnto hym, and toke of the sprete that was vpon hym, and gaue it vnto the .lxx. elders. And it fortuned that when the sprete rested vpon them, they prophecied, Ꟶ did not ceasse.
But there remayned two of the men in the hoost: the name of the one was Eldad, and the name of the other Medad. And the sprete rested vpon them, and they were of them that were wrytten, and went not out vnto the tabernacle, but prophecied in the hoost.
And there ran a yong man, and tolde Moses and sayd: Eldad and Medad do prophecye in the hooste.
And Iosua the sonne of Nun the seruaunt of Moses one of hys yonge men, answered Ꟶ sayde: master Moses, forbyd them.
And Moses sayde vnto hym: enuyest thou for my sake? wolde God that all the Lordes people coulde prophecye, and that the Lorde wold put hys sprete vpon them.
And Moses gat him into the hoost, he and the elders of Israel.
And there went forth a wynde from the Lorde: and brought quayles from the see: and let them fall about the hoost, euen a daies iorney rounde about on euery syde of the hoost, and as it were two cubites hye ouer the erth.
And the people stode vp, and all that day and all the nyght, and on the morowe they gathered quayles. And he that gathred a lytle, gathred ten homers ful. And they spred them abrode rounde aboute the hoost.
And whyle the flesh was yet betwene their teth, and yer it was chewed vp: beholde, the countenaunce of the Lorde was moued agaynst the people, Ꟶ the Lord slewe the people with an exceadynge great plage.
And the name of the place was called, the graues of lust, because they buryed the people that lusted, there.
And the people toke their iorneye from the graues of lust vnto Hazeroth, and bode at Hazeroth.
And Mir Iam and Aaron spake agaynst Moses, because of the woman of Inde which he had taken: for he had taken to wyfe one of Inde.
And they sayde: Hath the Lorde in dede spoken only thorow Moses? Hath he not spoken also by vs? And the Lorde hearde it.
But Moses was a very meke man, aboue all the men of the earth.
And the Lorde spake at once vnto Moses vnto Aaron and to Mir Iam: come out ye thre vnto the tabernacle of witnes, and they came out all thre.
And the Lorde came downe in the pyller of the cloude, and stode in the dore of the tabernacle, and called Aaron and MirIam: And they went out both of them.
And he said: heare my wordes. If there be a prophete of the Lordes amonge you, I wylbe knowne of him in a visyon: and wyll speake vnto him in slepe.
My seruaunt Moses is not so, which is faithfull in all myne house.
Unto him wil I speake mouth to mouth in a visyon: but in rydels and symylitudes doth not he se the Lord. Wherfore then were ye not afrayed to speake agaynst my seruaunt Moses?
And the Lorde was moued vnto wrath agaynst them, and he went his waye:
and the cloude departed from the tabernacle. And beholde, Mir Iam was become leprous, as it were snowe. And Aaron looked vpon Mir Iam, and beholde, she was leprous,
and Aaron sayde vnto Moses: I besech the my Lorde, put not the synne vpon vs, which we haue folishly commytted and synned.
Oh, let her not be as one that commeth out of hys mothers wombe, and whose halfe flesh is eaten awaye.
And Moses cryed vnto the Lorde, saying: Heale her, O God, I beseche the.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: If her father had spyt in her face, shulde she not be ashamed seuen dayes? let her be shutte out of the hoost seuen dayes, and after that, let her be receaued in agayne.
And Mir Iam was shut out of the hoost seuen dayes: and the people remoued not, tyll she was brought in agayn.
And afterward the people remoued from Hazeroth, and pitched in the wyldernes of Pharan.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses saying:
Sende men out to searche the lande of Canaan, which I geue vnto the chyldren of Israel: of euery trybe of their fathers shall ye sende a man, and let them all be suche as are rulars among them.
And Moses at the commaundement of the Lorde sent forth out of the wyldernes of Pharan suche men as were all heades of the chyldren of Israel: Their names are these.
Of the trybe of Ruben, Sammua the sonne of zacur.
Of the trybe of Symeon, Saphat the sonne of Hori.
Of the trybe of Iuda, Caleb the sonne of Iephune.
Of the trybe of Isachar, Igeal the sonne of Ioseph.
Of the tribe of Ephraim, Osea the sonne of Nun.
Of the trybe of Ben Iamin, Palthi the sonne of Raphu.
Of the trybe of zabulon, Gadiel the sonne of Sodi.
Of the tribe of Ioseph, namelye of the trybe of Manasse, Gaddi the sonne of Susi.
Of the trybe of Dan, Amiel the sonne of Gemali.
Of the trybe of Aser, Sethur the sonne of Michael.
Of the trybe of Nephtali, Nahebi the sonne of Uaphsi.
Of the trybe of Gad, Guel the sonne of Machi.
These are the names of the men, which Moses sent to spye oute the lande. And Moses called the name of Osea the sonne of Nun, Iosua.
And Moses sent them forth to spye oute the lande of Canaan, and sayde vnto them: get you vp thys waye southwarde, that ye maye go vp into the hye contrey,
and se the lande what maner thyng it is, Ꟶ the people that dwelleth therin: whyther they be stronge or weake, ether fewe or many,
and what the lande is that they dwell in, whyther it be good or bad: and what maner of cyties they be, that they dwell in, whyther they dwell in tentes or walled townes:
and what maner of lande it is: whether it be fat or leane, and whether there be trees therin or not. Be of a good corage, and brynge of the frute of the lande. And it was about the tyme that grapes are fyrst rype.
And so they went vp, Ꟶ searched out the lande from the wildernesse of zin vnto Rehob, as men come to Hemath,
Ꟶ they ascended vnto the south, and came vnto Hebron, where Ahiman was Ꟶ Sesai Ꟶ Thalmani, the sonnes of Enack. Hebron was buylt seuen yere before zoan in Egipt.
And they came vnto the ryuer of Escol, and cut downe there a braunch with one cloustre of grapes and twayne bare it vpon a staffe: and they brought also of the pomgranates and of the fygges.
And the place was called the ryuer Escol: because of the cloustre of grapes which the children of Israel cut downe thence.
And they turned back agayne from searchynge of the lande after fourty dayes.
And they went and came to Moses and Aaron, and vnto all the multitude of the chyldren of Israel, in the wildernes of Pharan: which is Cades, and brought them worde, and also vnto all the congregacion, and shewed them the frute of the lande.
And they tolde hym, and sayde: we came vnto the lande whether thou sendedst vs, and surely it floweth with mylke and honye: and here is of the frute of it.
Neuerthelesse, the people be stronge that dwell in the lande, and the cityes are walled and exceadynge greate: and moreouer, we sawe the children of Enack there.
The Amaleckes dwell in the south contrey, and the Hethites, Iebusites, Ꟶ the Amorites dwell in the mountaynes, Ꟶ the Cananites dwell by the see, and by the coaste of Iordan.
And Caleb stylled the of the people before Moses, saying: we wyll go vp, and conquerre it: for we be able to ouercome it.
But the men that went vp with hym, sayde: We be not able to go vp against the people: for they are stronger than we.
And they brought vp an euell reporte of the lande which they had searched, saying vnto the children of Israel: The land which we haue gone thorowe to searche it out, is a lande that eateth vp the inhabiters therof: and the people that we sawe in it, are men of a greate stature.
And there we sawe also gyauntes, the chyldren of Enack, which come of the gyauntes. And we semed in oure syght as it were greshoppers, and so we did in theyr syght.
And all the multitude of the people cryed out, and wepte thorowout that nyght,
and all the chyldren of Israel murmured agaynst Moses and Aaron. And the whole congregacyon sayde vnto them: wolde God that we hadd dyed in the lande of Egypte, eyther that we had dyed in thys wildernes.
Wherfore hath the Lorde brought vs vnto thys lande to fall vpon the swearde: and that our wyues, and oure children shulde be a praye? Were it not better, that we retourne vnto Egypte agayne?
And they sayde one to another: We wyll make a captayne, and retourne vnto Egipt agayne.
But Moses and Aaron fell on theyr faces before all the congregacyon and multytude of the chyldren of Israel.
And Iosua the sonne of Nun, and Caleb the sonne of Iephune (which were of them that searched the lande) rent theyr clothes,
and spake vnto all the companye of the chyldren of Israel, sayinge: The lande which we walked thorowe to searche it, is a very good lande.
If the Lorde hath lust to vs, he wyll brynge vs into this lande and geue it vs, which is such a lande as floweth with mylke and honye,
But in any wyse rebell not ye agaynst the Lorde. Neyther nede ye to feare the people of the lande: for they are but bread for vs. Theyr shadowe is departed from them, and the Lorde is with vs, feare them not therfore.
But all they which were in that multytude, bade stone them with stones. And the glorye of the Lorde appeared in the tabernacle of wytnesse, before all the chyldren of Israel.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: How longe do this people prouoke me, and howe longe will it be yer they beleue me: for all the signes which I haue shewed among them?
I wyll smyte them with the pestilence and destroie them: and wyll make of the a greater nacion and a myghtier then they.
And Moses sayde vnto the Lorde: then the Egipcyans shall heare it, for thou broughtest thys people in thy myght from amonge them.
And it wylbe tolde to the inhabyters of this lande also: for they haue hearde lykewyse, that thou Lorde art amonge this people: and that thou Lorde art sene face to face, and that thy cloude standeth ouer them, and that thou goest before them by daye tyme in a pyller of a cloude, and in a pyller of fyer by nyght.
If thou shalt kyll all thys people as they were but one man, then the nacyons which haue hearde the fame of the, wyll saye:
The Lorde is not able to brynge in this people into the lande which he sware vnto them: but hath slayne them in the wildernesse.
And nowe I besech the, let the power of my Lorde be greate, accordyng as thou hast spoken, saying:
the Lorde is longe yer he be angrye, and full of mercy, and suffereth iniquitie, and synne, and leaueth no man innocent, and visiteth the vnryghteousnesse of the fathers vpon the chyldren, in the third and fourth generacyon:
be mercyfull I beseche the vnto the synne of thys people, accordynge vnto thy greate mercye, as thou hast forgeuen this people from Egipt, euen vntyll nowe.
And the Lorde sayde: I haue forgeuen it, according to thy request.
But as truly as I lyue, all the erth shalbe fylled wt the glorye of the Lorde.
But all those men which haue sene my glory and my miracles which I dyd in Egipt and in the wildernes and haue tempted me nowe thys .x. tymes, and will not herken vnto my voyce,
shall not se the lande which I sware vnto their fathers: nether shall any of them that prouoked me se it.
But my seruaunt Caleb: with whom there was another maner of sprete: and because he hath folowed me vnto the vtmost, hym will I brynge into the lande whiche he hath walked in, and his seed shall inheret it,
and also the Amalekites Ꟶ Cananites whiche dwell in the playne contreye. Tomorowe turne you, and get you into the wildernesse: euen by the waye of the redd see.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses Ꟶ Aaron, saying:
howe longe doth this euell multitude murmur agaynst me?
I haue heard the murmuringes of the chyldren of Israel with the which they murmur agaynst me. Tell them therfore: As truly as I lyue (sayth the Lorde) I will do vnto you, euen as ye haue spoken in myne eares.
Youre carkasses shall lye in this wildernes. And all you that were tolde thorowout your nombres, from .xx. yeare and aboue (which haue murmured against me)
shalt not come into the land, ouer which I lyfted vp myne hande, to make you dwell therin, saue Caleb the sonne of Iephune, and Iosua the sonne of Nun.
But your children which ye saye shulde be a praye, them I will bring in, Ꟶ they shall knowe the land which ye haue refused,
and your carkasses shall lye in this wyldernesse.
And your children shall wander in this wildernes .xl. yeres, Ꟶ suffer for your whordom, vntyll your carkasses be wasted in the wildernes,
after the nombre of the dayes in which ye searched out the lande euen fourty daies, euery daye for a yeare shall ye beare your vnrighteousnes euen .xl. yeare, and ye shall knowe my displeasure.
I the Lorde haue sayde that I wyll do it vnto all thys euell congregacion that are gathered together agaynst me. For in this wildernes they shalbe consumed, and here they shall dye.
And the men which Moses sent to search the lande, Ꟶ which (when they came agayne) made all the people to murmure before hym, and brought vp a sclaunder vpon the lande,
euen those men that did bring vp that sclaunder vpon it, as though it had bene euell dyed in a greate plage before the Lord.
But Iosua the sonne of Nun Ꟶ Calleb the sonne of Iephune which were of the men that wente to search the lande, lyued styll.
And Moses tolde these sayinges vnto all the chyldren of Israel, and the people toke great sorowe.
And they rose vp early in the morninge, and gat them vp into the toppe of the mountayne, sayinge: lo, we be here, and wyll go vp vnto the place of which the Lorde sayde vnto vs, for we haue synned.
And Moses sayde: wherfore wyll ye go on thys maner, beyonde the worde of the Lorde? it will not come well to passe:
go not vp therfore: (for the Lorde is not amonge you) that ye be not slayne before your enemyes.
For the Amaleckytes and the Cananites are there before you, and ye will fall vpon the sweard, because ye are turned awaye from the Lord, and and the Lorde will not be with you.
But they presumed obstinatly to go vp into the hyll top. Neuerthelater, the arck of the testament of the Lorde, and Moses departed not out of the hoost.
Then the Amaleckites and the Cananites which dwelt in that hyll, came downe, and smote them, and hewed them euen vnto Horma.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
speake vnto the children of Israel and saye vnto them: when ye be come into the lande of your habitacions, which I geue vnto you,
Ꟶ wyll offer an offerynge vnto the Lorde. Namely, a burntoffering or a speciall sacrifyce, eyther of a vowe or of a wyllinge mynde, and in youre princypall feastes, to make a swete fauoure vnto the Lorde, of the oxen or of the flocke.
Then lett hym that offereth hys offeryng vnto the Lorde, bring also a meatofferinge of a tenth deale of floure, myngled wt the fourth parte of an hin of oyle,
Ꟶ the fourth part of an hin of wyne for a drynckoffering, and offer with the burntofferyng or any other offeryng: when it is a lambe.
Or yf it be a ram, thou shalt offer for a meate offerynge, two tenth deales of floure, myngled with the thyrd part of an hin of oyle:
and for a drinkofferynge, thou shalt offer the thyrde parte of an hyn of wyne for a swete sauoure vnto the Lorde.
And when thou offerest a bullocke for a burntoffring or for a speciall vowe or peace offering vnto the Lorde,
let him bring with a bullock a meateoffering of .iij. tenth deales of floure myngled with halfe an hin of oyle. And thou shalt bryng for a drinckofferynge euen halfe an hin of wyne,
for an offering of a swete sauoure vnto the Lorde.
After thys maner, shall it be done for an oxe, or for a ram, or for a lambe or a kyd.
Loke what nombre thou makest in these, such a nombre shalt thou make in them also. And according to the nombre of suche offeringes, thou shalt encrease the meatofferynges and the drynckofferinges.
All that are of your selues shall do these thinges after this maner, to offer an offeringe of swete sauour vnto the Lorde.
And yf a straunger sogeorne with you, or whoso euer be amonge you in your generacions, and will offer an offering of a swete sauour vnto the Lorde: euen as ye do, so he shall do.
One ordinaunce shalbe both for you of the congregacion, and also for the straunger. It shalbe an ordinaunce for euer in your generacions, both vnto you and to the straunger before the Lorde.
One lawe and one maner shall serue, both for you and for the straunger that sogeorneth with you.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
speake vnto the children of Israel, and saye vnto them: When ye become into the lande to the which I bring you,
then when ye will eate of the bread of the lande, ye shall take vp an heueoffering vnto the Lorde.
Ye shall take vp a cake of the fyrst of your dow for an heueoffering, as ye do the heueoffering of the barne, euen so ye shall heue it.
Of the fyrst of your dowe ye shall geue vnto the Lorde an heueoffering in your generacions.
And yf ye ouerse your selues, and obserue not all these commaundementes, which the Lorde hath spoken vnto Moses:
euen all that the Lorde hath commaunded you by the hande of Moses, from the fyrst daie that the Lorde commaunded Moses, and hence forwarde amonge youre generacions.
Yf it happen that ought is commytted ignorantlye of the congregacion, all the multitude shall offer a bullocke for a burntofferyng, to be a swete sauoure vnto the Lorde, with the meatoffering and drynckoffering therto, acdynge to the maner, and an he goate for synne.
And the preast shall make an atonement for all the multitude of the children of Israel, and it shalbe forgeuen them: for it is ignoraunce. And they shall brynge theyr offeryng for a sacrifyce vnto the Lorde: Ꟶ theyr synofferynge before the Lorde for their ignoraunce.
And it shalbe forgeuen vnto all the multitude of the chyldren of Israel, and vnto the straunger that dwelleth amonge you: seinge all the people were in ignoraunce.
If any one soule synne thorow ignoraunce, he shall brynge a she goate of a yeare olde for synne.
And the preaste shall make an atonement for the soule that synned ignorauntly, with the synneofferynge before the Lorde to reconcyle hym: and that it maye be forgeuen hym.
And both thou that art borne of the children of Israel and the straunger that dwelleth amonge you, shall haue both one lawe, whoso doeth synne thorowe ignoraunce.
But the soule that doeth ought presumptuouslye, whyther he be an Israelite or a straunger, the same blasphemeth the Lorde. And that soule shalbe roted out from among his people,
because he hath despysed the word of the Lorde, and hath broken hys commaundement, that soule therfore shall perish, and his synne shalbe vpon him.
And whyle the chyldren of Israel were in the wyldernesse, they founde a man that gathered styckes vpon the Sabboth daye.
And they that founde him gatherynge styckes, brought hym vnto Moses and Aaron and vnto all the congregacyon:
and they put him inwarde, seyng it was not declared what shulde be done vnto him.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: Let the man die: and let all the multitude stone him with stones without the hoost.
And all the multitude brought him without the hoost, Ꟶ stoned him with stones, and he dyed as the Lord commaunded Moses.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, saying:
speake vnto the children of Israel and byd them: that they make them gardes in the quarters of theyr garmentes thorow out their generacions, and put vpon the garde of the quarters a ryband of yelow sylke:
And the garde shalbe vnto you to loke vpon it, that ye maye remembre all the commaundementes of the Lorde, and do them: and that ye seke not after youre awne hert or youre awne eyes: after the which ye vse to go a whoring:
but ye shall remembre rather and do all my commaundementes, and be holy vnto youre God:
I am the Lorde youre God, which broughte you oute of the lande of Egypte, for to be youre God. I am the Lorde youre God.
And Corah the sonne of Iezehar the sonne of Cahath the sonne of Leui, and Dathan Ꟶ Abiram the sonne of Eliab, and On the sonne of Peleth, the sonne of Ruben:
rose vp before Moses, with other men of the children of Israel, two hundred and fiftye, which were captaynes of the multitude great and famous men in the congregacion:
Ꟶ they gathred them selues together agaynst Moses and Aaron, Ꟶ sayde vnto them: ye make moche to do, seynge all the multitude are holy euery one of them, and the Lorde is amonge them: Why heaue ye your selues vp aboue the congregacyon of the Lorde?
And when Moses heard it, he fell vpon his face,
and spake vnto Corah and vnto all his company, saying: to morowe the Lorde will shewe who are his, who is holy, Ꟶ who ought to approch nye vnto him, and whom he hath chosen to come to him.
This do therfore, take you fyerpannes, both Corah and all his company
and do fyer therin, and put cens in them before the Lorde to morowe. And the man whom the Lorde doth chose, the same shalbe holy. Ye make much to do, ye chyldren of Leui.
And Moses sayde vnto Corah: heare ye chyldren of Leui:
Is it but a small thinge vnto you, that the God of Israel hath separated you from the multitude of Israel: and brought you to him selfe, to do the seruyce of the dwelling place of the Lord, and to stande before the multitude, and to minystre vnto him?
he hath taken the to him and all thy brethren the sonnes of Leui with the, and seke ye the offyce of the preaste also.
For which cause both thou and all thy companye are gathered together against the Lorde? And what is Aaron, that ye murmur agaynst him?
And Moses sent, and called Dathan and Abiram the sonnes of Eliab, which sayde: we wyll not come vp.
Is it a small thynge, that thou hast brought vs oute of a lande that floweth with mylke and hony, to kyll vs in the wildernes, and to raygne ouer vs also?
Hast thou brought vs vnto a lande that floweth with mylke and hony, and geuen vs inheritaunce of feldes and vyneyardes? Wilt thou pull out the eyes of these men? we wyll not come vp.
And Moses waxed very angry, Ꟶ sayde vnto the Lorde. Turne not thou vnto theyr offeryng. I haue not taken so muche as an asse from them, neyther haue I hurte any of them.
And Moses sayde vnto Corah: Be thou and all thy company before the Lorde both thou, they, and Aaron tomorowe.
And take euery man his censer, and put cens in them, that ye maye offre before the Lorde: euery man of the two hundred and fyftye take his censoure, thou also Aaron, that euery one maye haue his censer.
And they toke euery man hys censer, and put fyer in them, and layed cens theron, and stode in the dore of the tabernacle of witnesse with Moses and Aaron.
And Corah gathered all the congregacyon agaynst them vnto the dore of the tabernacle of witnes. And the glory of the Lord appeared vnto all the congregacion.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses and Aaron, sayinge:
separate your selues from amonge this congregacion, that I maye consume them atonce.
And they fell vpon their faces and sayde. O moost myghtye God of the spretes of all fleshe, yf one man hath synned, wylt thou be wroth with all the multitude?
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses saying:
speake vnto the congregacyon and saye: Get you awaye from about the dwellyng of Corah, Dathan and Abiram.
And Moses rose vp, and went vnto Dathan and Abiram, and the elders of Israel folowed him.
And he spake vnto the congregacion, saying: departe from the tentes of these wicked men, and touche nothing of theirs: lest ye perysh in all their synnes.
And so they gate them from the dwellyng of Corah, Dathan and Abiram on euery syde. And Dathan and Abiram came out and stode in the dore of their tentes with their wyues, their sonnes and their lytle chyldren.
And Moses sayd: Herby ye shall knowe that the Lorde hath sent me to do all these workes, and that I haue not done them of mine awne minde.
If these men dye the comen deth of all men: or yf they be visyted after the visitacyon of all men, then the Lorde hath not sent me.
But and yf the Lorde make a newe thyng, and the earth open her mouth and swalowe them vp wt all that they haue: and they go downe quycke into hell: then ye shall vnderstande, that these men haue prouoked the Lorde.
And it fortuned that assone as he had made an ende of speakyng all these wordes,
the grounde cloue asonder that was vnder them: Ꟶ the erth opened her mouth, and swalowed them vp, and their houses,
and all the men that were with Corah and all their goodes. And they and all that they had, went downe alyue vnto hell, and the earth closed vpon them: and they peryshed from amonge the congregacion.
And all Israel that were aboute them fledd at the crye of them. And they sayd: lest the earthe swalowe vs vp also.
And there came oute a fyer from the Lorde, and consumed the two hundred and fyftye men that offred cens.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, saying:
Speake vnto Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the preaste, that he take vp the censers oute of the burnynge, and skatter the fyer here and there,
for the censers of these synners are halowed in theyr deathes: and let them make of them thinne beaten plates for a coueryng of the aultare. For they offered them before the Lord, and therfore they are halowed, and they shalbe a sygne vnto the chyldren of Israel.
And Eleazar the preast toke the brasen censers which they that were burnt had offered, and beate them thinne for a couering of the aultare,
to be a remembraunce vnto the chyldren of Israel, that no straunger which is not of the seed of Aaron, come nere to offer cens before the Lord, that it happen not vnto hym lyke as vnto Corah and hys companye, as the Lorde sayde of him by the hande of Moses.
But on the morowe all the multitude of the children of Israel murmured agaynste Moses and Aaron, sayinge: ye haue kylled the people of the Lord.
And it fortuned that when the multitude was gathred agaynst Moses and Aaron, they loked towarde the tabernacle of witnes. And beholde, the cloude couered it, and the glory of the Lorde appeared.
And Moses and Aaron came before the tabernacle of witnes.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, saying:
Get you from amonge thys congregacion, that I maye consume them quickly. And they fell vpon their faces.
And Moses sayde vnto Aaron: take a censer, and put fier therin out of the aulter, and powre on cens, and go quyckly vnto the congregacion, that thou mayest obteyne forgeuenes for them. For there is wrath gone oute from the Lorde, and there is a plage begonne.
And Aaron toke as Moses commaunded him, and ran into the middes of the congregacion: and beholde, the plage was begonne among the people, and he put on cens, and made an atonement for the people.
And when he stod betwene the deed and them that were alyue, the plage ceased.
They that dyed in the plage, were .xiiij. thousande and seuen hundred: besyde them that dyed aboute the busynes of Corah.
And Aaron went againe vnto Moses before the dore of the tabernacle of witnes, and the plage ceased.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, saying:
speake vnto the children of Israel: and take of euery prynce of them a rodd, after the houses of their fathers, euen twelue roddes: and write euery mans name vpon his rodd.
And wryte Aarons name vpon the rodd of Leui: for euery rodd is for a house of their fathers.
And put them in the tabernacle of witnes, euen in the place where I mete you.
And the mans rod whom I chose, shall blossome. And I wyll make cease from me the grudgynges of the chyldren of Israel, whereby they grudge agaynst you.
And Moses spake vnto the chyldren of Israel, and all the prynces gaue hym euery prince ouer their fathers houses, a rod, euen twelue roddes: and the rodd of Aaron was among the roddes.
And Moses put the roddes before the Lorde in the tabernacle of witnes.
And on the morowe, Moses went into the tabernacle of witnes: and beholde, the rodd of Aaron for the house of Leui was budded, and bare blossomes and almondes.
And Moses brought out all the roddes from before the Lorde vnto all the chyldren of Israel: and they loked vpon them, and toke euery man his rodd.
And the Lord sayde vnto Moses: bring Aarons rod agayne before the witnes to be kepte for a token of the childrens rebellyon, and that their murmuring maye cease from me, and that they dye not.
And Moses dyd as the Lorde commaunded him, euen so dyd he.
And the children of Israel spake vnto Moses, saying: beholde, we are wasted awaye Ꟶ consumed: we all come to naught:
whosoeuer commeth nye the dwellyng of the Lord, dyeth. Shall we vtterly consume awaye?
And the Lorde sayde vnto Aaron Thou and thy sonnes and thy fathers house with the shall beare the faute of that which is done amysse in the holy place. And thou and thy sonnes wt the shall beare the faute of that which is done amysse in your presthode.
And thy brethren of the trybe of Leui and of thy fathers housholde thou shalt take vnto the, that they maye be ioyned vnto the and minystre vnto the: euen vnto the and thy sonnes with the before the tabernacle of witnes.
They shall wayte vpon the and vpon all the tabernacle: onely let them not come nye the vesselles of the sanctuary and the alter, that they and ye also dye not.
And they shalbe by the, and wayte on the tabernacle of witnes for all the seruyce of the tabernacle, and let no straunger come nye vnto you.
Therfore shall ye kepe the holy place and the aulter, that ther fall no more wrath vpon the chyldren of Israel:
beholde, I haue taken your brethren the Leuites from amonge the the childreen of Israel, which as a gyft of yours are geuen vnto the Lorde, to do the seruyce of the tabernacle of witnes.
Therfore shalt thou and thy sonnes with the take hede vnto your preastes offyce for all thynges that perteyne vnto the aulter, and for all that are within the vayle. And se that ye serue: for I haue geuen your prestes office vnto you as a gyft: and therfore the straunger that commeth nye, must be slayne.
And the Lorde spake vnto Aaron: behold, I haue geuen the the kepynge of myne heue offerynges of all the halowed thynges of the chyldren of Israel. Euen vnto the, I haue geuen them for the anoyntinge, and to thy sonnes, for a dutye for euer.
Thys shall be thyne of most holy from the fyre of the altare. All theyr sacrifyces for all theyr meateofferynges, synne offerynges or trespace offerynges, which they brynge vnto me, are most holy. It is thyne and thy sonnes.
In the most holy place shalt thou eat it: and all that are males shall eat of it: let it be holy vnto the.
And this also is thyne the heueofferynges of theyr gyftes, thorowe out all the waueofferynges of the chyldren of Israel: I haue geuen them vnto the and thy sonnes, and thy daughters with the, to be a dutye for euer and all that are cleane in thy house, shall eate of it,
all the fatt of the oyle, and all the fatt of the wyne and of the corne, whyche they shall offre vnto the Lord for fyrst frutes, the same haue I geuen vnto the.
And whatsoeuer is fyrst rype in theyr lande whych they brynge vnto the Lord, shalbe thyne: and all that are cleane in thyne house, shall eate of it.
All dedicate thinges in Israel, shalbe thyne.
All that breaketh the matrice in all fleshe that men brynge vnto the Lorde, whether it be of men or beastes, shalbe thyne. Neuerthelater the fyrstborne of man shalt thou redeme, and the fyrstborne of vncleane beastes shalt thou redeme lykewyse. Those that are to be redemed,
shalt thou redeme from the age of a moneth, for the value of the money, namely for fyue sycles after the sycle of the sanctuari. A sycle maketh twentye halfpens.
But the fyrstborne of oxen, shepe and goates shalt thou not redeme. For they are holy, therfore thou shalt sprynkle theyr bloude vpon the alter, and shalt burne theyr fatt vpon the sacrifyce for a swete sauoure vnto the Lorde.
And the flesh of them is thyne as the wauebrest and the ryght shoulder. These are thyne.
All the holy heueofferynges whych the chyldren of Israel offre vnto the Lorde, haue I geuen the and thy sonnes and thy daughters wyth the, to be a dutye foreuer: let it be a salted couenaunte for euer, before the Lorde, both vnto the Ꟶ to thy seed with the.
And the Lorde spake vnto Aaron thou shalt haue none enheritaunce in their lande, nether shalt thou haue any parte amonge them. I am thy parte and thy enherytaunce amonge the chyldren of Israel.
Beholde, I haue geuen the chyldren of Leui all the tenth in Israel to enheryte, for the seruyce whiche they serue in the tabernacle of witnesse.
Neither must the chyldren of Israel henceforth come nye the tabernacle of witnesse, lest they beare synne and dye.
But the Leuites shall do the seruice in the tabernacle of witnesse Ꟶ beare theyr synne, It shalbe a lawe foreuer in youre generacyons, that amonge the chyldren of Israel they possesse none enheritaunce.
But the tythes of the chyldren of Israel whyche they paye as an heue offerynge vnto the Lorde, I haue geuen the Leuites to enheret. And therfore I haue sayed vnto them. Amonge the chyldren of Israel ye shall possesse none enheritaunce.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses saying:
speake vnto the Leuites and saye vnto them when ye take of the chyldren of Israel the tythes which I haue geuen you of them for youre enheritaunce, ye shall take an heueofferynge of that same for the Lorde: euen the tenth parte of that tythe.
And thys youre heueoffering shalbe rekened vnto you, euen as though it were of the corne of the barne, or out of the fulnesse of the wyne presse.
Of thys maner ye shall therfore separate an heueofferynge vnto the Lorde, of all youre tythes which ye receaue of the chyldren of Israel, and ye shall geue ther of vnto the Lord an heueofferynge, whyche shall belonge to Aaron the preaste.
Of all youre gyftes, ye shal take out all the Lordes heueofferynges euen the fatt of theyr halowed thynges.
Therfore thou shalt saye vnto them: when ye haue taken awaye the fatt of it from it, it shalbe counted vnto the Leuites, as yf it were the encrease of the corne floore, or the increase of the wyne presse.
And ye shall eate it in all places, both ye and youre housholdes, for it is youre rewarde for youre seruyce in the tabernacle of witnesse.
And ye shall beare no synne by the reason of it, when ye haue taken from it the fatt of it: nether shall ye vnhalowe the holy thynges of the children of Israel lest ye dye.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses and Aaron sayinge:
this is the ordinaunce of the lawe whyche the Lorde hath commaunded sayinge: speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, that they brynge the a redd kowe without spot, and wherin is no blemish, and vpon which neuer came yocke.
And ye shall geue her vnto Eleazar the preaste, that he maye brynge her without the hoste, Ꟶ cause her to be slayne before hys face.
And let Eleazar the preast take of her bloude with hys fynger, and sprynkle it before the tabernacle of witnesse seuen tymes. And cause the kowe to be burnt in his syghte
wt hyr skynne, fleshe and bloude. And the dounge of hyr shall he burne also.
And let the preast take Cedar wodd, and Isope and purple cloth, and cast it vpon the kowe as she burneth.
Then let the preast wash hys clothes, and he shall bathe hys flesh in water, and then come into the hoste, and the preast shalbe vncleane vnto the euen.
And he that burneth her, shall wassh his clothes in water, and bathe his fleshe in water, and be vncleane vntill euen.
And a man that is cleane, shall take vp the asshes of the kowe, and put them without the hoste in a cleane place. And it shall be kepte for the multitude of the chyldren of Israel for a sprenklynge water and for an atonement of synne.
Therfore, he that gathered the asshes of the kowe, shall washe hys clothes, Ꟶ remayne vncleane vntyll euen. And thys shalbe vnto the chyldren of Israel and vnto the straunger that dwelleth amonge them, a statute for euer.
He that toucheth the deed body of any man, shalbe vncleane seuen dayes.
And he shall purifye hym selfe with thys water the thyrde daye and the seuenth daye, and he shalbe cleane. But yf he purifye not hym selfe the thyrde daye and the seuenth daye, he shal not be cleane.
Whosoeuer toucheth the coarse of any man that is deed, and sprynkleth not hym selfe, defyleth the dwellynge of the Lorde: and that soule shalbe roted out of Israel, because the sprynklyng water was not sprenkled vpon hym. He shalbe therfore vncleane, and hys vnclennesse shall remayne vppon hym.
Thys is the lawe of the man that dyeth in a tent: all that come into the tent, and all that is in the tent, shalbe vncleane seuen dayes.
And all the vessels that be open whych haue no lyd nor couerynge vpon them, shalbe vncleane.
And whosouer toucheth one that is slayne with a swerde in the feldes, or a deed persone, or a bone of a deed man, or a graue: shall be vncleane seuen dayes.
Therfore, for an vncleane persone they shall take of the burnt asshes of the synofferynge, Ꟶ runnynge water shall be put therto in a vessell.
And let a cleane persone take Isope and dyppe it in the water, Ꟶ sprynkle it vpon the tent, and vpon all the vessels, and on the soules that were there in, and vpon hym that touched a bone, or a slayne persone, or a deed body, or a graue.
And the cleane persone shall sprynkle vpon the vncleane the thirde daye and the seuenth daye. And the seuenth daye he shall purifye him selfe, Ꟶ wasshe hys clothes, Ꟶ bathe him selfe in water, and shalbe cleane at euen.
But the man that is vncleane, and sprynkleth not him selfe, the same soule shalbe destroyed from amonge the congregacyon: because he hath defyled the holy place of the Lorde, and the sprynklynge water hath not bene sprynkled vpon him, therfore shall he remayne vncleane. And thys shalbe a perpetuall lawe vnto them. And he that sprynkleth the sprynklynge water, shall washe his clothes.
And he that toucheth the sprynklyng water shalbe vncleane vntyll euen.
And whatsoeuer the vncleane persone toucheth, shalbe vncleane. And the soule that toucheth it, shalbe vncleane vntyll the euen.
And the children of Israel came wt the whole multitude into the deserte of Sin in the fyrst moneth, and the people abode at Cades. And there dyed MirIam, and was buryed there.
But there was no water for the multitude, and they gathered them selues together agaynst Moses Ꟶ Aaron.
And the people chode with Moses, and spake, sayinge: wolde God that we had perysshed, when oure brethren dyed before the Lorde.
Why haue ye brought the congregacyon of the Lorde vnto thys wyldernesse, that both we and oure catell shulde dye in it?
Wherfore haue ye made vs to go oute of Egypte, to brynge vs into this vngracious place, which is no place of seed nor of fygges nor vynes, nor of pomgranates, nether is there any water to drynke?
And Moses and Aaron went from the congregacyon vnto the dore of the tabernacle of witnesse, and fell vpon theyr faces. And the glory of the Lorde appered vnto them.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge:
take the rodd, and gether thou and thy brother Aaron the congregacyon together, and speake vnto the rocke before theyr eyes, and it shall geue forth hys water. And thou shalt brynge them water out of the rocke, to geue the company dryncke, and theyr beastes also.
And Moses toke the rodd from before the Lorde, as he commaunded hym.
And Moses Ꟶ Aaron gethered the congregacyon together before the rocke: and Moses sayde vnto them: heare ye rebellyons, must we fett you water oute of thys rocke?
And Moses lyfte vp hys hande, and with hys rodd he smote the rocke two tymes, and the water came oute aboundantly, and the multitude drancke and theyr beastes also.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses Ꟶ Aaron: because ye beleued me not, to sanctifye me in the eyes of the chyldren of Israel, therfore ye shall not brynge thys congregacyon into the lande whyche I haue geuen them.
Thys is the water of stryffe, because the chyldren of Israel stroue with the Lorde, Ꟶ he was sanctifyed in them.
And Moses sent messengers from Cades vnto the kynge of Edom. Thus sayeth thy brother Israel: Thou knowest all the trauell that hath happened vs,
Oure fathers went doune into Egpte, and we haue dwelt in Egypte a longe tyme, and the Egypcians vexed vs Ꟶ oure fathers.
And whan we cryed vnto the Lorde, he herde oure voyce, and sent an angell, and hath fett vs vp out of Egypt. And beholde, we are in Cades, euen in the vttermost cyte of thy border.
We wyll go now thorow thy countre: but we will not go thorowe the feldes or vyneyardes, nether wyll we dryncke of the water of the fountaynes, we wyll go by the kynges hye waye, and nether turne vnto the ryghte hande nor to the lefte, vntyll we be past thy countre.
And Edom answered hym. Thou shalt not go by me, lest I come out agaynst the with the swerde.
The chyldren of Israel sayde vnto hym: we wyll go by the beaten waye: and yf I and my catell drynke of thy water, I wyll paye for it I wyll but onely (without any harme) go thorowe on my fete.
He answered. Thou shalt not go thorowe. And Edom came oute agaynst hym with moche people, and wyth a myghtie power.
And thus Edom denied to geue Israel passage thorow his countre: wherfore Israel turned awaye from hym.
And the chyldren of Israel departed from Cades, and came vnto mount Hor wyth all the congregacyon.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses and Aaron in mount Hor, harde by the coaste of the londe of Edom sayinge:
Aaron shall be gathered vnto hys people, for he shall not come into the lande whych I haue geuen vnto the chyldren of Israel: because ye disobeyed my mouth at the water of stryffe.
Take Aaron and Eleazar his sonne, and brynge them vp into mount Hor,
and thou shalt strype Aaron out of hys vestimentes, and put them vpon Eleazar hys sonne, and Aaron shalbe gathered vnto hys people and shall dye there.
And Moses dyd as the Lorde commaunded: and they went vp into mount Hor in the syghte of all the multitude.
And Moses toke of Aarons clothes, and put them vpon Eleazar hys sonne and Aaron dyed there in the toppe of the mount.
And Moses and Eleazar came doune oute of the mount. Whan all the multytude sawe that Aaron was deed, they mourned for Aaron thyrtye dayes, thorowe oute all the housholdes of Israel.
And when kynge Arad the Cananite whyche dwelt towarde the south, harde tell that Israel came vp the waye that the spyes had founde oute, he foughte agaynst Israel, and toke some of them presoners.
And Israel vowed a vowe vnto the Lorde, and sayde: If thou wylt delyuer this people into my hande, I wyll vtterly destroye theyr cyties.
And the Lorde herde the voyce of Israel, and deliuered them the Cananites. And they destroyed them and theyr cyties, Ꟶ called the name of the place Horma.
And they departed from mount Hor by the waye of the redd see: to compasse the land of Edom. And the soule of the people faynted by the waye.
And the people spake agaynst God Ꟶ agaynst Moses wherfore hast thou brought vs oute of Egypte, for to dye in the wildernesse? for here is nether bread nor water, Ꟶ oure soule lotheth thys lyghte breade.
Wherfore the Lorde sent fyerye serpentes amonge the people, whych stonge them: and moche people of Israel dyed.
Therfore the people came to Moses and sayde: we haue synned, for we haue spoken agaynst the Lorde Ꟶ agaynst the, make intercessyon to the Lorde, that he take awaye the serpentes from vs. And Moses made intercessyon for the people.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: make the a fyrie serpent Ꟶ set it vp for a sygne, that as many as are bytten, maye loke vpon it, Ꟶ lyue.
And Moses made a serpent of brasse, and set it vp for a sygne. And when the serpentes had bytten any man, he behelde the serpent of brasse, and was healed.
And the chyldren of Israel departed thence, and pytched in Oboth.
And they departed from Oboth, and pitched at the heapes of Abarim: euen in the wyldernesse whyche is by the playne of Moab on the east syde.
And they remoued thence, and pytched vpon the ryuer of zarad.
And they departed thence, and pytched on the other syde of Arnon, which is in the wyldernesse, and commeth oute of the costes of the Amorites: for Arnon is the border of Moab, betwene Moab and the Amorites.
Wherfore it is spoken in the boke of the warre of the Lord, what thynge he dyd in the redd see, Ꟶ in the ryuers of Arnon.
And the heade of the ryuers, that goeth downe to the dwellyng of Ar, and stretcheth vnto the border of Moab:
from thence it turneth vnto Beer. The same is Beer, or well wherof the Lorde spake vnto Moses: gether the people together, and I wyll geue them water.
Then Israel sange thys songe: Aryse vp well, singe ye vnto him.
The princes dygged thys well, the captaynes of the people dygged it, with the teacher, and with theyr staues. And from the wyldernesse they went to Matana,
and from Matana to Nahaliel, Ꟶ from Nahaliel to Bamoth,
and from Bamoth to the valay that is in the felde of Moab vnto the top of the hyll that appeareth before Iesimon.
And Israel sent messengers vnto Sehon, kynge of the Amorites, sayinge:
I wyll go thorowe thy lande: we wyll not tourne into thy feldes or vyneyardes, nether drynke of the waters of the well: but we wyll go a longe by the kynges hye waye, vntyll we be past thy countre.
But Sehon wolde geue Israel no licence to passe thorowe hys countre, but gethered all hys people together and went oute agaynst Israel into the wyldernesse. And he came to Iaheza and foughte agaynst Israel.
And Israel smote him in the edge of the swerde, and conquered hys lande, from Arnon vnto Iakob: and vnto the chyldren of Ammon. For the border of the chyldren of Ammon was, stronge.
And Israel toke all these cities and dwelt in all the cyties of the Amorites: in Hesbon and in all the townes that longe therto.
For Hesbon was the cytie of Sehon the kynge of the Amorites, whyche fought before agaynst the kynge of the Moabites, and toke all his lande out of hys hande, euen vnto Arnon.
Wherfore they saye in the prouerbe: come to Hesbon, and let the cytye of Sehon be bylt Ꟶ repayred:
for there is a fyre gone out of Hesbon, and a flamme from the cytie of Sehon, and hath consumed Ar in Moab, and the inheritours of the hye places in Arnon.
Wo be to the Moab: o people of Chamos, ye are vndone, he hath put his sonnes to flyghte, and hys daughters to captiuyte vnto Sehon kynge of the Amorites.
Theyr empire is lost from Hesbon vnto Dibon, and we made a wyldernesse euen vnto Nopha, whych reacheth vnto Mediba.
And thus Israel dwelt in the lande of the Amorites.
And Moses sent to serche oute Iaezer, and they toke townes belongynge therto, and rooted oute the Amorites that were there in.
And they tourned and went vp towarde Basan. And Og the kynge of Basan came out agaynst them, he and all his people to fyght at Adrei.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses, feare him not, for I haue delyuered him in thy hande, and all his people, and hys lande. And thou shalt do to him as thou dydest vnto Sehon the kyng of the Amorites which dwelt at Hesbon.
They smote hym therfore, and his sonnes, and all his people, vntill ther was nothinge lefte him. And they conquered hys lande.
And the chyldren of Israel departed and pytched in the feldes of Moab, on the othersyde of Iordane, ouer against Iericho.
And Balac the sonne of ziphor sawe all that Israel had done to the Amorites:
and the Moabites were sore afrayed of the people, because they were many, and stode in feare of the chyldren of Israel.
And Moab sayde vnto the elders of Madian: now shall this companye lycke vs vp all that are rounde aboute vs, as an oxe lycketh vp the grasse of the felde. And Balac the sonne of ziphor was kynge of the Moabites at that tyme.
He sent messengers therfore vnto Balaam the sonne of Beor in Pethor (whych is by the ryuer in the lande of the chyldren of his folke) to call him, sayinge: beholde, there is a people come oute of Egypte, Ꟶ beholde, they couer the face of the erth, Ꟶ dwell ouer agaynst me.
Come nowe therfore Ꟶ curse thys people for my sake. For they are to myghtie for me, yf so perauenture I myght be able to smyte them Ꟶ to dryue them oute of the lande. For I wote that he whome thou blessest, is blessed, and whome thou cursest is cursed.
And the elders of Moab and the elders of Madian departed, hauynge the rewarde of the sothsayinge in theyr hande. And they came vnto Balaam, and tolde him the wordes of Balac.
He answered them: tary here thys nyght, and I wyll brynge you worde, euen as the Lord shall saye vnto me. And the Lordes of Moab abode with Balaam.
And God came vnto Balaam and sayde, what men are these wyth the?
And Balaam sayde vnto God: Balac the sonne of ziphor kynge of Moab hath sent vnto me, sayinge:
beholde, there is a people come out of Egypt and couereth the face of the erth: come nowe therfore, and curse them for my sake, yf so peraduenture I maye be able to ouercome them in batell, and to dryue them oute.
And God sayde vnto Balaam: Go not thou with them, nether curse the people, for they are blessed.
And Balaam rose vp in the mornynge Ꟶ sayde vnto the Lordes of Balac: get you vnto youre lande: for the Lorde wyll not suffre me to go wyth you.
And the Lordes of Moab rose vp, Ꟶ went vnto Balac and sayde: Balaam wolde not come wyth vs.
And Balac sent agayne a greatter companye of Lordes and more honorable then they:
whyche came to Balaam, and told him: Thus sayeth Balac the sonne of ziphor: oh, let nothynge let the, but come vnto me,
for I wyll greatly promote the vnto greate honoure, and wyll do whatsoeuer thou sayest vnto me, come I praye the, curse thys people for my sake:
And Balaam answered and sayde vnto the seruauntes of Balac: If Balac wolde geue me hys housefull of syluer and golde, I cannot go beyonde the worde of the Lord my God, to do lesse or moare.
Nowe therfore tarye ye here thys nyghte: that I maye wete, what the Lorde wyll saye vnto me moare.
And God came vnto Balaam by nyghte, Ꟶ sayde vnto him: If the men come to call the, ryse vp and go with them: but loke what I saye vnto the, that shalt thou do.
And Balaam rose vp early, and sadeld hys asse, Ꟶ went with the Lordes of Moab.
And the countenaunce of God was angrye because he went. And the angell of the Lorde stode in the waye agaynst hym, as he rode vpon hys asse, and hys two seruauntes were with hym.
And when the asse sawe the angell of the Lorde stande in the waye, and hauynge a swerde drawen in his hande, the asse turned asyde oute of the waye, and went out into the felde. And Balaam smote the asse, to turne her into the waye.
But the angell of the Lord stode in a path betwene the vyneyardes, and there was a wall on the one syde Ꟶ another on the other.
And when the asse sawe the angell of the Lorde, she wrenched vnto the wall, and thrust Balaams fote vnto the wall, and he smote her agayne.
And the angell of the Lorde went forther and stode in a narowe place, where was no waye to tourne, ether to the ryght hande or to the lyfte.
And when the asse sawe the angell of the Lorde, she fell downe vnder Balaam: and Balaam was wroth, and smote the asse with a staffe.
And the Lorde opened the mouth of the asse, Ꟶ she sayed vnto Balaam: what haue I done vnto the, that thou hast smytten me nowe thre tymes?
And Balaam sayde vnto the Asse: because thou hast mocked me: I wolde also there were a swerde in myne hande, for euen nowe wolde I kyll the.
And the asse sayde vnto Balaam: am not I thyne Asse whyche thou hast rydden vpon sence thou wast borne vnto thys daye? Was I euer wont to do so vnto the? he sayde: nay.
And the Lorde opened the eyes of Balaam and he sawe the angell of the Lorde standinge in the waye, hauynge a swerde drawen in hys hande. He bowed hym selfe therfore, and fell flat on hys face.
And the angell of the Lorde sayde vnto hym: Wherfore hast thou smyten thyne asse thre tymes? beholde, I came out as an aduersary, because thou makest thy waye contrary vnto me,
and the asse sawe me, and went backe fro me thre tymes: or els yf she had not turned fro me I had suerly slayne the, and saued her alyue.
Balaam sayd vnto the angell of the Lord: I haue synned: for I wist not that thou stodest in the waye agaynst me Nowe therfore yf it displease the I wyll turne home agayne.
The angell sayde vnto Balaam: go with the men: but, what I saye vnto the, that shalt thou speake. And so Balaam went with the Lordes of Balac.
And when Balac herde that Balaam was come, he went out to mete hym vnto a cytie of Moab, whiche is in the border of Arnon, euen in the vtmost coast.
And Balac sayde vnto Balaam: dyd I not sende for the, to call the? And wherfore camest thou not vnto me? because I am not able to promote the vnto honoure?
And Balaam made answere vnto Balac: Loo, I am come vnto the. And can I nowe saye any thinge at all. The worde that God putteth in my mouthe, that shall I speake.
And Balaam went wyth Balac, and they came vnto a cytie of stretes.
And Balac offered oxen and shepe, and sent for Balaam and for the Lordes that were with hym.
And on the morowe Balac toke Balaam, and brought hym vp into the hye place of Baal, that thence he myght se the vtmost parte of the people.
And Balaam sayd vnto Balac: bylde me here seuen alters and prepare me here seuen oxen and seuen rammes.
And Balac dyd as Balaam sayde. And Balac and Balaam offered on euery alter an oxe and a ram.
And Balaam sayd vnto Balac: stande by the sacrifyce, and I wyll goo yf happly the Lorde wyll mete me: and whatsoeuer he sheweth me, I will tell the, and he went forth alone.
But God met Balaam, and Balaam sayde vnto hym: I haue prepared seuen alters, and haue offered vpon euery alter, an oxe and a ram.
And the Lorde put a sayinge in Balams mouth, and sayde: go agayn to Balac and saye on thys wyse.
And whan he went agayne vnto him, loo, he stode by hys sacrifice, he and all the Lordes of Moab.
And he toke vp hys parable and sayde Balac the kynge of Moab hath fett me from Mesopotamia out of the mountaynes of the east (sayinge:) come, curse Iacob for my sake: come, Ꟶ defye Israel.
Howe shall I curse him, whom God hath not cursed? or howe shall I defye him, whom God hath not defyed?
from the toppe of the rockes I se hym, and from the hylles I beholde hym: loo, the people shall dwell by them selfe, and shall not be rekened among the nacyons.
Who can tell the dust of Iacob, and the nombre of the fourth parte of Israel? I praye God, that my soule maye dye the death of the ryghteous, Ꟶ that my last ende maye be lyke hys.
And Balac sayde vnto Balaam: what hast thou done vnto me? I fett the to curse myne enemyes, and beholde, thou hast blessed them.
He answered and sayde: must I not kepe that Ꟶ speake it, whych the Lorde hath put in my mouthe?
And Balac sayde vnto hym: Come I praye the with me vnto another place, whence thou mayest se them, and thou shalt se but the vtmost parte of them, and shalt not se them all: curse them out of that place for my sake.
And he brought him into a felde (where men myght se farre of) euen to the toppe of an hyll, and bylt seuen alters, and offered an oxe and a ram on euery alter.
And he sayd vnto Balac: stande here by thy sacrifyce, whyle I go yonder.
And the Lord mett Balaam, and put a worde in hys mouth Ꟶ sayd: go agayne vnto Balac, and thus saye.
And when he came to hym: beholde, he stode by his sacrifyce, Ꟶ the Lordes of Moab with hym. And Balac sayde vnto him: what hath the Lorde sayde?
And he toke vp his parable Ꟶ answered: ryse vp Balac and heare, and herken vnto me thou sonne of ziphor.
God is not a man that he shulde lye, nether the sonne of a man that he shulde repent: shulde he saye, and not doo? or shulde he speake, and not make it good?
beholde, I haue taken vpon me to blesse, for he hath blessed, and it is not in my power to alter it.
He behelde no vanyte in Iacob, nor sawe trauayll in Israel. The Lorde hys God is wt him, and the presence of the kyng is amonge them.
God brought them oute of Egypte, he hath strength as an vnicorne.
There is no sorcery in Iacob, nor sothsaying in Israel. It is nowe tolde vnto Iacob Ꟶ Israel, what God hath wrought.
Beholde, the people shal ryse vp as a lyonesse, and heue vp hym selfe as a lyon. He shall not lye downe, vntill he eate of the praye, and drynke the bloude of them that are slayne.
And Balac sayde vnto Balaam: nether curse them nor blesse them.
But Balaam answered and sayde vnto Balac: tolde not I the sayinge: all that the Lorde speaketh, that I must doo?
And Balac sayde vnto Balaam: come I praye the, and I wyll brynge the yet vnto another place: yf peraduenture it shall please God, that thou mayst thence curse them for my sake.
And Balac broughte Balaam vnto the toppe of Peor, that boweth toward the wyldernesse of Iesymmom.
And Balaam sayde vnto Balac: make me here seuen alters, and prepare me here seuen oxen, and seuen rammes.
And Balac dyd as Balaam had sayde, and offered an oxe and a ram on euery alter.
And when Balaam sawe that it pleased the Lorde that he shulde blesse Israel, he went not as he dyd twyse before to fett sothsayinge, but sett hys face towarde the wyldernesse.
And Balaam lyfte vp hys eyes, and loked vpon Israel as he laye accordyng to his trybes, and the spirite of God came vpon him.
And he toke vp hys parable and sayde: Balaam the sonne of Beor hath sayde Ꟶ the man whose eye is open hath sayd:
he hath sayde, whyche heareth the wordes of God and seyth the visyons of the almyghtie, and falleth doune with open eyes.
Howe goodly are thy tentes o Iacob, and thyne habitacyons o Israel?
Euen as the valeyes are they layed abrode, and as gardens by the ryuers syde: as the tentes whyche the Lorde hath pytched, and as cyperstrees besyde the waters.
The water droppeth out of his bouket, and hys seed shal be many waters and hys kinge shalbe hyer then Agag, And hys kyngdome shalbe exalted.
God broughte hym out of Egypt: as the strength of an vnycorne is he vnto hym. He shall eate the nacyons hys enemyes, and gnawe theyr bones, Ꟶ perce them thorowe with his arowes.
He couched hym selfe, and laye doune as a lyon, and as a lyonesse, who shall sterre hym vp? blessed is he that blesseth the, Ꟶ cursed is he that curseth the.
And Balac was wroth wyth Balaam, and smote hys handes together, and Balac sayde vnto Balaam: I sent for the to curse myne enemyes, and beholde, thou hast blessed them this thre tymes.
Therfore nowe gett the quyckly vnto thy place. I thought that I wolde promote the vnto honoure, but lo, the Lorde hath kept the backe from worshype
Balaam answered vnto Balac: tolde I not thy messengers which thou sentest vnto me, sayinge:
If Balac wolde geue me his house full of syluer and golde, I cannot passe the worde of the Lorde, to do ether good or bad of myne awne mynde? But what the Lorde sayeth, that am I compelled to speake.
And nowe beholde, I go vnto my people: come therfore, and I wyll aduertise the, what this people shal do to thy folke in the later dayes.
And he toke vp hys parable and sayde: Balaam the sonne of Beor hath sayde, the man whose eye is open, hath sayde.
He hath sayde that heareth the wordes of God, and hath the knowledge of the most hye, and beholdeth the visyon of the almyghtie, and that falleth with open eyes:
I shall se hym, but not nowe I shall beholde him, but not nye. There shall come a starre of Iacob, and ryse a sceptre of Israel, and shal smyte the costes of Moab Ꟶ vndermyne all the chyldren of Seth.
And Edom shalbe possessed, and Seir shall fall to the possessyon of theyr enemyes, and Israel shall do manfully.
Out of Iacob shall come he that shal haue dominion, and shall destroye the remnaunt of the cytie.
And whan he loked on Amaleck, he toke vp his parable, Ꟶ sayde: Amaleck is the fyrst of the nacynos but hys latter ende shall perysh vtterly.
And he loked on the Kenytes and toke vp hys parable, and sayde: stronge is thy dwellynge place, and thou puttest thy nest in a rocke,
Neuerthelesse the kenyte shalbe roted out, vntyll Assur take the presoner:
And he toke vp his parable and sayd: Alas, Who shall lyue when God doeth thys?
The shyppes also shall come out of the coste of Italy, and subdue Assur, Ꟶ subdue Eber, and he hym selfe shall perishe at the last.
And Balaam rose vp, and went and returned to hys place: and Balac also went hys waye.
And Israel dwelt in Sittim, and the people began to committe whoredome with the daughters of Moab,
which called the people vnto the sacryfyce of theyr goddes. And the people dyd eate, and worshypped theyr goddes,
Ꟶ Israel coupled him selfe vnto Baal Peor. And the indignacyon of the Lorde was prouoked agaynst Israel,
and the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: take all the heades of the people, Ꟶ hange them vp before the Lorde agaynst the sonne, that the wrath of the Lordes countenaunce maye be tourned awaye from Israel.
And Moses sayd vnto the iudges of Israel euery one slaye hys men that were ioyned vnto Baal Peor.
And beholde, one of the chyldren of Israel came and broughte vnto his brethren, a Madianitish wyfe euen in the syghte of Moses, and in the sight of all the multitude of the children of Israel, that wepte before the dore of the tabernacle of witnesse.
And when Phinehes the sonne of Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the preaste sawe it, he rose vp oute of the myddes of the companie, and toke a weapon in hys hande,
and went after the man of Israel into the tent, and thrust them thorowe: both the man of Israel and also the woman, euen thorowe the belly of her. And the plage ceased from the chyldren of Israel.
And there dyed in the plage .xxiiii. thousande.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses saying:
Phinehes the sonne of Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the preaste, hath tourned myne anger awaye from the chyldren of Israel, whyle he was gelous for my sake amonge them, that I had not consumed the chyldren of Israel in my gelousye.
Wherfore saye: beholde, I geue vnto him my couenaunt of peace,
and he shall haue it, Ꟶ his seed after him, euen the couenaunte of the preastes offyce for euer because he was gelous for his Goddes sake, and made an attonement for the chyldren of Israel.
The name of the Israelite whych was slayne with the Madianytyshe wyfe was zamri the sonne of Salu, a Lorde of an house and kynred of Symeon.
And the name of the Madianitish wyfe that was slayne, was Cozbi the daughter of zur, a heed ouer the people of an house and kynred of Madian.
And the Lord spake vnto Moses, saying:
vexe the Madianites, and smyte them,
for they trouble you with theyr wyles, whyche haue begyled you by disceate in the cause of Peor, and in the cause of theyr syster Cozbi the daughter of a Lorde of the Madianites, which was slayne in the daye of the plage for Peor sake.
And it fortuned, that after the plage, the Lorde spake vnto Moses Ꟶ vnto Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the preste, sayinge:
take the nomber of all the multytude of the chyldren of Israel from .xx. yeare and aboue thorowe out theyr fathers houses, all that are able to goo to warre in Israel.
And Moses and Eleazar the preast spake vnto them in the feldes of Moab, by Iordane ouer agaynst Iericho,
from .xx. yeare and aboue, as the Lorde commaunded Moses Ꟶ the chyldren of Israel, whan they were come oute of Egypte.
Ruben the eldest sonne of Israel. The chyldren of Ruben: Hanoch, of whome commeth the kynred of the Hanochites: and Palu of whom commeth the kynred of the Paluites.
Of Hesron, commeth the kynred of the Hesronites: of Carmi, commeth the kynred of the Carmites.
These are the kynredes of the Rubenites, and they were in nombre .xliii. thousande seuen hundred Ꟶ thyrtye.
And the sonnes of Palu: Eliab.
And the soonnes of Eliab Nemuel, Dathan and Abiram. Thys is that Dathan and Abiram, which were famous in the congregacyon, Ꟶ stroue agaynst Moses and Aaron in the companye of Corah, when they stroue agaynst the Lorde.
And the erth opened her mouth, and swalowed them vp. Corah also was in the death of that multitude, what tyme the fyre consumed two hundred and fyfty men, and they became a sygne:
Notwithstonding, the chyldren of Corah dyed not.
And the chyldren of Symeon after theyr kynredes were: Nemuel, of whom commeth the kynred of the Nemuelites: Iamin, of whom commeth the kynred of the Iaminytes: Iachin, of whom commeth the kynred of the Iachinites:
of zareh, commeth the kynred of the zarehites. And of Saul, commeth the kynred of the Saulites.
These are the kynredes of Simeon: euen .xxii. thousande Ꟶ .ii. hundred
The chyldren of Gad after theyr kynredes were: zephon, of whom commeth the kynred of the zephonites: Haggi, of whom commeth the kynred of the Haggites: Suni of whom commeth the kynred of the Sunites:
Of Aseni, commeth the kynred of the Asenites: and of Eri, commeth the kynred of the Erites:
Of Arod, commeth the kynred of the Arodites. Of Ariel, commeth kynred of the Arielites.
These are the kynredes of the chyldren of Gad according to their nombres .xl. thousande and fyue hundred.
The children of Iuda: Er and Onan Ꟶ Er and Onan dyed in the lande of Canaan.
But the chyldren of Iuda after theyr kynredes, were: Sela, of whom commeth the kynred of the Selanites: Phares, of whom commeth the kynred of the Pharesites: zareh, of whom commeth the kynred of the zarehites.
And the chyldren of Phares were: Hesron, of whom commeth the kynred of the Hesronites: Hamul, of whom commeth the kynred of the Hamulites.
These are the kynredes of Iuda, after theyr nombres .lxxvi. thousand and fyue hundred.
The chyldren of Isachar after theyr kynredes, were: Thola, of whom commeth the kynred of the Tholaites: Phuua, of whom commeth the kynred of the Phuuaites:
of Iasub commeth the kynred of the Iasubytes, of Symron, commeth the kynred of the Simronites.
These are the kynredes of Isachar after theyr nombres .lxiiii. thousande, and thre hundred.
The chyldren of zabulon after theyr kynredes were: Sered, of whom commeth the kynred of the Seredites: Elon, of whom commeth the kynred of the Elonites: Iaheliel, of whom commeth the kynred of the Iahelelites.
These are the kynredes of the zabulonites after theyr nombres: threscore thousande, and fyue hundred.
The chyldren of Ioseph thorow out their kynredes were: Manasse Ꟶ Ephraim.
The chyldren of Manasse: Machir, of whom commeth the kynred of the Machirites. And Machir begat Gilead, and of Gilead commeth the kynred of the Gileadites.
And these are the chyldren of Gilead: Hieser, of whom commeth the kynred of the Hieserites: Helech, of whom commeth the kynred of the Helechites:
and Asriel, of whom commeth the kynred of the Asrielites: and Sichem, of whom commeth the kynred of the Sichemites:
Simida, of whom commeth the kynred of the Simidites: and Hepher, of whom commeth the kynred of the Hepherites.
And zelaphead the sonne of Hepher had no sonnes but daughters. And the names of the daughters of zelaphead were: Mahela, Noa, Hagla, Milcha and Thirza.
These are the kynredes of Manasse, and the nombre of them .lii. thousande and seuen hundred.
These are the chyldren of Ephraim after theyr kynredes: Suthelah, of whom commeth the kynred of the Suthelahites: Becher, of whom commeth the kynred of the Becherites: Thahen, of whom commeth the kynred of the Thahenites.
And these are the chyldren of Suthelah: Eran, of whom commeth the kynred of the Eranites.
These are the kynredes of the chyldren of Ephraim after theyr nombres .xxxii. thousande and fyue hundred. And these are the chyldren of Ioseph after theyr kynredes.
These are the chyldren of BenIamin after their kynredes: Bela, of whom commeth the kynred of the Belaites: Asbel, of whom commeth the kynred of the Asbelites: Ahiram, of whom commeth the kynred of the Ahiramites:
Supham, of whom commeth the kynred of the Suphamites: Hupham, of whom commeth the kynred of the Huphamites.
And the chyldren of Bela were, Ard and Naaman, from whence commeth the kynred of the Ardites, and of Naaman the kynred of the Naamites.
These are the chyldren of BenIamin after theyr kynredes, and after theyr nombres .xlv. thousande and syxe hundred.
These are the chyldren of Dan after their kynredes: Suham, of whom commeth the kynred of the Suhamites. These are the housholdes of Dan after their kynredes.
And the kynredes of the Suhamites were after theyr nombres .lxiiii. thousande, Ꟶ foure hundred.
The chyldren of Aser after theyr kynredes were: Iemna, of whom commeth the kynred of the Iemnites. Iesui, of whom commeth the kynred of the Iesuites: Bria, of whom commeth the kynred of the Brites.
The chyldren of Bria were: Heber, of whom commeth the kynred of the Heberites: Malchiel, of whom came the kynred of the Malchielites.
And the daughter of Aser was called Sarah.
These are the kynredes of Aser after their nombres .liii. thousande and foure hundred.
The chyldren of Nephthali, after theyr kynredes were: Iaheziel, of whom came the kynred of the Iahezielites: Guni, of whom came the kynred of the Gunites:
Iezer, of whom came the kynred of the Iezerites: Selem, of whom came the kynred of the Selemites.
These are the kynredes of Nephthali according to theyr housholdes, whose nombre is .xlv. thousande and foure hundred
These are the nombres of the chyldren of Israel: syxe hundred thousande, and a thousand, seuen hundred and thyrtye.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, saying:
vnto these the lande shalbe deuyded to enheret, accordyng to the nombre of names.
To many thou shalt geue the moare enheritaunce, and to fewe the lesse: to euery trybe shall the enheritaunce be geuen accordynge to the nombre therof
Notwithstandynge, the lande shalbe deuyded by lot, and according to the names of the trybes of their fathers, they shall inheret,
accordynge to the lott shall the possession therof be deuyded betwene many and feawe.
These are the nombres of the Leuites, after their kinredes: Gerson, of whom came the kynred of the Gersonites: Cahath, of whom came the kynred of the Cahathytes: Merrari, of whom came the kynred of the Merrarites.
These are the kynredes of the Leuites: the kynred of the Libnites, the kinred of the Hebronites: the kinred of the Mahelites: the kynred of the Musites: the kinred of the Karahites Cahath begat Amram,
Ꟶ Amrams wyfe was called Iochebed a daughter of Leui, which was borne vnto Leui in Egipte. And she bare vnto Amram Aaron, Moses, and MirIam their syster.
And vnto Aaron were borne Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
And Nadab and Abihu dyed, when they offered straunge fier before the Lorde.
And after theyr nombres, they were foure and twentye thousande, all males from a moneth olde and aboue. For they were not nombred amonge the chyldren of Israel, because there was no enheritaunce geuen them amonge the children of Israel.
These are the nombres, when Moses and Eleazar the preast nombred the children of Israel in the playne of Moab, fast by Iordan, ouer against Iericho.
And among these there was not a man of them, whom Moses and Aaron nombred, when they tolde the chyldren of Israel in the wyldernesse of Sinai.
For the Lorde sayde of them: they shall dye in the wildernes: and ther was not left a man of them, saue Caleb the sonne of Iephune, and Iosua the sonne of Nun.
And the daughters of zelaphead the sonne of Heber the sonne of Gilead the sonne of Machir the sonne of Manasse, of the kinred of Manasse the sonne of Ioseph (whose names were Mahela, Noha, Hagla, Melcha and Thirza)
came, and stode before Moses and Eleazar the prest, and before the lordes, and all the multitude by the dore of the tabernacle of witnes, saying:
oure father dyed in the wyldernes: and was not in the companye of them that gathered them selues together against the Lorde in the congregacyon of Corah. But dyed in hys awne synne, and hadd no sonnes.
Wherfore then is the name of our fathers taken awaye from amonge his kinred, because he hath no sonne? Geue vnto vs therfore a possession among the brethren of oure father.
And Moses brought theyr cause before the Lorde.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
The daughters of zelaphead speake ryght: thou shalt geue them a possessyon to enheret amonge theyr fathers brethren, Ꟶ shalt turne the enheritaunce of their father vnto them.
And thou shalt speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, sayinge: If a man dye and haue no sonne, ye shall turne his enheritaunce vnto hys daughter.
If he haue no daughter, ye shall geue his enheritaunce vnto hys brethren.
If he haue also no brethren, ye shall geue his enheritaunce vnto his fathers brethren.
And yf his father haue no brethren, ye shall geue his enheritaunce vnto him that is next to him of his kinred, and he shall possesse it. And thys shalbe vnto the children of Israel a lawe of iudgement, as the Lorde hath commaunded Moses.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: get the vp into this mount Abarim, and behold the lande which I haue geuen vnto the children of Israel.
And when thou hast sene it, thou shalt be gathered vnto thy people also, as Aaron thy brother was gathered.
For ye were disobedyent vnto my mouthe in the deserte of Sin, in the stryfe of the congregacyon. Neyther dyd ye sanctifye me in the waters before their eyes. That is the water of stryfe in Cades in the wildernesse of Sin.
And Moses spake vnto the Lorde sayinge:
let the Lorde God of the spretes of all fleshe sett a man ouer the congregacyon,
which maye go out and in before them, and leade them out and in: that the congregacyon of the Lorde be not as shepe which haue not a shepherde.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: take Iosua the sonne of Nun, in whom is the sprete, and putt thyne handes vpon hym,
Ꟶ set hym before Eleazar the preast, and before all the congregacyon: and geue hym a charge in theyr syght.
And put of thy prayse vpon him, that all the companye of the children of Israel maye be obedient.
And he shall stande before Eleazar the preaste, which shall aske councell for hym after the iudgement of Urim before the Lorde. And according vnto his worde shall they go out and in, both he and all the chyldren of Israel wyth hym, and all the congregacyon.
And Moses dyd as the Lorde commaunded him: and he toke Iosua, and set hym before Eleazar the preaste, and before all the congregacyon:
and put hys handes vpon him, Ꟶ gaue him a charge, as the Lord commaunded thorowe the hande of Moses.
And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Commaunde the children of Israel, and saye vnto them: My offring and my bred for my sacrifyces which are made for a swete sauoure, shall ye obserue in theyr due season.
And thou shalt saye vnto them: This is the offering which ye shall offer vnto the Lord .ij. lambes of a yere olde without spot daye by daye, for a continuall burntoffering.
One lambe shalt thou offer in the morning, and the other at euen.
And therto the tenth part of an epha of floure for a meatofferyng myngled with beaten oyle conteyninge the fourth part of an hin.
It is a dayly burntoffering, such as was ordeyned in the mounte Sinai for a swete sauoure a sacrifyce vnto the Lorde.
And let the drinckofferyng of the same be the fourth part of an hin for one lambe, and in the holy place shalt thou commaunde the wyne to be powred vnto the Lorde.
And the other lambe thou shalt offer at euen after the maner of the meatofferyng and the drinckoffering of the morning: a sacrifice shalt thou offre for a swete sauoure vnto the Lorde.
And on the Sabboth daye two lambes of a yere olde a pece, and without spot, and two tenth deales of flour for a meatoffering myngled wt oyle, and the drinck offerynge therto.
The burntoffering of the Sabboth must be done in the selfe Sabboth, besyde the dayly burntoffering and his drinckoffering.
And in the beginnynge of youre monethes, ye shall offer a burntofferinge vnto the Lord: two yonge bullockes, and a ram, and vij, lambes of a yere olde without spot:
and .iij. tenth deales of floure for a meatoffering myngled with oyle for one bullocke, and .ij. tenth deales of floure for a meatoffering mingled with oyle for one ram.
And a tenth deale of floure myngled with oyle for a meateoffering vnto one lambe, for a burntoffring and a swete sauoure and sacrifice vnto the Lorde.
And theyr drinckofferynges shalbe halfe an hin of wyne vnto one bullocke, and the third part of an hin of wyne vnto a ram, and the fourth part of an hin vnto a lambe. Thys is the burntofferynge of the moneth in hys moneth, thorowout the monethes of the yere:
and one he goate for a synoffering vnto the Lord shalbe offred, after the dayly burntofferyng and hys drinckoffring.
And the fourtenth daye of the fyrst moneth, is the passeouer of the Lorde.
And in the fyftenth daye of the same moneth is the feast: and seuen dayes longe shall vnleuened bred be eaten.
In the fyrst daye shalbe an holy conuocacyon, ye shall do no maner of seruile worke therin.
But ye shall offer a sacrifyce for a burntofferynge vnto the Lorde .ij. yong bullockes, one ram, and seuen lambes of a yere olde, which are to you wtout spot,
and let theyr meatoffering be of floure mingled with oyle: thre tenth deales also shall ye offre for a bullock, and two tenth deales for a ram:
one tenth deale shalt thou offre for euery lambe of the seuen lambes:
and a hegoate for synne to make atonement for you.
Ye shall offer these, besyde the burntofferyng in the morning, which is a contynuall burntsacrifyce.
After this maner ye shall offre thorowout the .vij. dayes: the fode of the sacrifyce for a swete sauoure vnto the Lord. And it shalbe done besyde the dayly burntoffering and his drinckofferyng.
And in the seuenth daye ye shall haue an holy conuocacion, and ye shall do no seruyle worke.
Therfore in the daye of your first frutes, when ye bryng a newe meatoffering vnto the Lorde (accordyng to your wekes) ye shall haue an holy conuocacion,
Ꟶ ye shall do no seruile worke in it: but offer a burntofferynge for a swete sauoure vnto the Lorde two yonge bullockes, a ram, and .vij. lambes of a yere olde a pece,
with their meate offerynges of floure myngled with oyle, thre tenth deales vnto a bullock, two tenth deales to a ram,
and one tenth deale vnto a lambe thorowout the seuen lambes,
and an hegoate to make an atonement for you.
This ye shall do besydes the contynuall burntofferynge, and hys meatofferyng: Ꟶ they shalbe vnto you without spot, with their drynckofferynges.
And in the fyrst daye of the .vij. moneth ye shall haue an holy conuocacion: ye shall do then no seruyle worke. For it is a daye of blowing vnto you.
But ye shall offre a burntoffering for a swete sauoure vnto the Lord: one yong bullocke, one ram, and .vij. lambes of a yere olde a pece that are pure.
And their meatoffering shalbe made of floure mingled with oyle .iij. tenth deales vnto the bullocke, and .ij. vnto the ram:
and one tenth deale vnto one lambe thorowout the .vij. lambes.
And an hegoate for synne to make an atonement for you,
besyde the daylye burntoffering of the moneth Ꟶ his meatoffering, Ꟶ besyde the dayly burntofferyng Ꟶ his meatofferyng, and the drynckofferinges of the same, which must be done according vnto the maner of them for a sauoure of swetnes of the sacrifyce of the Lorde.
And ye shall haue the tenth daye of that same seuenth moneth an holy conuocacyon: and ye shall humble youre soules, Ꟶ shall do no maner worke therin.
But ye shall offre a burntofferynge vnto the Lorde for a swete sauoure: one bullocke, a ram, and .vij. lambes of a yere olde a pece, which shalbe vnto you, without faute.
Theyr meatoffering shalbe of floure mingled with oyle .iij. tenth deales to a bullock, and .ij. to a ram.
Ꟶ a tenth deale vnto a lambe, thorowout the .vij. lambes.
An he goate for synne, besyde the synoffering of atonement and dayly burntoffring, and the meate and drinck offeringes that longe to the same.
And in the fyftenth daye of the .vij. moneth ye shall haue an holy conuocacyon, and do then no seruyle worcke, and ye shall kepe a feast vnto the Lorde .vij. daies longe.
And ye shall offer a burntoffering for a sacrifice of a swete sauoure vnto the Lord thirtene bullockes, two rams, and fourtene lambes of a yere olde: which shalbe without blemysh.
And their meatofferynge shalbe of floure myngled wt oyle .iij. tenth deales vnto euery one of the .xiij. bullockes .ij. tenth deales to ether of the rams,
and one tenth deale vnto eche of the .xiiij. lambes.
And one hegoate for synne, besyde the dayly burntofferynge with his meate and drinkofferyng.
And the second daye ye shall offre twelue yonge bullockes .ij. rams .xiiij. yerlyng lambes without spot:
and let their meatoffering and drynckeofferynges vnto the bullockes, rams and lambes be according to the nombre of them and after the maner.
And an hegoate for synne, besyde the dayly burntofferinge and his meate and drynckofferinges.
And the thirde daye ye shall offre .xi. bullockes .ij. rams, and .xiiij. yerling lambes without spot:
and let their meate and drinckofferinges vnto the bullockes, rams, and lambes be after the nombre of them and accordynge to the maner.
And there shalbe offred an hegoate for synne, besyde the dayly burntoffering and his meate and drinckofferynge.
In the fourth daye, ye shall offre ten bullockes, two rams, and fourtene lambes yerlynges and pure:
let their meate and drinckofferinges vnto the bullockes, rams Ꟶ lambes be, according to the nombre of them and after the maner.
And an hegoate for synne, besyde the dayly burntofferynge, and hys meate and drinckoffering.
In the fyfth daye ye shall offre nyne bullockes, two rams and thirtene lambes of one yere olde a pece without spot.
And let their meate and drinckofferinges vnto the bullockes, rams and lambes be according to the nombre of them, and after the maner.
And an hegoate for synne, beside the dayly burntoffering and his meat and drinckofferynge.
And in the syxth daye, ye shall offre eight bullockes, two rams and fourtene yerling lambes without spot.
And let their meat and drinckofferinges vnto the bullockes, rams and lambes be accordynge to the maner.
And an hegoate for synne, besyde the dayly burntoffering, and his meate and drinckofferynges.
In the seuenth daye, ye shal offre seuen bullockes, two rams and thirten lambes that are yerlinges and pure.
And let their meate and drynckeofferynges vnto the bullockes, rams and lambes be accordyng to their nombre, and after the maner.
And an hegoate for synne, besyde the daylye burntofferynge, and hys meate and drinckofferinge.
In the eight daye, ye shall haue a colleccyon of the feaste vnto you, and ye shall do no seruile worcke therin.
But ye shall offre a burntofferinge, a sacrifyce for a swete sauoure vnto the Lord: one bullock, one ram and seuen yerelynge lambes without spot.
Let theyr meat and drynck offerynges vnto the bullocke, ram and lambes be accordyng to the nombre, and accordyng to the maner.
And an hegoate for synne, besyde the dayly burnt offerynge and hys meate and drynckofferynges.
These thinges ye shall do vnto the Lorde in youre feastes: besyde youre vowes and frewylofferynges, in youre burnt offerynges, meateofferynges, drynckeofferynges, and peaceofferynges.
And Moses tolde the chyldren of Israel all that the Lorde commaunded him.
And Moses spake vnto the heades of the tribes of the children of Israel, saying: this is the thing which the Lorde hath commaunded.
If a man vowe a vowe vnto the Lord, or swere an oth to bynde his soule: he shall not go back with his worde: but shall fulfyll all that is proceded out of his mouth.
If a woman also vowe a vowe vnto the Lorde, and bynde her selfe beynge in her fathers house in the tyme of her youth,
and her father heare her vowe and bonde which she hath made vpon her soule, and holde his peace therto: then all her vowes Ꟶ bondes which she hath made vpon her soule shall stande in effect.
But and yf her father forbyd her the same daie that he heareth it, none of her vowes nor bondes which she hath made vpon her soule shalbe of value: and the Lorde shall forgeue her, because her father forbade her.
If she had an husbande when she vowed or pronounced ought out of her lippes, wherwith she bonde her soule,
and her husbande hearde it and helde his peace there at the same daye he heard it, then her vowes and her bondes wherwith she bounde her soule, shall stande in effecte.
And yf her husbande forbade her the same daye that he hearde it: and made her vowe which she hath vpon her of none effecte, and released the openyng of her lyppes, wherwith she bounde her soule, the Lorde shall forgeue her.
But euery vowe of a wedowe and of her that is deuorced (that they haue bounde their soule withall) shall stande in effect wt them.
If she vowed in her husbandes house, or bounde her soule with an oth,
and her husbande hearde it, and helde his peace, and forbad her not, then all her vowes and bondes wherwith she bounde her soule, shall stande.
But yf her husbande disannulled them the same daye that he heard them, then nothing that proceadeth out of her lippes in vowes and bondes (wherwith she bounde her soule) shall stande in effecte: for her husbande hath lowsed them. And the Lorde shall forgeue her.
All vowes and othes that binde to humble the soule, maye her husbande stablysh or breake.
But yf her husbande holde his peace from one daye vnto another, then he stablisheth all her vowes and bondes which she had vpon her, because he helde his peace the same daye that he hearde them.
But yf he breake them, after that he hath heard them, he shall beare her synne him selfe.
These are the ordynaunces whiche the Lorde commaunded Moses, betwene a man and hys wyfe: and betwene the father and his daughter, beynge yet a damsell in her fathers house.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
auenge the chyldren of Israel of the Madianites, and afterwarde shalt thou be gathered vnto thy people.
And Moses spake vnto the folke sayinge. Harnesse some of you vnto warre, and let them go vpon the Madianites, and auenge the Lorde of the Madianites.
Lett there be chosen a thousande out of euery tribe of Israel, that out of all the tribes ye may send some to the warre.
And there were taken out of the thousandes of Israel, twelue thousande prepared vnto warre, of euery trybe a thousande.
And Moses sent them to the warre, euen a thousande of euery trybe, and with them, Phineas the sonne of Eleazar the preaste, and the holy vesselles: and the trompettes to blowe were in hys hande.
And they warred agaynst the Madianites, as the Lorde commaunded Moses, Ꟶ slue all the males.
And they slue the kinges of Madian amonge other that were sleyne: Namely Eui, and Rekem, zur and Hur and Reba: fyue kinges of Madian wt Balaam the sonne of Beor, whom they slue wt the sweard:
And the chyldren of Israel toke all the wemen of Madian presoners, Ꟶ their chyldren: and spoiled all their catell, and all their flockes, and all their goodes.
And they burnt al their cityes wherin they dwelt, and all their castels with fier.
And they toke all the spoyle and all that they coulde catch both of men and beastes.
And they brought the captiues and that which they had taken and the spoile vnto Moses and Eleazar the preaste, and vnto the company of the children of Israel, euen vnto the hoost that were in the feldes of Moab by Iordan, oueragaynst Iericho.
And Moses and Eleazar the preast, and all the lordes of the congregacion went out of the hoost against them.
And Moses was angrye with the officers of the hoost, with the captaynes ouer thousandes and ouer hundredes, which came from the warre and battayll:
and Moses sayde vnto them: Haue ye saued all the wemen alyue?
beholde, these caused the children of Israel thorow the councell of Balaam, to commyt trespace against the Lorde, in the busynes of Peor, Ꟶ there folowed a plage among the congregacion of the Lorde.
Nowe therfore, sleye all the men children, and the wemen that haue lien with men fleshly.
But all the wemen children that haue not lyen with men, kepe alyue for your selues.
And ye shall remayne without the hoost seuen dayes, all that haue kylled any persone: Ꟶ all that haue touched any deed body, and purify both your selues and your presoners, the .iij. daye Ꟶ the .vij.
And sprynkle all your raymentes and all that is made of skinnes, and al worke of goates heer, and all thinges made of wodd.
And Eleazar the preaste sayde vnto the men of warre, which came from the battayll: this is the ordinaunce of the lawe which the Lorde commaunded Moses:
Golde, syluer, brasse, and yron tyn and lead,
and all that maye abyde the fier, ye shall make it go thorowe the fier, and it shalbe cleane. Neuerthelesse, it shalbe sprynked with sprynkling water. And all that suffreth not the fier ye shall make go thorowe the water.
And washe youre clothes the seuenth daye, and ye shalbe cleane. And afterwarde come into the hooste.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, saying:
take the summe of the praye that was taken both of the wemen and of catell, thou Ꟶ Eleazar the preaste, and the auncient fathers of of the congregacyon.
And deuyde it into two partes, betwene them that toke the warre vpon them, and went out to battayll: and all the congregacion.
And take a porcyon vnto the Lorde of the men of warre, which went out to battayll: one soule of fyue hundred, both of the wemen and of the oxen, and of the asses, and of the shepe:
and ye shall take it of theyr halfe, and geue it vnto Eeleazar the preast, as an heueoffering of the Lord.
And of the halfe of the chyldren of Israel, thou shalt take one porcion of fyfty, of the wemen, of the oxen, of the asses and of the shepe, and of all maner of beastes: and geue them vnto the Leuites, which wayte vpon the habitacyon of the Lorde.
And Moses and Eleazar the preaste dyd as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And the botye and the praye which the men of warre had caught, was syxe hundred thousande, and .lxxv. thousande shepe:
and .lxxij. thousande oxen
.lxj. thousande asses:
and .xxxij. thousande soules of wemen, that had lyen by no man.
And the halfe which was the parte of them that went out to warre, was thre hundred thousande and seuen and thirtye thousande and .v. hundred shepe.
And the Lordes part of the shepe was syxe hundred and .lxxv.
And the oxen were .xxxvi. thousande, of which the Lordes parte was .lxxii.
And the asses were .xxx. thousande and fyue hundred, of which the Lordes parte was .lxi.
And the soules of wemen were .xvi. thousande, of whyche the Lordes parte was .xxxij. soules.
And Moses gaue that summe which was the Lordes heue offeryng, vnto Eleazar the preaste: as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And the other halfe of the chyldren of Israel whiche Moses separated from the men of warre,
(that is to wete the halfe that perteyned vnto the congregacion) was .iij. hundred thousande, and .xxxvij. thousande Ꟶ fyue hundred shepe:
and .xxxvi. thousande oxen:
and .xxx. thousand asses, and fyue hundred:
and .xvi. thousande soules of wemen.
And Moses toke of his halfe that perteyned vnto the children of Israel, one porcyon of fyftye, both of the wemen and of the catell, and gaue them vnto the Leuites, which wayted vpon the habitacyon of the Lorde, as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And the offycers of thousandes of the hooste, the captaynes ouer the thousandes, and the captaynes ouer the hundredes came forth, and sayde vnto Moses:
Thy seruauntes haue taken the summe of the men of warre, which are vnder oure auctoryte, and there lacketh not one man of vs.
We haue therfore brought a present vnto the Lorde what euery man founde of iewels of golde, cheyns, bracellettes, rynges, earynges and spangels, to make an atonement for our soules before the Lorde.
And Moses and Eleazar toke the golde of them, iewels of all maner fashions.
And all the golde of the heueoffering that they heued vp to the Lorde, (of the captaynes ouer thousandes and hundredes) was .xvi. thousande .vij. hundred and fyftye sycles,
for the men of warre had spoyled, euery man for him selfe.
And Moses and Eleazar the prest toke the golde of the captaynes ouer the thousandes and of the captaynes ouer the hundredes, Ꟶ brought it into the tabernacle of witnes, for a memoriall of the children of Israel before the Lorde.
The chyldren Ruben and the chyldren of Gad had an exceadynge greate multitude of catell. And when they sawe the lande of Iazer and the lande of Gilead that it was apte place for catell,
the chyldren of Ruben and the chyldren of Gad came Ꟶ spake vnto Moses and Eleazar the preast and vnto the lordes of the congregacyon, saying:
The lande of Ataroth and Dibon, Iazer and Nemrah, Hesbon and Elealeh, Sabam and Nebo and Beon:
which contreye the Lorde smote before the congregacyon of Israel: is a lande mete for a catell, and we thy seruauntes haue catell:
wherfore (sayde they) yf we haue founde grace in thy syght, let this land be geuen vnto thy seruauntes to possesse, and bryng vs not ouer Iordan.
And Moses sayde vnto the children of Gad and of Ruben: shall youre brethren goo to warre, and ye shall syt here?
Wherfore discorage ye the hert of the chyldren of Israel, that they shulde not goo ouer into the lande, which the Lorde hath geuen them?
Thus dyd your fathers, when I sent them from Cades Barne to se the lande.
For when they went vp euen vnto the riuer of Escol, and sawe the lande: they discoraged the hert of the children of Israel, that they shulde not go into the lande, which the Lorde hath geuen them.
And the Lorde was wroth the same tyme and sware, saying:
None of the men that came out of Egipte from twentye yere olde and aboue, shall se the lande which I sware vnto Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, because they haue not wholy folowed me:
saue Caleb the sonne of Iephune the Kenesite, and Iosua the sonne of Nun: for they haue folowed the Lorde.
And the Lorde was angry with Israel, and made them wandre in the wildernes fourty yere, vntyll all the generacyon that had done euell in the syght of the Lorde were consumed.
And beholde, ye are rysen vp in your fathers steade, as an encrease of synfull men, to augmente the fearce wrath of the Lorde, to Israel warde.
For yf ye turne awaye from after hym, he will yet agayne leaue the people in the wyldernesse, and ye shall destroye all thys folke.
And they went nere him, and sayde: we will buylde shepefoldes here for oure shepe and for oure catell, and cityes for our children.
But we our selues will goo ready armed before the chyldren of Israel, vntyll we haue brought them vnto their place. And our children shall dwell in the fenced cityes, because of the inhabiters of the lande.
We wyll not returne vnto oure houses, vntyll the children of Israel haue enhereted, euery man his enheritaunce.
Neyther will we enheret with them on yonder syde Iordan forwarde, because oure enheritaunce is fallen to vs on this syde Iordan eastwarde.
And Moses sayde vnto them: yf ye will do this thinge, and goo harnessed before the Lorde to warre,
and wyll go all of you in harnesse ouer Iordan before the Lorde, vntyll he haue cast out his enemies before him:
and vntyll the lande be subdued before the Lorde, then ye shall returne and be without synne before the Lord and before Israel, and this lande shalbe youre possessyon before the Lorde.
But and yf ye wyll not do so, beholde, ye haue synned agaynst the Lord: and be sure, youre synne wyll fynde you out.
Nowe therfore, buylde cityes for youre chyldren, and foldes for your shepe, and do that ye haue spoken.
The children of Gad and the children of Ruben spake vnto Moses, sayinge: thy seruauntes wyll do as my lorde commaundeth.
Our chyldren, our wyues, oure shepe and our catell shall remayne here in the cityes of Gilead.
But thy seruauntes wyll goo all harnessed for the warre, and vnto battayll before the Lorde, as my lorde sayth.
And for theyr sakes, Moses commaunded Eleazar the preast, and Iosua the sonne of Nun, and the auncient fathers of the trybes of the chyldren of Israel:
and Moses saide vnto them: If the children of Gad and the children of Ruben wyll go with you ouer Iordan, all prepared to fyght before the Lord, then when the lande is subdued before you, ye shall geue them the lande of Gilead to possesse:
but and yf they wyll not go ouer with you in harnesse, they shall haue their possessions amonge you in the lande of Canaam.
And the children of Gad and the chyldren of Ruben answered, sayinge: As the Lorde hath sayde vnto thy seruauntes, so wyll we do.
We will go harnessed before the Lorde into the lande of Canaan, that the possession of oure enheritaunce maye be on thys syde Iordan.
And Moses gaue vnto the chyldren of Gad and to the children of Ruben, and vnto halfe the trybe of Manasse the sonne of Ioseph, the kingdome of Sehon kynge of the Amorites, and the kingdome of Og king of Basan, the lande wt the cityes therof in the coastes and cityes of the countrey rounde about.
And the children of Gad buylt Dibon Ꟶ Ataroth, Ꟶ Aroer, and Atroth,
Sophan Iaeser, Ꟶ, Iegabea,
Bethnimra, Ꟶ Betharan, fenced cities, Ꟶ they buylt foldes for the shepe.
And the children of Ruben buylt Hesbon, Eleale, Kiriathaim,
Nebo, Baal, Meon, Ꟶ turned their names, Ꟶ Sibama also: and gaue other names vnto the cityes which they builded.
And the children of Machir the sonne of Manasse went to Gilead, and toke it, Ꟶ put out the Amorites that dwelt therin.
And Moses gaue Gilead vnto Machir the sonne of Manasse, and he dwelt therin.
And Iahir the sonne of Manasse went and toke the small townes therof, and called them Hauoth Iair.
And Nobah went and toke kenath, and the townes longyng therto, Ꟶ called it Nobah after his awne name.
These are the iourneies of the children of Israel, which went out of the lande of Egipt with their armyes vnder the hande of Moses and Aaron.
And Moses wrote their goinge out by their iourneyes, accordyng to the commaundement of the Lord: euen these are the iourneyes of their goynge out.
They departed from Rahemses the .xv. daye of the fyrst moneth, on the morowe after Passeouer: and the children of Israel went out with an hye hande in the syght of all the Egipcyans.
For the Egipcyans buryed all their fyrst borne which the Lorde had smyten amonge them. And vpon theyr goddes also the Lorde dyd execucion.
And the children of Israel remoued from Rahemses, and pitched in Socoth.
And they departed from Socoth, and pitched theyr tentes in Ethan, which is in the edge of the wildernesse.
And they remoued from Ethan, and turned againe vnto Pi Hiroth which is before Baal zephon: and pitched before Migdol.
And they departed from the playne of Hiroth: and went thorowe the myddes of the see in the wildernes, and went .iij. dayes iorney in the wildernes of Ethan, and pitched in Marah.
And they remoued from Marah, and came vnto Elim, where were twelue fountaynes of water, and .lxx. paulmetrees, and they pitched there.
And they remoued from Elim, and laye fast by the red see.
And they remoued from the red see, and laye in the wildernes of Sin.
And they toke their iorneye out of the wyldernesse of Sin, and set vp theyr tentes in Daphka.
And they departed from Daphka, and laye in Alus.
And they remoued from Alus, and laye at Raphedim, where was no water for the people to drynke.
And they departed from Raphedim, and pitched in the wildernes of Sinai.
And they remoued from the desert of Sinai, and pitched at the graues of lust.
And they departed from the sepulchres of lust, and laye at Hazeroth.
And they departed from Hazeroth, and pitched in Rithma.
And departed from Rithma, and pitched at Rimon Parez.
And they departed from Rimon parez, and pitched in Libna.
And they remoued from Libna, and pitched at Risa.
And they iourneied from Risa, and pitched in Rehelatha.
And they went from Rehelatha, and pitched in mount Sapher.
And they remoued from mount Sapher, and laye in Harada.
And they remoued from Harada, and pitched in Makeheloth.
And they remoued from Makeheloth, and laye at Tahath.
And they departed from Tahath, and pitched at Tharath.
And they remoued from Tharath, Ꟶ pitched in Mithca.
And they went from Mithca, and pitched in Hasmona.
And they departed from Hasmona, and laye at Moseroth.
And they departed from Moseroth, and pitched in Bane Iakan.
And they remoued from Bane Iakan, and laye at Horgadgad.
And they went from Horgadgad, and pitched in Iathbatha.
And they remoued from Iathbatha, and laye at Abrona.
And they departed from Abrona, and laye at Ezeon gaber.
And they remoued from Ezeon gaber, and pitched in the wyldernesse of Sin, whych is Cades.
And they remoued from Cades, and pitched in mounte Hor, whiche is in the edge of the lande of Edom.
And Aaron the preast went vp into mount Hor at the commaundement of the Lorde, and dyed there, euen in the fourtyth yere, after the chyldren of Israel were come out of the lande of Egypte, and in the fyrst daye of the fyfth moneth.
And Aaron was an hundred and .xxiij. yere olde when he died in mount Hor.
And king Erad the Canaanite, which dwelte in the south of the lande of Canaan, hearde of the comming of the chyldren of Israel.
And they departed from mounte Hor, and pitched in zalmona.
And they departed from zalmona, and pitched in Phunun.
And they departed from Phunun, and pitched in Oboth.
And they departed from Oboth, and pitched in Iehabarim, and towarde the border of Moab.
And they departed from Iehabarim, and pitched in Dibon Gad.
And they remoued from Dibon Gad, and laye in Almon Diblathaim.
And they remoued from Almon Diblathaim, and pitched in the mountaynes of Abarim before Nabo.
And they departed from the mountaynes of Abarim, and pitched in the feldes of Moab, fast by Iordan oueragainst Iericho.
And they pitched by Iordan, from Beth Haiesmoth vnto the playne of Sittim in the feldes of Moab.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses in the feldes of Moab by Iordan oueragainst Iericho, saying:
speake vnto the children of Israel, and say vnto them: when ye are come ouer Iordan to entre into the lande of Canaan,
ye shall dryue out all the inhabiters of the lande before you, and destroye all their pictures, and breake asunder all their ymages of metall, and plucke downe all theyr aulters.
And possesse the lande Ꟶ dwell therin, for I haue geuen you the lande to enioye it.
And ye shall deuyde the enheritaunce of the land by lot amonge your kynredes, and geue to the mo the more enheritaunce, and to the fewer the lesse enheritaunce. And youre enheritaunce shalbe in the trybes of your fathers, euery mans enheritaunce in the place where his lot faleth.
But and yf ye wyll not dryue oute the inhabiters of the lande before you, than those which ye let remayne of them, shalbe prickes in youre eyes, and dartes in your sydes, and shall vexe you in the lande wherin ye dwell.
Moreouer, it will come to passe, that I shall do vnto you, as I thought to do vnto them.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, saying:
commaunde the chyldren of Israel, and saye vnto them: when ye come into the lande of Canaan, thys is the lande that shall fall vnto your enheritaunce, the lande of Canaan with her coastes.
And your southquarter shalbe from the wildernes Sin alonge by the coaste of Edom, so that youre southquarter reache vpon the syde of the salt see east warde:
Ꟶ fet a compasse from the south vp to Acrahim: and recahe to zinna. And go out from the south to Cades Barne, Ꟶ go out also to Hazar Adar, and go alonge to Azmon:
and fet a compasse agayn from Azmon vnto the ryuer of Egipte, and shall go out at the see.
And let youre westquarter be the greate see: let the same see be your westcoaste.
And thys shalbe youre northquarter: ye shall compasse youre border from the greate see vnto mount Hor.
And from mount Hor, ye shall describe youre border, tyll it come vnto Hemath, and the ende of the coaste shalbe at zedada,
and the coaste shall reache out to ziphron, and go oute at Hazar Enan. Thys shalbe your northquarter.
And ye shall compasse your eastquarter from Hazarenan to Sepham.
And the coast shall go downe from Sepham to Ribla on the east syde of Ain. And the same border shall descende and go out at the syde of the see of Cenereth eastwarde.
And then go downe alonge by Iordane, Ꟶ leaue at the salt see. And thys shalbe your lande with the coastes therof rounde aboute.
And Moses commaunded the chyldren of Israel sayenge: thys is the lande whyche ye shall enherit by lot, and which the Lorde commaunded to geue vnto nyne trybes and an halfe:
for the tribe of the children of Ruben accordyng to the housholdes of theyr fathers, and the trybe of the chyldren of Gad accordyng to theyr fathers housholdes, and halfe the trybe of Manasse, haue receaued theyr enheritaunce.
Two trybes and an halfe haue receaued their enheritaunce on the other syde of Iordan, oueragaynst Iericho eastwarde.
And the Lorde spake to Moses, sayinge:
These are the names of the men, which shall deuyde the lande vnto you: Eleazar the preaste, and Iosua the sonne of Nun.
And ye shall take also a Lorde of euery trybe, when ye deuyde the lande.
The names of the men are these: Of the tribe of Iuda, Caleb the sonne of Iephune.
Of the trybe of the chyldren of Simeon, Semuel the sonne of Amiud.
Of the trybe of Ben Iamin, Elidad the sonne of Cislon.
Of the trybe of the chyldren of Dan, the lorde Bucki, the sonne of Iagli.
From amonge the children of Ioseph for the trybe of the chyldren of Manasse, the lorde haniel, the sonne of Ephod.
Of the trybe of the chyldren of Ephraim, the lorde Camuel the sonne of Siphtan.
Of the tribe of the sonnes of zabulon, the lorde Palzaphan the sonne of Pharnach.
Of the trybe of the chyldren of Isachar, the lorde Elithiel the sonne of Asan.
Of the trybe of the sonnes of Aser, the lorde Ahihud the sonne of Salomi.
Of the trybe of the children of Nephtali, the lorde Peda El, the sonne of Ammihud.
These are they whom the Lord commaunded to deuyde the enheritaunce vnto the chyldren of Israel in the lande of Canaan.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses in the feldes of Moab by Iordan, oueragaynst Iericho, sayinge:
commaunde the chyldren of Israel, that they geue vnto the Leuites of the enheritaunce of theyr possession, cyties to dwell in. And ye shall geue also vnto the cyties of the Leuites, suburbes hard by theyr cityes rounde about them.
The cyties shall they haue to dwell in, and the suburbes for theyr catell, and for theyr possession and all maner of beastes of theyrs.
And the suburbes of the cyties which ye shall geue vnto the Leuites, shall reache from the wall of the cytie outwarde, a thousande cubytes rounde about.
And ye shall measure without the cytie of the eastsyde, two thousande cubytes. And of the southsyde, two thousande cubytes. And of the westsyde, two thousande cubytes. And of the northsyde, two thousaude cubites also: and the cytie shalbe in the myddes. And these shalbe the suburbes of theyr cyties.
And from amonge the cyties whyche ye shall geue vnto the Leuytes, there shall be syxe cyties for refuge, which ye shall appointe to that intent, that he which kylleth, maye flye thyther. And to them ye shal adde .xlii. cyties mo:
so that all the cyties whyche ye shall geue the Leuites, maye be .xlviii. with theyr suburbes.
And these cities which ye shall geue, shall be out of the possession of the chyldren of Israel. They that haue many, shall geue many. But of them that haue fewe, ye shall take fewe. Euery one shall geue of hys cities vnto the Leuites, accordynge to the enheritaunce which he enheriteth.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses, sayenge:
speake vnto the chyldren of Israel and saye vnto them: whan ye be come ouer Iordane into the lande of Canaan,
ye shall appoynte you cyties to be cyties of refuge for you: that he whych sleeth a soule vnwares, maye flye thyther.
And the cytie shalbe to flye from the auenger of bloude, that he whyche kylleth dye not, vntyll he stande before the congregacion in iudgement.
And of these syxe fre cyties whyche ye shall geue
ye shall gyue thre on thys syde Iordan, and thre in the lande of Canaan.
And these syxe fre cyties shalbe a refuge both for the chyldren of Israel, and for the straunger, and for hym that dwelleth amonge you: that all they which kill any persone vnwares, maye flye thyther.
And yf any man smyte another with an instrument of yron that he dye, then is he a murtherer, and shall dye for it.
If he smyte hym wyth a throwynge stone that a man maye dye with, and yf he dye, he that smote hym is a murtherer, let the same murtherer be slayne therfore.
Or yf he smyte him with a handweapon of wodde that a man maye dye with, then yf he dye, he is a murtherer: let the murtherer be slayne therfore.
The iustice of bloude shall slaye the murtherer: whan he meteth hym, he maye slaye hym.
But yf the thrust at hym of hate, or hourle at him with layinge of wayte, that he dye, or smyte hym with hys hande of enuye that he dye,
he that smote him shall dye, for he is a murtherer. The iustice of bloude shall slaye the murthurer, as soone as he findeth him.
But and yf he pusshed hym by chaunce and not of hate, or cast at him with any maner of thynge and not of layinge of wayte:
or cast any maner of stone at him (that a man maye dye with) and sawe hym not. And he cast it vpon hym and he dye, and was not hys enemye, nether sought him any harme.
Then the congregacyon shall iudge betwene the slayer and the executer of bloude in soche cases.
And the congregacyon shall delyuer the slayer out of the hande of the auenger of bloude, and the congregacyon shall restore hym agayne vnto the cytie of hys refuge, whether he was fledd. And he shall byde there vnto the deathe of the hye preaste, which was anoynted with holy oyle.
But Ꟶ yf the slayer come without the borders of his preuileged cytie whether he was fledd,
yf the auenger of bloud fynde him withoute the borders of hys fre towne, and slaye the murtherer, he shal be gyltlesse,
because he shulde haue bydden in hys fre towne vntyll the deeth of the hye preaste, and after the deeth of the hye preaste to retourne agayne vnto the lande of his possession.
These commaundementes shalbe a lawe vnto you, for youre generacions in all youre dwellynges.
Whosoeuer kylleth a soule, the same the manslayer must be slayne him selfe thorowe witnesses. Nether shall one witnesse answere to put a man to death.
Moreouer, ye shall take none amendes for the lyfe of the murtherer which is worthy to dye: But he shall be put to death.
Also ye shall take no money of hym that is fled to a fre cytie, that he shulde come agayne, and dwell in the lande, before the death of the hye preaste.
And se that ye polute not the lande which ye shall dwell in: for bloud defyleth the lande. And the land can none other wyse be clensed of the bloude that is shed therin, but by the bloude of hym that shed bloude.
Defyle not therfore the lande which ye shall inhabyte, for I am in the myddes therof: euen I the Lord dwell among the chyldren of Israel.
And the auncient fathers of the children of Gilead the sonne of Machir the sonne of Manasse of the kynred of the chyldren of Ioseph, came forth Ꟶ spake before Moses and the prynces, and auncyent fathers of the chyldren of Israel,
and sayde: The Lorde commaunded my Lord, to geue the lande to enheret by lotte to the chyldren of Israel. And my Lorde commaunded in gods behalfe, to geue the enheritaunce of zelaphead oure brother vnto hys daughters.
Whom yf any of the sonnes of the other trybes of Israel take to wyues, then shall theyr enheritaunce be taken from the enheritaunce of oure fathers, and shall be put vnto the enheritaunce of the trybe which they are receaued into: and shalbe taken from the lotte of oure enheritaunce.
And when the yere of iubelye of the chyldren of Israel commeth then shall theyr enheritaunce be put vnto the enheritaunce of the trybe wherin to they are receaued: and so shall theyr enheritaunce be taken awaye from the enheritaunce of the trybe of oure fathers.
And Moses commaunded the children of Israel accordynge to the worde of the Lorde sayinge: the chyldren of the trybe of Ioseph haue sayd well.
This therfore doeth the Lorde commaunde the daughters of zelaphead sayinge let them be wyues to whom they them selfe thynck best, onely to the kynred and trybe of theyr father shall they marye,
so shal not the enheritaunce of the chyldren of Israel remoue from trybe to trybe, whan the chyldren of Israel abyde euery man in the enheritaunce of the trybe of his fathers.
And euery daughter that possesseth any enheritaunce in any trybe of the children of Israel, shalbe wyfe vnto one which is of the kynred of the trybe of her father, that the chyldren of Israel maye enioye euery man the enheritaunce of hys father:
Neyther ought the enheritaunce to go from one trybe to another: but euery one of the trybes of the chyldren of Israel, must abyde in hys awne enheritaunce.
And as the Lorde commaunded Moses euen so dyd the daughters of zelaphead.
And Mahela, Thirza, Hagla, Milcha and Noa were maryed vnto theyr fathers brothers sonnes,
which were of the kynred of the chyldren of Manasses the sonne of Ioseph: and so theyr enheritaunce remayned in the trybe of the kynred of theyr father.
These are the commaundementes Ꟶ lawes which the Lorde commaunded by the hande of Moses, vnto the chyldren of Israel in the feldes of Moab by Iordane ouer agaynst Iericho.
These be the wordes which Moses spake vnto all Israel, on the other syde Iordan in the wildernesse, in the plaine ouer agaynst the redd see, betwene Pharan and Tophel, Laban, Hazeroth and Disahab,
eleuen dayes iourney from Horeb vnto Cades barne, by mount Seir.
And it fortuned the fyrst daye of the eleuenth moneth in the fortieth yere, that Moses spake vnto the chyldren of Israel accordinge vnto all that the Lorde had geuen him in commaundement vnto them,
after that he had smytten Sehon the kynge of the Amorites which dwelt in Hesbon, and Og kyng of Basan which dwelt at Astaroth in Edrai.
On the other syde Iordan in the lande of Moab, begane Moses to declare thys lawe sayinge:
the Lorde oure God spake vnto vs in Horeb saying: Ye haue dwelt longe ynough in this mount.
departe therfore Ꟶ take youre iourney, and go vnto the hyll of the Amorites and vnto all places nye there vnto: both vnto the playne, and hylles and dales: to the south, to the sees syde, to the lande of Canaan, and vnto Libanon: euen vnto the greate ryuer Euphrates.
Beholde, I haue set the land before you: goo in and possesse the lande whych the Lorde sware vnto youre fathers Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, to geue vnto them and theyr seede after them.
And I spake vnto you the same ceason sayinge: I am not able to beare you my selfe alone.
For the Lorde youre God had multiplyed you: and beholde, ye are thys daye as the starres of heauen in nombr
(the Lorde God of youre fathers make you a thousande tymes so many moo as ye are, and blesse you as he hath promysed you)
howe can I my selfe alone, beare the combraunce, charge and stryfe that is amonge you?
brynge (from amonge you) men of wysdome and of vnderstandynge, and experte, accordynge to youre trybes, and I wyll make them ruelars ouer you.
And ye answered me and sayde: that whyche thou hast spoken is good for vs to do.
And out of youre trybes I toke the captaynes, (men of wysdome and that were experte) and made them ruelars ouer you: captaynes ouer thousandes Ꟶ ouer hundredes ouer fyftye and ouer ten, and offycers amonge youre trybes.
And I charged youre Iudges that same tyme saying: heare the cause of your brethren and iudge ryghteously betwene euery man and hys brother, and the straunger that is with hym.
Se that ye knowe no faces in Iudgement: but heare the small as well as the greate, and be afrayed of no man, for the iudgement is Gods. And the cause that is to harde for you, brynge vnto me, and I will heare it.
And I commaunded you the same ceason, all the thynges whyche ye shulde do.
And when we departed from Horeb, we went thorowe all that greate and terrible wyldernesse, as ye haue sene alonge by the waye of the hyll of the Amorites, as the Lorde oure God commaunded vs, and came to Cades Barne.
And I sayde vnto you: Ye are come vnto the hyll of the Amorites, which the Lord oure God wyll geue vnto vs.
Beholde, the Lorde thy God hath set the lande before the: goo vp and conquere it, as the Lorde God of thy fathers hath sayde vnto the feare not, nether be discouraged.
But ye came vnto me euery one and sayde we wyll sende men before vs, to searche vs oute the lande, and to brynge vs worde agayne, what waye we must go vp by, Ꟶ vnto what cyties we shall come.
And the sayinge pleased me well, and I toke twelue men of you, of euery trybe one.
Whych departed, and went vp into the hye contrey, and came vnto the ryuer Escoll, and serched it out,
Ꟶ toke of the frute of the lande in theyr handes Ꟶ brought it vnto vs, and brought vs worde agayne, Ꟶ sayde: it is a good lande, whych the Lorde oure God doth geue vs.
Notwithstandynge ye wolde not consente to goo vp, but were disobedient vnto the mouth of the Lord youre God,
and murmured in youre tentes, Ꟶ sayde: because the Lorde hateth vs, therfore hath he brought vs out of the lande of Egypte, to delyuer vs into the hande of the Amorites, and to destroye vs.
Howe shal we goo vp? Oure brethren haue discoraged oure herte, sayinge: the people is greater Ꟶ taller then we, and haue cyties greate and walled euen vp to heauen, Ꟶ moreouer we haue sene the sonnes of the Enakims there.
And I sayde vnto you: dreade not, nor be afrayed of them.
The Lorde youre God which goeth before you, he shall fyghte for you, accordynge to all that he dyd vnto you in Egypte before youre eyes.
In the wyldernersse also thou hast sene howe that the Lorde thy God bare the, euen as a man doth beare hys sonne, in all the waye whyche ye haue gone by, vntyll ye came vnto thys place.
And yet in this thyng ye dyd not beleue the Lorde youre God.
He went in the waye before you, to serche you out a place to pytche youre tentes in, in fyre by nyght, that ye myghte se what waye to go, and in a cloude by daye.
And the Lorde hearde the voyce of youre wordes, and was wroth, Ꟶ sware, sayinge:
there shall not one of these men and of this frowarde generacyon se that good lande which I sware to geue vnto youre fathers,
saue Caleb the sonne of Iephune, he shall se it and to hym wyll I geue that lande that he hath trodden vpon, and to his chyldren, because he hath folowed the Lord
the Lorde was angrye wythe me lykewyse for youre sakes, saying: thou also shalt not go in thither.
But Iosua the sonne of Nun which standeth before the, he shall go in thither. Bolden hym therfore, for he shal cause Israel to inheret the lande.
Moreouer youre chyldren, which ye sayde shulde be a praye, and youre sonnes which in that daye had no knowlege betwene good and euell, they shall goo in thither, and vnto them will I geue it, and they shall enioye it.
But as for you, turne youre face, and take youre iourneye into the wildernesse: euen by the waye of the reade see.
Then ye answered Ꟶ sayde vnto me: We haue synned agaynst the Lorde: we wyll go vp and fyghte, accordynge to all that the Lord oure God commaunded vs. And when ye had gyrde on euery man his wepons of warre, beholde, ye were ready to goo vp into the hyll.
And the Lorde sayde vnto me: saye vnto them, that they go not vp, and that they fyghte not, for I am not among you: lest ye fall before youre enemyes
I tolde you therfore, and ye wolde not heare, but disobeyed the mouth of the Lorde, Ꟶ went presumptuously vp into the hyll.
And the Amorites whych dwelt in that hyll, came out agaynst you, and chased you (as bees vse to do) Ꟶ smote you in Seir, euen vnto Horma.
And ye came agayne, Ꟶ wepte before the Lorde: but the Lorde wolde not heare youre voyce, nor geue you audience.
And so ye abode in Cades a longe ceason, according vnto the tyme that ye remayned in other places.
Then we tourned oure face, Ꟶ toke oure iourney into the wyldernesse euen by the waye of the read see as the Lorde spake vnto me. And we compassed mount Seir a longe tyme.
And the Lord spake vnto me, sayinge:
Ye haue compassed thys mountayne longe ynough, tourne you northward.
And warne thou the people sayinge: Ye shall go thorowe the coast of youre brethren the chyldren of Esau whyche dwell in Seir, Ꟶ they shalbe afrayed of you: Take ye good hede vnto your selues therfore.
Ye shall not prouoke them, for I wyll not geue you of their lande, no not so moche as a fote bredth because I haue geuen mounte Seir vnto Esau to possess
ye shall bye meat of them for money to eate, and ye shall procure water of them for money to drynke.
For the Lord thy God hath blessed the in all the workes of thy hande. He knewe thy entrynge into this greate wyldernesse this .xl. yeres, and the Lorde thy God hath bene with the, so that thou hast lacked nothynge.
And when we were departed from oure brethren the chyldren of Esau whych dwelt in Seir, the playne waye from Elath Ꟶ from Ezion Gaber, we turned Ꟶ went by the waye of the wyldernesse of Moab.
And the Lorde sayde vnto me: Thou shalt not fyght agaynst the Moabites, nether prouoke them to battell, for I wyll not geue the of their lande to possesse:
because I haue geuen Ar vnto the children of Loth to possesse. The terrible people the Emims dwelt therin in tymes past, a people great, many Ꟶ tall, as the Enakims:
whych also were taken for giauntes as the Enakims: whom the Moabites call Emims.
The Horims dwelt in Seir before tyme, whose possessyon the chyldren of Esau occupyed, and destroyed them before them, Ꟶ dwelt in their stead: as Israel dyd vnto the lande of his possession, which the Lorde gaue them.
Nowe ryse vp (sayd I) Ꟶ get you ouer the ryuer zared: Ꟶ we went ouer the ryuer zared.
The space in whych we came from Cades barne vntyll we were come ouer the ryuer zared, was .xxxviii. yeres: vntyll all the generacyon of the men of warre were wasted out from amonge the host, as the Lorde sware vnto them.
For in dede the hande of the Lorde was agaynst them, to destroye them from amonge the host, tyll they were consumed.
And so it came to passe, that all the men of warre were consumed and deed from amonge the people.
And the Lorde spake vnto me, sayinge:
Thou shalt go thorow Ar the coast of Moab thys daye:
and whan thou commest nye vnto the chyldren of Ammon, thou shalt not laye sege vnto them, ner moue warre agaynst them. For I wyll not geue the of the lande of the chyldren of Ammon a possessyon,
but I haue geuen it vnto the chyldren of Loth to possesse. That also is taken for a land of giauntes, and giauntes dwelt therin in olde tyme, whom the Ammonites call zanzumims.
A people that was great, many, Ꟶ talle, as the Enakims. But the Lord destroyed them before them, Ꟶ they succeaded them in the inheritaunce Ꟶ dwelt in theyr steade:
as he dyd for the children of Esau, which dwell in Seir: whan he destroyed the Horyms before them they conquered theyr possessyon, and dwelt in theyr steade vnto this daye.
And the Auims which dwelt in Hazarim euen vnto Aza, the Caphthoryms which came out of Caphthor destroyed them, and dwelt in theyr steade.
Ryse ye vp therfore, and take youre iourney ouer the ryuer Arnon. Beholde, I haue geuen into thy hande Sehon the Amorite kyng of Hesbon, and his lande. Go to therfore and conquere, and prouoke hym to battell.
This daye wyll I begynne to sende the feare and dreade of the, vpon all nacions that are vnder all the heauen: so that they whych heare speake of the, shall tremble and quake before the.
And so I sent messengers out of the wyldernesse of kedemoth vnto Sehon kynge of Hesbon, with wordes of peace, sayinge:
I wyll go thorowe thy lande. I wyll go alonge by the hye waye: I wyll nether turne vnto the ryghte hande nor to the lefte.
Thou shalt sell me meate for money for to eate, and geue me drinke for money for to drinke. Onely graunt me, that I maye go thorowe on my fot
(as the chyldren of Esau which dwell in Seir, Ꟶ the Moabites whych dwell in Ar, dyd vnto me) vntyll I be come ouer Iordan, into the lande which the Lorde oure God geueth vs.
But Sehon the kynge of Hesbon wolde not let vs passe by him, for the Lord thy God hardened his sprete, Ꟶ made his herte tough, because he wolde delyuer him into thy hande, as it is come to passe thys daye.
And the Lorde sayde vnto me: beholde, I haue begonne to set Sehon and his lande before the: go to and conquere, and possesse his lande.
Then both Sehon Ꟶ all hys people came out agaynst vs to fyght at Iaza.
And the Lorde set him before vs, Ꟶ we smote him and hys sonnes and all hys people.
And we toke all his cyties the same ceason, and slue the men, wemen and chyldren of all the cyties, and let nothynge remayne,
saue the catell onely we caught vnto oure selues, and the spoyle of the cyties which we toke,
from Aroer which is by the brinke of the ryuer of Arnon, Ꟶ from the cytie that is in the ryuer, vnto Gilead: there was not one cytie to stronge for vs. The Lorde oure God delyuered all vnto vs:
onely vnto the lande of the children of Ammon thou camest not, nor vnto euery place of the ryuer Iabock, nor vnto the cyties in the mountaynes, nor vnto whatsoeuer the Lorde oure God forbade vs.
Then we turned Ꟶ went vp the waye to Basan. And Og the kynge of Basan came out agaynst vs: he and all hys people to battel at Edrai.
And the Lord sayde vnto me: feare him not, for I wyll delyuer hym, Ꟶ all his people and hys lande into thy hande, and thou shalt do vnto him, as thou dyddest vnto Sehon kinge of the Amorites, which dwelt at Hesbon.
And so the Lorde oure God delyuered into oure handes, Og also the kynge of Basan and all hys folke. And we smote him, vntyll none was lefte hym alyue.
And we toke all his cyties the same ceason (nether was there a cytie which we toke not from them) euen thre score cyties thorow out all the region of Argob, the kyngdome of Og in Basan.
All these cyties also were made stronge with hye walles, gates and barres, besyde vnwalled townes a greate meanye.
And we vtterly destroyed them, as we dyd vnto Sehon kynge of Hesbon, bringyng to nought all the cyties, with men, wemen and chyldren.
But all the catell and the spoyle of the cyties, we caughte for oure selues.
And thus we toke the same ceason, out of the hande of two kynges of the Amorites, the lande that was on the other syde Iordan, from the ryuer of Arnon vnto mount Hermon
(whych Hermon the Sidons call Syrion, and the Amorites call it Senyr)
all the cyties that laye in the playne, and all Gilead and all Basan vnto Salecha and Edrai, cityes of the kyngdome of Og in Basan.
For onely Og kynge of Basan remayned of the remnaunt of the gyauntes, whose bed was a bed of yron. And is it not yet at Rabah amonge the chyldren of Ammon? .ix. cubytes doth the length therof conteyne, and foure cubytes the breadth of it, after the cubite of a man.
And so we conquered this lande the same tyme, from Aroer whych is by the ryuer of Arnon, vnto halfe mount Gilead, Ꟶ the cities therof gaue I vnto the Rubenites and Gaddites.
And the rest of Gilead and all Basan of the kyngdome of Og, gaue I vnto the halfe trybe of Manasse: euen all the rygyon of Argob with all Basan: which is called the lande of gyauntes.
Iair the sonne of Manasse toke all the region of Argob vnto the coastes of Gesuri and Maachati, and called them after hys owne name: Basan Hauoth Iair vnto thys daye.
And I gaue Gilead vnto Machir.
And vnto the Rubenites and Gaddites I gaue halfe Gilead vnto the ryuer of Arnon, halfe the valey Ꟶ beyonde, euen vnto the ryuer Iabock, which is the border of the chyldren of Ammon:
the playne also and Iordan and the coast therof, from Ceneroth euen vnto the see whych is in the playne, euen the salt see vnder the springes of the hyll, eastwarde.
And I commaunded you the same tyme sayinge: the Lorde youre God hath geuen you thys lande to enioye it: ye shall go harnessed before youre brethren the chyldren of Israel, all that are mete for the warre.
Youre wyues onely, youre chyldren, and youre catell (for I wote that ye haue moche catell) shall abyde in youre cyties which I haue geuen you,
vntill the Lorde haue geuen rest vnto youre brethren as well as vnto you, and vntyll they also haue conquered the lande, whyche the Lord youre God hath geuen them beyonde Iordan: and then shall ye returne agayne, euery man vnto hys possession which I haue geuen you.
And I warned Iosua the same tyme sayinge: thyne eyes haue sene all that the Lorde youre God hath done vnto these two kinges euen so shall he do vnto all kyngdomes whyther thou goest.
Ye shall not feare them, for the Lord youre God, he shall fyghte for you.
And I besoughte the Lorde the same tyme sayinge:
O Lorde God, thou hast begonne to shewe thy seruaunte thy greatnesse and thy myghtye hande, for els where is there a God in heauen or in erth, that can do after thy workes and after thy power?
let me go ouer and se the good lande that is beyonde Iordan, that goodly mountayne, and Libanon.
But the Lorde was angrye wyth me for youre sakes, and wolde not heare me. And the Lorde sayed vnto me: be content, speake no moare vnto me of this matter.
Get the vp into the toppe of the hyll, and lyfte vp thyne eyes westwarde, north warde, southwarde, and eastewarde, and beholde it wyth thyne eyes, for thou shalt not go ouer thys Iordan.
But charge Iosua: and courage him, Ꟶ bolden him. For he shal go before this people, and he shall deuyde vnto them the lande whyche thou shalt se.
And so we abode in the valye ouer agaynst the house of Peor.
And now herken O Israel vnto the ordinaunces and lawes which I teache you, for to do them, that so ye maye lyue Ꟶ go in and conquere the lande, which the Lord God of youre fathers geueth you.
Ye shall put nothinge vnto the worde which I commaunde you, nether do ought therfrom, that ye maye kepe the commaundementes of the Lord youre God which I commaunde you.
Youre eyes haue sene what the Lorde dyd vnto Baal Peor for all the men that folowed Baal Peor, the Lorde youre God hath destroyed from amonge you.
But ye that cleue vnto the Lorde youre God, are alyue euery one of you this daye.
Behold I haue taught you ordinaunces and lawes, soch as the Lorde my God commaunded me, that ye shulde do euen so in the lande, whether ye go to possesse it.
Kepe them therfore and do them, for that is youre wysdome Ꟶ vnderstandynge in the syghte of the nacyons: that they maye heare all these ordinaunces, and saye: Surely it is a wyse and vnderstandynge people: it is a greate nacyon.
For what other nacyon is so greate, that Goddes come so nye vnto: as the Lorde oure God is nye vnto vs, in all thynges as oft as we call vnto him?
Ye, Ꟶ what nacyon is so greate, that hath ordinaunces Ꟶ lawes so righteous, as all this lawe whyche I sett before you this daye?
Take hede to thy selfe therfore, and kepe thy soule diligently, that thou forget not the thynges which thyne eyes haue sene, Ꟶ that they departe not out of thyne harte, all the dayes of thy lyfe: but teache them thy sonnes Ꟶ thy sonnes sonnes:
Specially the daye that thou stodest before the Lord thy God in Horeb, when the Lord sayed vnto me: gether me the people together, and I wyll make them heare my wordes, that they maye lerne to feare me all the dayes that they shall lyue vpon the erth and that they maye teache their chyldren:
ye came and stode also vnder the hyll, and the hyll burnt with fyre: euen vnto the myddes of heauen, Ꟶ there was darcknesse, clowdes Ꟶ myst.
And the Lorde spake vnto you out of the myddes of the fyre, Ꟶ ye herde the voyce of the wordes but sawe no ymage, saue herde a voyce onely.
And he declared vnto you his couenaunt which he commaunded you to do, euen .x. verses, which he wrote vpon two tables of stone.
And the Lorde commaunded me that same ceason, that I shulde teach you ordinaunces and lawes, which ye ought to do in the lande whether ye go to possesse it.
Take therfore good hede vnto youre selues as pertaynynge vnto youre soules, for ye sawe no maner of ymage in the daye that the Lorde spake vnto you in Horeb out of the myddes of the fyre: lest ye marre youre selues
and make you a grauen ymage and picture of eny maner of fygure: the lykenesse of man or woman,
the lycknesse of any maner of beast that is on the erth, or the lykenesse of any maner feathered foule that flyeth in the ayre,
or the lyknesse of any maner worme that crepeth on the erth, or the liknesse of any maner fyshe that is in the waters beneth the erth.
Ye and leste thou lyfte vp thyne eyes vnto heuen and when thou seyst the sonne, the moone and the starres with all the hoost of heauen, shuldest be desceaued, and shuldest worshippe and serue the thynges, which the Lorde thy God hath made to serue all nacyons vnder the whole heauen.
But the Lorde hath taken you, Ꟶ brought you out of the yron fornace: euen out of Egypte, to be vnto him a people and enheritaunce, as ye be this daye.
Furthermoare, the Lorde was angrye with me for youre sakes, and sware, that I shulde not go ouer Iordan, and that I shulde not go in vnto that good land, which the Lorde thy God geueth the to enheritaunce.
But I must dye in thys land, and shall not go ouer Iordan. But ye shall go ouer, and conquere that good lande.
Take hede vnto youre selues, that ye forgett not the appoyntement of the Lorde your God whyche he made with you, and that ye make you no grauen ymage, or any pycture, that the Lorde thy God hath forbydden the.
For the Lorde thy God is a consumynge fyre, and a gelouse God.
If thou dost beget chyldren childrens children, Ꟶ whan ye haue dwelt in the lande, ye do wikedly, Ꟶ make any maner of grauen ymage, and worke euell in the syghte of the Lord thy God, to prouoke him to anger,
I call heauen and erth to recorde agaynst you thys daye, that ye shall shortely perish from of the lande, whether ye go ouer Iordan to possesse it: ye shall not prolonge youre dayes therin, but shall vtterly be destroyed
And the Lord shall skater you amonge the nacyons, and ye shalbe lefte fewe in nombre amonge the people, whether the Lorde shall brynge you:
and there ye shall serue goddes, whyche are the worke of mans hande, wood and stone, which nether se, nor heare, nor eate, nor smell.
And there thou shalt seke the Lorde thy God: Ꟶ shalt fynde hym, yf thou seke hym wt all thyne herte, and with all thy soule.
Whan thou are in tribulacyon, and when all these thynges (that be here spoken of) are come vpon the euen in the later dayes, thou shalt be obedient vnto his voyce.
For the Lord thy God is a mercyfull God: he will not forsake the, nether destroye the nor forget the appoyntement of thy fathers, which he sware vnto them.
For aske of the dayes that are past, which were before the sence the daye that God created man vpon the erth, and (aske) from the one syde of heauen vnto the other, yf euer there came to passe soch a greate thing, or whether any soche lyke thynge hath bene herde.
Dyd euer a nacyon heare the voyce of God speakynge out of the myddes of a fyre, as thou hast herde, and yet lyued?
other whether God assayed to go and take hym a people from amonge nacyons thorowe temptacions, signes wondres, warre, a myghtie hande, a stretched out arme, and thorowe greate syghtes, accordynge vnto all that the Lord youre God dyd vnto you in Egypte before youre eyes?
Unto the it was shewed, that thou myghtest knowe, howe that the Lorde he is God, and that there is none other but he.
Out of heauen he made the heare his voyce, that he myght nourter the, and vpon erth he shewed the hys greate fyre, Ꟶ thou heardest his wordes out of the myddes of the fyre.
And because he loued thy fathers, he chose theyr seed after them, and broughte the out in his syght, Ꟶ with his myghtie power out of Egipte:
to thrust out nacyons great Ꟶ myghtyer then thou, before the, and to brynge the in, Ꟶ to geue the their lande to enheritaunce: as it is come to passe thys daye.
Understande therfore thys daye, Ꟶ turne it to thyne hert, that the Lorde, he is God in heauen aboue, and vpon the erth beneth: neyther is there any other.
Thou shalt kepe therfore his ordinaunces, and hys commaundementes which I commaunde the thys daye, that it maye go well with the and with thy chyldren after the, Ꟶ that thou mayst prolonge thy dayes vpon the erth, which the Lord thy God geueth the thy lyfe longe.
Then Moses seuered thre cyties on the other syde Iordan towarde the sonne rysynge,
that he shulde flye thyther, which had kylled hys neyghboure vnwares, Ꟶ hated hym not in tyme past, Ꟶ therfore shulde flye vnto one of the same cyties, and lyue:
Namely, Bezer in the wyldernesse, euen in the playne contre of the trybe of Ruben: and Ramoth in Gilead of the trybe of Gad, and Golan in Basan of the trybe of Manasse.
And so thys is the lawe which Moses set before the chyldren of Israel.
These are the witnesse, statutes, and ordinaunces, whych Moses tolde the chyldren of Israel after they came out of Egypte,
on the other syde Iordan, in the valey ouer agaynst the house of Peor, in the lande of Sehon kynge of the Amorites which dwelt at Hesbon: whom Moses and the chyldren of Israel smote, after they were come out of Egypte,
Ꟶ conquered hys lande, Ꟶ the lande of Og kynge Basan two kynges of the Amorites, whych were on the other syde Iordan towarde the sonne risynge:
from Aroer whych is by the bancke of the ryuer Arnon, vnto Mount Syon whych is Hermon,
and all the playne on the other syde Iordan eastwarde: euen vnto the see, which is in the playne vnder the springes of the hyll.
And Moses called all Israel, Ꟶ sayed vnto them. Heare O Israel the ordinaunces Ꟶ lawes which I speake in youre eares this daye, that ye maye lerne them, and fullfill them in ded
The Lorde oure God made an apoyntment with vs in Horeb.
The Lorde made not this bonde with oure fathers, but with vs: euen with vs, which are all here alyue thys daye.
The Lorde talked with you face to face in the mount, oute of the myddes of the fyrere.
And I stode betwene the Lorde and you the same tyme, and shewed you the worde of the Lorde. For ye were afrayed at the syght of the fyre, and went not vp into the mount, Ꟶ he sayed
I am the Lorde thy God, which broughte the oute of the lande of Egypte from the house of bondage.
Thou shalt haue none other goddes in my presence.
Thou shalt make the no grauen ymage of any maner of lykenesse that is in heauen aboue and that is in erth beneth, and that is in the waters benethe the erth.
Thou shalt nether bowe thy selfe vnto them, nor serue them, for I the Lorde thy God, am a gelouse God, visytinge the wyckednesse of the fathers vpon the chyldren, euen in the thyrde Ꟶ fourth generacyon, amonge them that hate me:
Ꟶ shewe mercye vpon thousandes, amonge them that loue me, and kepe my commaundementes.
Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vayne: for the Lorde wyll not holde him gyltlesse, that taketh his name in vayne.
Kepe the Sabboth daye, that thou sanctifye it, as the Lorde thy God hath commaunded th
Syxe dayes thou shalt laboure and do all that thou hast to do,
but the seuenth daye is the Sabboth of the Lorde thy God: thou shalt not do any worke, thou and thy sonne, thy daughter, thy seruaunte and thy mayde, thyne oxe and thyne asse, and all thy catell, and the straunger that is within thy gates, that thy seruaunte Ꟶ thy mayde maye rest as well as thou.
Remembre, that thou wast a seruaunte in the lande of Egypt, and howe that the Lorde thy God brought the out thence thorowe a myghtye hande and a stretched out arme. For whyche cause the Lord thy God commaunded the, to kepe the Sabboth daye.
Honoure thy father and thy mother, as the Lorde thy God hath commaunded the: that thy dayes maye be prolonged, Ꟶ that it maye go well with the in the lande, which the Lord thy God geueth the.
Thou shalt nol slaye.
Thou shalt not breake wedlocke.
Thou shalt not steale.
Thou shalt not beare false witnesse agaynst thy neyghboure.
Thou shalt not luste after thy neygboures wyfe: thou shalt not couet thy neyghbours house, hys felde, hys seruaunte, or hys mayde, hys oxe, hys asse, or ought that thy neyghboure hath.
These wordes the Lorde spake vnto all your multitude in the mount out of the myddes of the fyre, cloude and darcknesse, with a greate voyce, added nomore therto, and wrote them in two tables of stone, and delyuered them vnto me.
And it fortuned, that whan ye herde the voyce out of the myddes of the darcknesse, Ꟶ sawe that the hill dyd burne with fyre, ye came vnto me with the captaynes of youre tribes and youre elders:
and ye sayde: beholde, the Lord oure God hath shewed vs his glorye and his greatnesse, Ꟶ we haue herde his voyce out of the myddes of the fyre: we haue sene thys daye, that God doth talke wyth a man, and he yet lyueth.
Nowe therfore, why shulde we dye, that thys greate fyre shulde consume vs? If we heare the voyce of the Lord oure God any moare, we shal dye.
For what fleshe hath it bene, that euer hearde the voyce of the lyuynge God speakinge out of the myddes of the fyre (as we haue done) and yet dyd lyue?
Go thou and here all that the Lord oure God sayeth, and tell thou vnto vs all that the Lord oure God sayeth vnto the and we wyll heare it and do it.
And the Lorde hearde the voyce of youre wordes when ye spake vnto me, Ꟶ the Lorde sayde vnto me: I haue herde the voyce of the wordes of thys people, which they haue spoken vnto the, they haue well sayed all that they haue spoken.
Oh that ther were such an hert in them that they wolde feare me, Ꟶ kepe all my commaundementes alwaye, that it myghte go wel with them, and with theyr chyldren for euer.
Go and saye vnto them: gett you into youre tentes agayne,
but stande thou here by me, and I wyll tell the all the commaundementes, ordinaunces and lawes, which thou shalt teache them, that they maye do them in the lande which I geue them to possesse.
Take hede therfore, that ye do in dede as the Lorde youre God hath commaunded you, Ꟶ turne not asyde: ether to the ryghte hande or to the lefte:
but walke in all the wayes which the Lorde youre God hath commaunded you, that ye maye lyue, and that it maye go well with you, and that ye maye prolonge youre dayes, in the lande which ye shall possesse.
These are the commaundementes, ordinaunces and lawes whych the Lord youre God commaunded me to teach you that ye might do them in the lande whether ye go to possesse it:
namely, that thou myghtest feare the Lorde thy God, and kepe all hys ordinaunces and hys commaundementes whych I commaunde the: thou and thy sonne, and thy sonnes sonne all dayes of thy lyfe, that thy dayes maye be prolonged.
Heare therfore. O Israel, and take hede, that thou do therafter, that it maye go well with the, and that ye maye encrease myghtely, euen as the Lorde God of thy fathers hath promysed the a lande, that floweth wyth mylcke and hony.
Heare O Israel, the Lorde oure God is Lorde only,
and thou shalt loue the Lorde thy God with all thyne harte, Ꟶ with all thy soule, Ꟶ with all thy might.
And these wordes which I commaunde the thys daye, shalbe in thine herte,
and thou shalt shewe them vnto thy chyldren, and shalt talke of them when thou art at home in thyne house, and as thou walkest by the waye, and when thou lyest doune, and when thou rysest vp:
and thou shalt bynde them for a sygne vpon thine hande. And they shalbe warnynges betwene thyne eyes
and thou shalt write them vpon the postes of thy house and vpon thy gates.
And when the Lord thy God hath brought the into the lande, whych he sware vnto thy fathers, Abraham Isahac and Iacob, and geueth the greate Ꟶ goodly cyties which thou byldedst not,
houses full of all maner of goodes which thou fylledst not, and welles dygged which thou dyggedest not, vineyardes Ꟶ oliue trees which thou plantedst not, and when thou hast eaten Ꟶ art full:
Then beware, lest thou forget the Lorde, whyche broughte the oute of the lande of Egypt from the house of bondage.
Thou shalt feare the Lorde thy God, Ꟶ serue him, and swere by his nam
Se that ye walcke not after straunge goddes: the goddes of the nacyons which are aboute you.
For the Lorde thy God is a gelouse God amonge you, lest the countenaunce of the Lorde thy God be moued to wrath agaynst the, and destroye the from of the erth.
Ye shall not tempte the Lorde your God as ye dyd in the tentacyon.
But kepe the commaundementes of the Lorde youre God, and hys witnesses and his ordinaunces which he hath commaunded the,
and thou shalt do that which is right and good in the syghte of the Lorde: that thou mayst prospere, and that thou mayst go in, and conquere that good lande whyche the Lorde sware vnto thy fathers,
to cast oute all thyne enemyes before the as the Lorde hath sayed.
And when thy sonne asketh the in tyme to come, sayinge: What meaneth these witnesses, ordinaunces Ꟶ lawes, which the Lorde oure God hath commaunded you?
Then thou shalt saye vnto thy sonne: We were Pharaos bondmen in Egypte, and the Lorde brought vs out of Egipte with a myghtie hande.
And the Lorde shewed signes Ꟶ wondres greate Ꟶ euell vpon Egypte, vpon Pharao Ꟶ vpon all hys housholde, before oure eyes,
but brought vs oute from thence: to brynge vs in, and to geue vs the lande which he sware vnto oure fathers.
And he hath commaunded vs, to do all these ordinaunces, and to feare the Lorde oure God, for oure welth all the dayes of our lyfe, as it is come to passe thys daye.
Moreouer thys shalbe oure ryghteousnes before the Lorde oure God, yf we take hede Ꟶ kepe all these commaundmentes, as he hath commaunded vs.
When the Lord thy God hath brought the into the lande whyther thou goest to possesse it, Ꟶ hath cast out many nacions before the: namely, the Hethites, the Gergesites, the Amorites, the Cananites, the Pheresites, the Heuites Ꟶ the Iebusites, seuen nacyons greater, and myghtier than tho
and when the Lorde thy God hath sett them before the, thou shalt smyte them, Ꟶ vtterly destroye them, and make no couenaunt with them, nor haue compassyon on them. Thou shalt make no mariages with them,
nether geue thy daughter vnto hys sonne, nor take hys daughter vnto thy sonne.
For they wyll disceaue thy sonne, that he shuld not feare me and they shall serue straunge goddes, and then wyll the wrath of the Lorde waxe whote agaynst you, and destroye you shortely.
But thus ye shall deale with them: Ye shall ouerthrowe theyr alters, Ꟶ breake doune theyr pylers, cut doune theyr groues, and burne theyr grauen ymages with fyre.
For thou art an holy nacyon vnto the Lorde thy God the Lorde thy God hath chosen the, to be a seuerall people vnto hym selfe, aboue all nacyons that are vpon the erth.
It was not because of the multitude of you aboue all nacyons, that the Lorde had lust vnto you and chose you, seynge ye were fewest of all nacyons.
But because the Lorde loued you, and because he wolde kepe the othe whyche he had sworne vnto your fathers, therfore hath the Lorde brought you oute of Egypte thorowe a myghtie hande, Ꟶ delyuered you out of the house of bondage: euen from the hande of Pharao kynge of Egypte.
Understande therfore, that the Lorde thy God he his God, Ꟶ that a true God whych kepeth poyntment and mercy vnto them that loue hym Ꟶ kepe his commaundementes, euen thorowe out a thousande generacyons:
and rewardeth them that hate him before hys face, so that he bringeth them to naught, and doth not deferre the tyme, but rewardeth him that hateth hym, before his face.
Kepe thou therfore the commaundementes, and ordinaunces and lawes, which I commaunde the this daye that thou do them.
If ye herken vnto these lawes, and obserue Ꟶ do them, the Lord thy God also shall kepe vnto the the poyntement, and the mercy which he sware vnto thy fathers.
He wyll loue the, Ꟶ blesse the, Ꟶ multiplye the: he wyll also blesse the frute of thy wombe, and the frute of thy londe, thy corne, thy wyne and thyne oyle, Ꟶ the frute of thine oxen, Ꟶ the flockes of thy shepe in the lande, which he sware vnto thy fathers to geue the.
Thou shalt be blessed aboue all nacyons: there shalbe nether man nor woman vnfrutefull amonge you, nor any thing vnfrutefull amonge your catell.
Moreouer the Lorde will take awaye from the all maner infirmityes, and will put none of the euell diseases of Egypte (whiche thou knowest) vpon the, but wyll sende them vpon all them that hate the.
Thou shalt consume all the nacions which the Lord thy God shall deliuer the: thyne eye shall haue no pytie vpon them, nether shalt thou serue theyr goddes, for that shalbe thy decaye.
If thou saye in thyne hert: these nacyons are moo than I, howe can I cast them out?
Thou shalt not feare them, but remembre, what the Lorde thy God dyd vnto Pharao and vnto all Egypte:
the greate temptacyons whych thyne eyes sawe, and the sygnes, and wondres, and the myghtye hande and stretched out arme, where thorowe the Lorde thy God brought the out: euen so shall the Lorde thy God do vnto all the nacyons, of whom thou art afrayed.
Moreouer the Lord thy God will sende hornettes amonge them vntyll they that are lefte, and hyde them selues from the, be destroyed.
Thou shalt not feare them, for the Lord thy God is among you, a myghtie God and a terrible.
For the Lorde thy God wyll put out these nacyons before the by a lytle Ꟶ a lytle thou mayst not consume them at once, lest the beastes of the felde encrease vpon the.
But the Lorde thy God shall geue them ouer before the, and shall destroye them with a myghtie tempest, vntill he haue brought them to naught.
And he shall delyuer theyr kynges in to thyne hande, and thou shalt destroye their name from vnder heauen. There shall no man be able to stande before the, vntyll thou haue destroyed them.
The grauen ymages of theyr goddes shalt thou burne wyth fyre, Ꟶ couet not the golde and syluer that is on them, nor take it vnto the, lest thou be snared ther in. For it is an abhominacyon before the Lorde thy God.
Brynge not therfore abhominacyon in to thyne house, lest thou be a damned thynge, as it is: but vtterlye defye it and abhorre it, for it is a damned thynge.
All the commaundmentes whych I commaunde the thys daye, shall ye kepe for to do them, that ye maye lyue and multiplie and go in, and possesse the lande whyche the Lorde sware vnto your fathers.
And thou shalt thynke on all the waye, which the Lorde thy God ledd the thys .xl. yeare in the wildernesse, for to humble the, Ꟶ to proue the, Ꟶ to wete what was in thyne herte, whether thou woldest kepe hys commaundmentes or no,
He humbled the, and suffred the to hongre, and fedd the with Manna, whych nether thou nor thy fathers knewe of, to make the knowe, that a man doth not lyue by bread only: but by euery that procedeth out of the mouth of the Lorde, doth a man lyue.
Thy rayment waxed not olde vpon the, nether dyd thy fote swell these .xl. yeares.
Thys also shalt thou consyder in thyne herte, that as a man nourtereth hys sonne, euen so the Lorde thy God nourtereth the.
Therfore shalt thou kepe the commaundementes of the Lorde thy God, that thou walke in his wayes, and feare hym.
For the Lord thy God bryngeth the into a good lande, a lande in the whych are ryuers of water, and fountayns and sprynges that springe out of valeyes and hylles:
a lande wherin is wheat Ꟶ barly, vyneyardes, fygtrees and pomgranates: a lande wherin is oyle olyue and honie:
a lande, wherin thou shalt eate bread wythout skarcenesse, neither shalt thou lacke anye thynge: a lande whose stones are yron, Ꟶ out of whose hylles thou shalt dygge brasse.
When thou hast eaten therfore and fylled thy selfe, thou shalt blesse the Lord thy God in that good lande, whych he hath geuen the.
Beware, that thou forgett not the Lorde thy God, that thou woldest not kepe hys commaundmentes, hys lawes Ꟶ his ordinaunces whych I commaunde the thys daye y
Ꟶ when thou hast eaten, and fylled thy selfe, Ꟶ hast bylt goodly houses Ꟶ dwelt therin,
and when thy beastes, and thy shepe are waxed manye, and thy syluer Ꟶ golde is multiplied, and all that thou hast is encreased,
then beware, lest thyne herte ryse Ꟶ thou forgett the Lorde thy God, whych brought the out of the lande of Egypte, and from the house of bondage,
Ꟶ whych was thy gyde in the greate and terrible wyldernesse (wherin were) fyrye serpentes, scorpions, and drouth without any water. But he brought out water for the, euen out of the rocke of flynt:
he fedd the in the wildernesse wyth Manna, whych thy fathers knewe not, euen for to humble the, and to proue the, and that he myght so do the good at thy later ende.
Lest thou shuldest saye in thyne herte my power Ꟶ the might of myne awne hande hath prepared me thys abundaunce:
But remembre the Lorde thy God, howe that it is he which geueth the power to get substaunce, for to make good the promesse whych he sware vnto thy fathers, as thys daye doth wytnesse.
And yf thou forget the Lorde thy God, and walke after straunge goddes, and serue them, Ꟶ worshype them, I testifye vnto you this daye, that he shall surely perysh.
As the nacions whych the Lorde destroyeth before you, euen so ye shall peryshe, because ye wolde not be obedient vnto the voyce of the Lorde youre God.
Heare O Israel, thou passest ouer Iordan thys daye, to go in, and conquere nacyons greate Ꟶ myghtier then thy selfe: cyties greate and walled vp to heauen,
a people greate and tall, euen the chyldren of the Enakims, whych thou knowest of, and of whom thou hast herde saye: who wyll stande before the chyldren of Enack?
Understande therfore thys daye, that the Lorde thy God is euen he whych goeth ouer before the as a a consumynge fyre, he shall destroye them and he shall brynge them downe before thy face. He shall cast them out, Ꟶ brynge them to nought quickly, as the Lord hath sayed vnto the.
Speake not thou in thyne hert (after that the Lord thy God hath cast them out before the) sayinge: for my ryghteousnes the Lorde hath brought me in, to possesse thys lande. Nay, but for the wyckednesse of these nacyons the Lorde hath cast them out before the.
It is not for thy righteousnes sake or for thy ryght hert, that thou goest to possesse theyr lande. But for the wyckednesse of these nacions, the Lorde thy God doth cast them out before the, euen to performe the worde, which the Lorde thy God sware vnto thy fathers, Abraham, Isahac and Iacob.
Understande therfore that it is not for thy ryghteousnes sake, that the Lorde thy God doth geue the thys good lande to possesse it seynge thou art a stiffenecked people.
Remembre Ꟶ forget not, howe thou prouokedest the Lorde thy God in the wyldernesse, sence the daye that thou dyddest departe out of the lande of Egypte vntyll ye came vnto thys place, ye haue rebelled agaynst the Lord.
Also in Horeb ye angred the Lorde, so that the Lord was wroth wyth you, euen to haue destroyed you,
whan I was gone vp into the mount, to receaue the tables of stone, the tables of appoyntment, whych the Lorde made with you. And Iabode in the hyll .xl. dayes Ꟶ .xl. nyghtes, whan I nether dyd eate bread nor dranke water.
And the Lord delyuered me two tables of stone, wryten with the fynger of God, Ꟶ in them was accordynge to all the wordes which the Lorde sayed vnto you in the mount out of the myddes of the fyre in the daye, of the gatherynge together.
And when the .xl. dayes Ꟶ .xl. nyghtes were ended, the Lorde gaue me the two tables of stone, the tables of the couenaunt,
and the Lorde sayde vnto me. Up, Ꟶ get the doune quickely from hence, for thy people which thou hast broughte out of Egypte, haue marred all. They are turned attonce out of the waye, whiche I commaunded them, and haue made them a molten ymage.
Furthermore, the Lord spake vnto me sayinge: I haue sene thys people, and beholde, it is a styffenecked people,
let me alone, that I maye destroye them, and put out the name of them from vnder heauen, and I wyll make of the a myghtie nacyon, Ꟶ greater than they be.
And I turned me, and came doune from the hyll (euen from the hyll that burnt wyth fyre) and the two tables of the appoyntment were in my handes.
And I loked, Ꟶ beholde, ye had synned agaynst the Lorde your God, Ꟶ had made you a molten calfe, and had turned attonce out of the waye whyche the Lord had commaunded you.
And I toke the two tables and cast them out of my two handes, and brake them before youre eyes.
And I fell downe flat before the Lorde: euen as at the fyrst tyme, and .xl. dayes Ꟶ .xl. nyghtes I dyd nether eate bread nor drincke water, because of all youre synnes, whych ye synned, in doynge wyckedly in the syght of the Lord in that ye prouoked hym vnto wrath.
For I was afrayed that for the wrath Ꟶ fearsnesse wher wyth the Lorde was moued agaynst you, he wolde haue destroyed you. But the Lorde herde me at that tyme also.
The Lorde was very angrye wyth Aaron also, euen to haue destroyed hym: Ꟶ I made intercessyon for Aaron also the same tyme:
And I toke youre synne the calfe whych ye had made and burnt hym with fyre, Ꟶ stamped hym Ꟶ grounde hym a good, euen vnto sinal dust. And I cast the dust therof into the brooke, that descended out of the mounte.
Also at the burnynge, at the tentacyon, and at the sepulchres of lust ye angred the Lord,
lykewyse when the Lorde sent you from Cades Barne, sayinge, go vp, and conquere the lande which I haue geuen you ye disobeyed the mouth of the Lorde youre God, and nether beleued him, nor herkened vnto his voyce.
Ye haue bene disobedient vnto the Lorde, sence the daye that I knewe you.
And I fell downe flat before the Lord .xl. dayes, and .xl. nyghtes whiche I laye there, for the Lorde sayde, that he wolde destroye you.
I made intercessyon therfore vnto the Lorde, and sayed: O Lorde God, destroye not thy people Ꟶ thyne enheritaunce, whych thou hast delyuered thorow thy greatnesse, and which thou hast brought out of Egypte thorowe a myghtie hand.
Remembre thy seruauntes Abraham, Isahac and Iacob, and loke not vnto the stoburnesse of this people, ner to theyr wickednesse Ꟶ synne:
lest the lande whence thou broughtest them, saye: The Lorde is not able to brynge them in to the lande, whych he promysed them: and because he hated them, therfore hath he caryed them out, to slaye them in the wyldernesse.
Beholde, they are thy people, and thyne enheritaunce, whyche thou broughtest out in thy myghtie power and in thy stretched out arme.
In the same ceason the Lord sayde vnto me hewe the two tables of stone lyke vnto the fyrst, and come vp vnto me in to the mount, Ꟶ make the an Arcke of wood,
Ꟶ I will wryte in the tables, the wordes that were in the fyrst tables which thou brakest, Ꟶ thou shalt put them in the arcke.
And I made an arcke of sethim wood, and hewed two tables of stone like vnto the fyrst, and went vp in to the mountayne, hauynge the two tables in myne hande.
And he wrote in the tables accordynge to the fyrst writynge (the ten verses whiche the Lorde spake vnto you in the mount out of the myddes of the fyre, in the daye of the gatherynge together) and the Lord gaue them vnto me.
And I departed, and came downe from the hyll, and put the tables in the arcke which I had made: and there they be, as the Lorde commaunded me.
And the chyldren of Israel toke theyr iourney from Beroth of the chyldren of Iakan to Mosera, where Aaron dyed, and was buryed, and Eleazer hys sonne became preast in hys stead:
From thence they departed vnto Gadgad: Ꟶ from Gadgad to Iathbath a land which hath riuers of water.
The same ceason the Lorde separated the trybe of Leui to beare the arcke of the appoyntment of the Lorde, Ꟶ to stande before the Lorde, Ꟶ to ministre vnto hym Ꟶ to blesse in his name vnto thys daye.
Wherfore the Leuites haue no parte nor enheritaunce wyth theyr brethren: But the Lorde is theyr enheritaunce, as the Lorde thy God hath promysed them.
And I taryed in the mount, euen as at the fyrst time .xl. dayes and .xl. nyghtes, and the Lorde herkened vnto me at that tyme also, Ꟶ the Lorde wolde not destroye the.
And the Lorde sayde vnto me: vp, and go forth in the iourneys before the people, that they maye go in, and conquere the lande which I sware vnto theyr fathers, to geue vnto them.
And nowe Israel, what doth the Lord thy God requier of the but to feare the Lorde thy God, and to walke in all hys wayes, to loue hym, and to serue the Lorde thy God with all thyne herte Ꟶ with all thy soule:
Namely, that thou kepe the commaundmentes of the Lorde, and hys ordinaunces whych I commaunde the thys daye, for thy welth.
Beholde, heauen and the heauen of heauens is the Lordes thy God, and the erth wyth all that therin is:
Notwythstondynge, the Lord had a lust vnto thy fathers to loue them, and chose theyr seed after them, euen you, aboue all nacyons, as thou seest thys daye.
Circumcyse therfore the foreskynne of youre harte, and be no more stiffnecked:
For the Lorde your God, is God of Goddes, and Lorde of Lordes, a greate God, a myghtye and a terrible whych regardeth no mans person nor taketh gyfte:
He doeth ryght vnto the fatherlesse Ꟶ wedowe, and loueth the straunger, to geue hym fode and rayment.
Loue ye therfore the straunger also: for ye were straungers youre selues in the lande of Egypte.
Thou shalt feare the Lorde thy God, Ꟶ hym (onely) shalt thou serue, to hym shalt thou cleue, and swere by hys nam
he is thy prayse and thy God, that hath done for the these greate and terrible thynges, whych thyne eyes haue sene.
Thy fathers went doune in to Egypte with .lxx. soules, and nowe the Lorde thy God hath made the Ꟶ multiplyed the, as the starres of heauen.
Therfore thou shalt loue the lord thy God Ꟶ kepe his obseruaunces, his ordinaunces, hys lawes, Ꟶ his commaundments alwaye.
Call to your mynde this daye that which youre chyldren haue nether knowen nor sene: euen the nourture of the Lorde youre God, hys greatnesse, hys myghtye hande, and hys stretched out arme:
his myracles and hys actes whych he dyd in the myddes of Egypte, euen vnto Pharao the kynge of Egypte and vnto all hys lande:
Ꟶ what he dyd vnto the host of Egypt, vnto theyr horses Ꟶ charettes howe he brought the water of the red see vpon them as they chased you behynde, Ꟶ howe the Lorde hath brought them to nought vnto thys daye:
Ꟶ what he dyd vnto you in the wildernesse, vntyll ye came vnto thys place:
Ꟶ what he dyd vnto Dathan and Abiram the sonnes of Eliab the sonne of Ruben, howe the erth opened hyr mouth, and swalowed them, wyth theyr housholdes and theyr tentes, Ꟶ all theyr substance that was in theyr possession, in the myddes of Israel.
Doutles, youre eyes haue sene all the greate actes of the Lorde whych he dyd.
Therfore shall ye kepe all the commaundmentes, whych I commaunde the thys daye, that ye maye be stronge Ꟶ go in and conquere the lande whether ye go to possesse it,
Ꟶ that ye maye prolonge youre dayes in the lande which the Lorde sware vnto your fathers, to geue vnto them and to theyr seed, a lande that floweth wyth mylcke and honye.
For the lande whether thou goest to possesse it, is not as the lande of Egypte that ye came out of, where thou sowedst thy seed and wateredst it wyth thy fete as a garden of herbes:
but the lande whyther ye go ouer to possesse it, is a lande that hath hylles and valeyes, and drinketh water of the rayne of heauen.
Thys lande doth the Lorde thy God care for, Ꟶ the eyes of the Lorde thy God are alwayes vpon it, from the begynnynge of the yeare, vnto the ende of the yeare.
If you shall herken therfore vnto my commaundementes, whych I commaunde you thys daye, that ye loue the Lorde youre God Ꟶ serue him wyth all youre herte, Ꟶ wyth all youre soul
I also wyll geue rayne vnto youre lande in due ceason: the fyrst rayne and the later, that thou mayest gather in thy corne, thy wyne Ꟶ thyne oyle.
And I will sende grasse in thy feldes for thy catell: that thou mayest eate, and fyll thy selfe.
But beware that youre herte deceaue you not Ꟶ ye turne asyde, and serue straunge Goddes, and worshyp them,
and then the Lord beynge wroth agaynst you, shutt vp the heauen, that there be no rayne, and that youre lande yelde not her frute, and lest ye perysh quickly from of the good lande, whych the Lorde geueth you.
Therfore shall ye put vp these my wordes in youre herte and in youre soule, Ꟶ bynde them for a sygne vpon youre hande, that they maye be as a warninge betwene your eyes,
and ye shall teach them youre children that they maye talke of them, when thou syttest in thyne house, and when thou walkest by the waye: when thou lyest downe, Ꟶ when thou rysest vp:
yee and thou shalt wryte them vpon the dore postes of thyne house, and vpon thy gates,
that your dayes maye be multiplied, Ꟶ the dayes of youre children, in the land whych the Lorde sware vnto youre fathers to geue them, as longe as the dayes of heauen last vpon the erth.
For yf ye kepe all these commaundmentes, which I commaund you so that ye do them: Namely, that ye loue the Lord youre God, Ꟶ walke in all his wayes, and cleaue vnto him,
Then wyll the Lorde cast out all these nacyons before you, and ye shalbe the heyres of great nacions and of them that are myghtyer then youre selues.
All the places where on the soles of youre fete shall treade, shalbe youres, euen from the wildernesse and from Libanno, Ꟶ from the ryuer Euphrates, euen vnto the vttemost see, shall youre coaste be.
There shall no man be able to stande before you: for the Lorde youre God shall cast the feare Ꟶ dreade of you vpon all the lande that ye shall treade vpon, as he hath sayde vnto you.
Beholde, I set before you thys daye, a blessynge Ꟶ a curs
a blessynge: yf ye obeye the commaundmentes of the Lorde youre God whych I commaunde you thys daye.
And a curse: yf ye wyll not obeye the commaundmentes of the Lorde youre God: but turne out of the waye, whych I commaunde you thys daye, to go after straunge goddes, whych ye haue not knowen.
When the Lorde thy God therfore hath brought the in to the lande, whether thou goest to possesse it, thou shalt put the blessynge vpon mount Garizim, Ꟶ the curse vpon mount Ebal,
whych (mountaynes) are on the other syde Iordan on the backe syde of the waye towarde the goynge doune of the sonne, in the lande of the Cananites whych dwel in the playne ouer agaynst Gilgal besyde the groue of Moreh.
For ye shall passe ouer Iordane, to go in, and possesse the lande, which the Lorde your God geueth you, and ye shall conquere it, Ꟶ dwell therin.
Take hede therfore that ye do all the commaundementes and lawes, whych I sett before you thys daye.
These are the ordinaunces and lawes which ye shall obserue and do in the lande, whych the Lord God of thy fathers geueth the to possesse it, as longe as ye lyue vpon the erth.
Ye shall destroye all places where in the nacions which ye shall conquere serued their Goddes, vpon hye mountaynes, on hylles, and vnder euery thyck tree.
Ouerthrowe theyr alters, and breake theyr pilers, and burne their groues with fyre and hewe downe the grauen ymages of the Goddes that they haue, and bringe the names of them to noughte out of that place.
Ye shall not do so vnto the Lorde youre God,
but ye shall seke the place, whych the Lorde youre God shall haue chosen out of all youre trybes, to put hys name there, Ꟶ there to dwell.
And thyther thou shalt come, and thyther ye shall brynge youre burnt sacrifyces, your offrynges, youre tythes, and heue offrynges of youre hande, youre vowes, your frewill offerynges and the fyrst gendred of youre oxen and of your shepe.
And there ye shall eate before the Lorde youre God, Ꟶ ye shall reioyse in all that ye put youre hande vnto both ye and youre housholdes, wherin the Lord thy God hath blessed the.
Ye shall not do after all the thynges that we do here thys daye, euery man what semeth hym good in hys awne eyes.
For ye are not yet come to rest, Ꟶ to the enheritaunce, which the Lorde youre God geueth you.
But whan ye go ouer Iordan, and dwell in the lande whych the Lorde your God hath geuen you to enheret, and whan he hath geuen you rest from all youre enemyes rounde aboute, so that ye dwel in safetye,
then vnto the place whych the Lorde youre God hath chosen, to put his name there, ye shall brynge all that I commaunde you: Namely, youre burntsacrifyces, youre offerynges, youre tythes, the heueofferinge of youre hande, Ꟶ all youre speciall vowes, which ye vowe vnto the Lord.
And ye shall reioyse before the Lorde youre God, ye and youre sonnes, Ꟶ youre daughters, youre seruauntes and youre maydens, and the Leuite that is wythin youre gates for asmoch as he hath no parte nor enheritaunce wyth you.
Take hede that thou offer not thy burntofferynges in euery place that thou seest:
but in the place whych the Lorde shall haue chosen in one of thy trybes, there thou shalt offer thy burntofferinges, and there thou shalt do all that I commaunde the.
Notwythstandynge thou mayst kyll and eate fleshe in all thy cyties, whatsoeuer thy soule lusteth after, accordynge to the blessinge of the Lorde thy God, which he hath geuen the both the vncleane and the cleane may eat therof, euen as the roo, or the hert:
only ye shall not eate the bloud, but powre it vpon the erth as water.
Thou mayst not eate wythin thy gates the tithe of thy corne, of thy wyne and of thy oyle, and the fyrst gendred of thine oxen, and of thy shepe, nether any of thy vowes whych thou vowest, nor thy fre wil offringes or heueofferynge of thyne hande:
but thou must eate them before the Lorde thy God, in the place which the Lorde thy God hath chosen: thou, and thy sonne, and thy daughter, thy seruaunte and thy mayde, Ꟶ the Leuite that is wythin thy gates: and thou shalt reioyse before the Lorde thy God, in all that thou puttest thyne hande to.
Beware, that thou forsake not the Leuite, as longe as thou lyuest vpon the erth.
If (when the Lorde thy God hath enlarged thy border as he hath promised the) thou saye: I wyll eate flessh, because thy soule longeth to eate fleshe: thou mayest eate fleshe whatsoeuer thy soule lusteth.
If the place whych the Lorde thy God hath chosen to put his name there, be to farre from the, then thou shalt kyll of thy oxen Ꟶ of thy shepe which the Lord hath geuen the, as I haue commaunded the, Ꟶ thou shalt eate in thine awne cytie, whatsoeuer thy soule lusteth.
And as the roo Ꟶ the herte is eaten, euen so thou shalt eate them: both the cleane and the vncleane shall eate of them.
But be stronge that thou eate not the bloude. For the bloude, that is the lyfe, and thou mayst not eate the lyfe wyth the fleshe:
thou shalt not eate it, but powre it vpon the erth as water.
Se thou eate it not, that it maye go well wyth the, and wyth thy chyldren after the: But thou shalt do that, which is ryght in the syghte of the Lorde.
But thy holye thinges which thou hast, and thy vowes thou shalt take, Ꟶ come vnto the place which the Lorde hath chosen,
and thou shalt offer thy burntoffringes, both fleshe and bloude vpon the alter of the Lorde thy God, and the bloude of thyne offeringes shalbe powred out vpon the alter of the Lord thy God, Ꟶ thou shalt eate the flesh.
Take hede, Ꟶ heare all these wordes whych I commaunde the, that it maye go well wyth the, and wyth thy chyldren after the for euer, yf thou doest that whych is good and ryght in the syghte of the Lorde thy God.
When the Lorde thy God hath destroyed the nacyons before the, whether thou goest to conquere them, Ꟶ thou succedest in theyr inheritaunce, and dwellest in theyr lande:
Beware, that thou be not taken in a snare after them, after that they be destroyed before the, and that thou aske not after theyr Goddes, sayinge: howe dyd these nacyons serue their Goddes? I wyll do so lyke wise.
Nay, thou shalt not do so vnto the Lorde thy God: for all abhominacions, Ꟶ that whych the Lord hateth, the same haue they done vnto theyr Goddes. For they burne both theyr sonnes and theyr daughters wyth fyre before theyr Goddes.
Therfore whatsoeuer I commaunde you, that take hede ye do and put thou nought therto, nor take ought therfrom.
If there a ryse amonge you a prophete or a dreamer of dreames, and geue the a sygne, or a wonder,
and that sygne or wonder whych he hath sayde come to passe, and then saye: let vs go after straunge Goddes whych thou hast not knowen, and let vs serue them
herken not thou vnto the wordes of that prophete or dreamer of dreames. For the Lorde thy God proueth you, to wete, whether ye loue the Lorde youre God wyth all youre herte and with all your soule.
Ye shall walke after the Lorde youre God, and feare him, kepe his commaundmentes, and herken vnto hys voyce, serue him, and cleaue vnto hym.
And that prophete or dreamer of dreames shall dye, because he hath spoken to turne you a waye from the Lorde youre God, (which brought you out of the lande of Egypte, and delyuered you out of the house of bondage) to thrust the out of the waye, which the Lorde thy God commaunded the to walke in: and therfore thou shalt put the euell a waye from the.
If thy brother, the sonne of thy mother, or thyne awne sonne, or thy daughter, or the wyfe that lyeth in thy bosome, or thy frende which is as thyne awne soule vnto the, entice the secretly, saying: let vs go Ꟶ serue straunge Goddes, whych thou hast not knowen nor yet thy fathers,
And they be of the Goddes of the people which are rounde aboute you, whether they be nye vnto the or farre of from the, from the one ende of the erth vnto the other,
Thou shalt not consente vnto him, nor herken vnto him: thine eye shall not pitie him nether shalt thou haue compassion on him, nor kepe him secret but cause him to be slayne.
Thyne hande shalbe fyrst vpon him to kyll hym: Ꟶ then the handes of all the people.
And thou shalt stone him wyth stones that he dye, because he hath gone aboute to thrust the awaye from the Lorde thy God, which brought the out of the lande of Egipte, and from the house of bondage.
And all Israel shall heare and feare, and shall do no moare any soche wyckednesse as this is, amonge you.
If thou shalt heare saye in one of thy cyties which the Lorde thy God hath geuen the to dwell in,
that certen men beynge the chyldren of Belial, are gone out from amonge you, and haue moued the enhabiters of their cytie, sayinge: let vs go and serue straunge Goddes, which ye haue not knowen.
Then thou must seke, and make serche and enquere diligently. And beholde, yf it be true, and the thynge of a suertye, that soche abhominacion is wrought among you:
then thou shalt smyte the dwellers of that cytie in the edge of the swerde, and destroye it vtterly, and all that is therin, and euen the very catell therof with the edge of the swerde.
And gether all the spoyle of it into the myddes of the streate therof, and burne with fyre both the cytie Ꟶ all the spoyle therof euery white for the Lorde thy God. And it shalbe an heape for euer Ꟶ shall not be bylt agayne.
And there shall cleaue naught of the damned thynge in thine hande, that the Lorde maye turne from the fearcenesse of hys wrath, and shewe the mercye, and haue compassyon on the, and multiplye the, as he hath sworne vnto thy fathers.
Therfore shalt thou herken vnto the voyce of the Lorde thy God, to kepe all hys commaundmentes, whych I commaunde the this daye, that thou do it, which is ryght in the eyes of the Lorde thy God.
Ye are the children of the Lord your God. Ye shall not cut youre selues, nor make you any baldnes betwene youre eyes for any deed man.
For thou art an holy people vnto the Lorde thy God, and the Lorde hath chosen the, to be a seuerall people vnto hym selfe, aboue all the nacyons that are vpon the erth.
Thou shalt eate no maner of abhominacion.
These are the beastes which ye shall eate of oxen, shepe and goates,
hert, roo and bugle: wildegoate, vnicorne, wylde oxen Ꟶ Camelion.
And all beastes that cleaue the hoffe, and slytte it into two clawes, and chewe the cud, them ye shall eate.
Neuerthelesse, these ye shall not eate of them that chewe cud and of them that deuyde and cleaue the hoffe: the camell, the hare and the conye: whych chewe cud, but deuyde not the hoffe: therfore are they vncleane vnto you:
and also the swine, though he deuide the hoffe, yet he cheweth not cud, therfore is he vncleane vnto you: ye shall not eate of the flesh of soche, nor touche the dead carkesse of them.
These ye shall eate of all that are in the waters: All that haue fynnes Ꟶ scales shall ye eate:
And whatsoeuer hath not fynnes Ꟶ scales, of that ye maye not eate, but it is vncleane vnto you.
Of all cleane byrdes ye shall eate:
but these are they of whych ye shall not eate: the Egle, the goshauke, and the cormerant,
the Ixion, the vultur, the kyte after her kynde,
and all kynde of rauens,
the Estritch, the nyghtcrowe, the kuckowe, and the sparowe hawk after her kynde,
the lytle oule, the great oule, the back,
the bitture, the pye,
the storke, the heron, the Iay in his kynde, the lapwinge, the swaloue.
And let all crepinge foules be vncleane vnto you, and not be eaten of:
but of all cleane foules ye maye eate.
Ye shall eat of nothynge that dyeth alone: But thou shalt geue it vnto the straunger that is in thy cytie, that he eate it, or thou mayst sel it vnto an Aliant. For thou art an holy people vnto the Lorde thy God. Thou shalt not sethe a kyd in hys mothers mylcke.
Thou shalt tythe all the encrease of thy seed, that the felde bryngeth furth yeare by yeare:
And thou shalt eate before the Lorde thy God, (in the place whych he hath chosen, and where he hath put his name) the tythe of thy corne, of thy wyne Ꟶ of thyne oyle, and the fyrst gendred of thyne oxen Ꟶ of thy shepe, that thou mayst learne to feare the Lorde thy God all waye:
If the waye be to longe for the, so that thou art not able to carye it, Ꟶ yf the place be farre from the, which the Lord thy God hath chosen to set his name there (and the Lord thy God hath blessed the)
then shalt thou make it in money, Ꟶ take the money in thyne hande, Ꟶ go vnto the place whych the Lorde thy God hath chosen,
and bestowe the money for whatsoeuer thy soule lusteth after: for oxen, Ꟶ shepe, wyne Ꟶ stronge drynke, Ꟶ for whatsoeuer thy soule desyreth, and eate there before the Lorde thy God and be mery. bothe thou and thyne housholde,
and the Leuite that is wythin thy gates, shalt thou not forsake, for he hath nether parte nor enheritaunce wyth the.
At the ende of thre yeare, thou shalt brynge forth all the tythes of thyne encrease the same yeare, and laye it vp wythin thyne awne gates.
And the Leuite whych hath no parte nor enheritaunce with the, shall come, Ꟶ the straunger, the fatherlesse and the wedowe, which are within thy gates, shall eate Ꟶ be fylled: that the Lorde thy God maye blesse the, in all the workes of thyne hande which thou doest.
In the seuenth yeare thou shalt make a fredome. And this is the maner of the fredom
whosoeuer lendeth ought wyth hys hande vnto his neyghboure, maye not aske againe (that whych he hath lent) of hys neyghboure or of his brother: because it is called the Lordes fre yeare:
yet of a straunger thou mayst call it home agayne. But he that is thy brother, him shall thyne hande remytt,
Neuertheles there shall be no begger amonge you. For the Lord shall blesse the in the lande, whych the Lorde thy God geueth the, an enheritaunce to possesse it:
so that thou herken vnto the voyce of the Lorde thy God, to obserue and do all these commaundmentes, which I commaunde the this daye.
For the Lorde thy God hath blessed the as he hath promysed the, and thou shalt lende vnto many nacyons, but thou thy selfe shalt not borowe: And thou shalt raygne ouer many nacions, and they shall not raygne ouer the.
Yf one of thy brethren amonge you be poore wythin any of thy gates in thy lande which the Lorde thy God geueth the, thou shalt not harden thine hert, nor shut to thyne hande from thy poore brother:
But open thyne hande vnto him, Ꟶ lende hym sufficient for his nede, which he hath.
Beware, that there be not a wycked poynte in thine hert, that thou woldest saye: The seuenth yeare, the yeare of fredome is at hande, and therfore it greueth the to loke on thy poore brother, and geuest him naught Ꟶ he then crye vnto the Lord against the, and it be synne vnto the:
But geue him, and let it not greue thyne hert to geue vnto him. Because that for thys thynge, the Lord thy God shall blesse the in all thy workes, Ꟶ in all that thou puttest thyne hande to.
The lande shall neuer be wtout poore: And therfore I commaunde the sayinge: Thou shalt open thyne hande vnto thy brother that is neady and poore in thy lande.
If thy brother an Hebrue sell hym selfe to the, or an Hebruesse, Ꟶ serue the sixe yeare, in the seuenth yeare thou shalt let hym go fre from the.
And when thou sendest him out fre from the, thou shalt not let hym go awaye emptye:
but shalt geue hym of thy shepe, of thy corne, and of thy wyne, and geue hym of that, wher wt the Lorde thy God hath blessed the.
And remembre, that thou wast a seruante in the lande of Egypte, and the Lorde thy God delyuered the thence: and therfore I commaunde the thys thynge to daye.
And yf he saye vnto the I wyll not go awaye from the, because he loueth the Ꟶ thyne house, and is well at ease with the:
Then shalt thou take an aule, and nayle his eare to the doore therwith, Ꟶ let hym be thy seruaunte for euer: And vnto thy mayde seruaunte thou shalt do lyke wise.
And let it not greue thyne eye, whan thou lettest him go out fre from the, for he hath bene worth a double hyred seruaunte to the in hys seruice syxe yeres, And the Lorde thy God shall blesse the in all that thou doest.
All the fyrst gendred that come of thyne oxen, and of thy shepe that are males, thou shalt halowe vnto the Lord thy God. Thou shalt do no worke with the fyrst gendred of thyne oxen, ner shere the fyrst gendred of thy shepe:
Thou shalt eate it before the Lord thy God yeare by yeare, in the place whych the Lorde hath chosen, both thou and thyne housholde.
If there be any deformyte therin, as yf it be lame, or blynde, or haue any other euell fauorednesse, thou shalt not offer it vnto the Lord thy God:
But shalt eate it within thyne awne gates, the vncleane and the cleane indifferently, as the roo Ꟶ the hert.
Only eate not the bloude therof, but poure it vpon the grounde as water.
Obserue the moneth of newe corne, that thou mayest offer passeouer vnto the Lorde thy God. For in the moneth whan corne beginneth to rype, the Lorde thy God brought the out of Egypte by nyght.
Thou shalt therfore offer passe ouer vnto the Lorde thy God (and shepe and oxen) in the place whych the Lorde shall chose to put his name there.
Thou shalt eate no leuened bread with it: but seuen dayes shalt thou eate vnleuened bred therwith: euen the bread of trybulacyon (for thou camest out of the lande of Egypte in haste) that thou mayst remembre the daye, when thou camest out of the lande of Egypte, all dayes of thy lyfe.
And there shall be no leuened bread sene in all thy coastes seuen dayes longe, neyther shall there remayne any thynge of the fleshe which thou offrest the fyrst daye at euen, vntyll the mornynge.
Thou mayst not offer passeouer wythin any of thy gates, whych the Lorde thy God geueth the:
but in the place which the Lord thy God shall chose, to set his name in, there thou shalt offer Passeouer at euen, aboute the goynge downe of the sonne, euen in the ceason that thou camest out of Egypte.
And thou shalt sethe and eate it, in the place which the Lorde thy God hath chosen, and departe on the morowe, Ꟶ gett the vnto thy tente.
Syxe dayes thou shalt eat swete bread, and the seuenth daye is a gatherynge together before the Lorde thy God: thou shalt do no worke therin.
Seuen wekes shalt thou nombre vnto the, and begynne to nombre the seuen wekes, whan thou begynnest to put the syckell to the corne,
Ꟶ kepe the feast of wekes vnto the Lorde thy God, wyth a frewylofferynge of thyne hande: which thou shalt geue vnto the Lorde thy God, accordynge as the Lorde thy God hath blessed the.
And reioyse before the Lorde thy God, thou Ꟶ thy sonne, thy daughter, thy seruaunte Ꟶ thy mayde and the Leuite that is within thy gates, and the straunger, the fatherlesse Ꟶ the wedowe that are amonge you, in the place whych the Lorde thy God hath chosen to put hys name there.
And remembre, that thou wast a seruaunte in Egypte: and thou shalt obserue Ꟶ do these ordinaunces.
Thou shalt also obserue the feast of tabernacles seuen dayes, after that thou hast gethered in thy corne and thy wyne.
And thou shalt reioyse in that thy feast, thou and thy sonne, thy daughter, thy seruaunte, and thy mayde, the Leuite, the straunger, and the fatherlesse Ꟶ the wedowe, that are wythin thy gates.
Seuen dayes shalt thou kepe holy daye vnto the Lorde thy God, in the place whych the Lorde shall chose: for the Lord thy God shall blesse the in all thy frutes, and in all the workes of thyne handes, therfore shalt thou be glad.
Thre tymes in the yere shall all thy males appeare before the Lorde thy God, in the place which he shall chose: In the feast of swete bread, in the feast of wekes, Ꟶ in the feast of tabernacles. And they shall not appeare before the Lorde empty
but euery man accordynge to the gyfte of hys hande, Ꟶ accordynge to the blessynge of the Lorde thy God whych he hath geuen the.
Iudges and offycers shalt thou make the in all thy cyties, whych the Lorde thy God geueth the thorowe out thy trybes: and they shall iudge the people ryghteously.
Wrest not thou the lawe, nor knowe any persone, nether take any rewarde: for gyftes blynde the wyse, Ꟶ peruerte the wordes of the ryghteous.
That whych is iust and ryght, shalt thou folowe, that thou mayst lyue, and enioye the lande, which the Lorde thy God geueth the.
Thou shalt plante no groue of whatsoeuer trees it be, nye vnto the altare of the Lorde thy God, which thou shalt make the.
Thou shalt set the vp no piler, whiche the Lorde thy God hateth.
Thou shalt offer vnto the Lorde thy God no oxe nor shepe where in is blemysh or any deformite: for that is an abhomynacyon vnto the Lorde thy God If
there be founde amonge you wyth in any of thy gates, whych the Lorde thy God geueth the, man, or woman that hath wrought wyckednesse in the syghte of the Lorde thy God, so that they haue gone beyonde hys appoyntment,
and gone and serued straunge goddes, and worshypped them the sonne or moone or any of the hoost of heauen, which I haue not commaunded,
Ꟶ it is tolde the, and thou hast heard of it then shalt thou enquire diligently. And yf it be true, Ꟶ the thynge of a suertye, that soche abhominacion is wrought in Israel,
then shalt thou brynge forth that man or that woman (whych haue committed that wycked thinge) vnto the gates, and shalt stone them wyth stones, tyll they dye.
At the mouth of two or thre witnesses shall he that is worthy of death, dye: and at the mouth of one wytnesse let no man dye.
The handes of the wytnesses shalbe fyrst vpon hym, to kyll hym, and afterwarde the handes of the people, Ꟶ thou shalt put the wycked awaye from the.
If there ryse a matter to harde for the in iudgement betwene bloud and bloud, betwene plee and plee, betwene plage and plage, and the matters come to stryfe wythin thy gates, Then shalt thou aryse, and get the vp vnto the place which the Lord thy God hath chosen,
and come vnto the preastes the Leuites, and vnto the iudge that shalbe in those dayes, and aske and they shall shewe the the sentence of iudgement.
And thou must do accordynge to that, whych they of that place (which the Lorde had chosen) shewe the and thou shalt obserue to do, accordynge to all that they enfourme the.
Accordynge to the sentence of the lawe which they teache the, Ꟶ accordinge to the iudgement which they tell the, shalt thou do, and bowe not from that which they shewe the, nether to the right hande nor to the lefte.
And that man that will do presumptuously, and wyll not herken vnto the preast (that standeth there before the Lorde thy God to mynistre) or vnto the iudge, that man shall dye: and thou shalt put awaye euell from Israel.
And all the people shall heare and feare, and shall do no more presumptuously.
When thou art come vnto the lande whych the Lorde thy God geueth the, and enioyest it, and dwellest therin: Ꟶ yf thou shalt saye. I wyll set a kynge ouer me lyke as all the nacyons that are aboute me:
Then thou shalt make hym kynge ouer the, whom the Lorde thy God shall chose: Euen one from amonge thy brethren shalt thou make kynge ouer the, and thou mayst not set a straunger ouer the, whych is not of thy brethren.
But he shall not multiplye horses to him selfe, ner brynge the people agayne to Egypte thorowe the multitude of horses, for as moche as the Lord hath sayde vnto you: ye shall hence forth go no moare agayne that waye.
Also he ought not to multiplie wyues to hym selfe, lest his hert turne awaye, nether shall he gether him syluer and golde to moch.
And when he is sett vpon the seate of hys kyngedome, he shall wryte hym out a copye of thys lawe in a boke, before the Preastes the Leuites.
And it shalbe wyth him, Ꟶ he ought to reade therin all dayes of hys lyfe, that he maye lerne to feare the Lorde hys God, Ꟶ to kepe all the wordes of thys lawe and these ordinaunces, for to do them:
and that hys hert aryse not aboue hys brethren, Ꟶ that he turne not from the commaundement: to the ryght hande or to the lefte, but that he maye prolonge hys dayes in hys kyngdome: he, and hys chyldren in Israel.
The Preastes the, Leuites, and all the trybe of Leuy must haue no parte nor enheritaunce wyth Israel: but shall eate the offringes of the Lorde, and hys enheritaunce:
Therfore shall they haue no enheritaunce amonge their brethren: But the Lorde, he is their enheritaunce, as he hath sayde vnto them.
And this is the Preastes dutie of the people, and of them that offer, whether it be oxe or shepe: They must geue vnto the Preaste, the shoulder, and the two chekes, and the maw
the fyrst frutes also of thy corne, wyne and oyle, and the fyrst of the woll of thy shepe shalt thou geue hym:
For the Lorde thy God hath chosen hym out of all thy trybes, to stande and to ministre in the name of the Lorde: he and hys sonnes for euer.
If a Leuite come out of any of thy cyties of all Israel, wher he is a soiourner, and come wythall the lust of hys herte vnto the place whych the Lorde hath chosen:
he shall mynistre in the name of the Lorde hys God, as hys other brethren the Leuites do, whych remayne there before the Lorde.
And they shall haue lyke porcyons to eate, besyde that whych commeth to hym of the patrimonye of hys elders.
When thou arte come into the lande whych the Lorde thy God geueth the, se that thou lerne not to do after the abhominacions of those nacions.
Let ther not be founde amonge you any one, that maketh hys sonne or daughter to go thorowe the fyre, or that vseth wytchcrafte, or a choser out of dayes or that regardeth the flyenge of foules,
or a sorcerar, or a charmar, or that counceleth wyth spretes, or a sothsayer, or that asketh at them that be deed.
For all that do soch thynges are abhominacyon vnto the Lorde: and because of these abhominacyons the Lorde thy God doeth cast them out before the.
Thou shalt be perfecte therfore in the syght of the Lorde thy God.
For these nacyons whych thou shalt conquere, herken vnto chosers oute of dayes, and vnto sorcerers: But the Lord thy God hath not suffred the so to do.
The Lorde thy God wyll styr vp vnto the a Prophete amonge you: euen of thy brethren, lyke vnto me vnto hym ye shall herken,
accordynge to all that thou desyredest of the Lorde thy God in Horeb, in the daye of the gatherynge together, whan thou saydest: Let me heare the voyce of my Lorde God no moare, nor se thys greate fyre any moare, that I dye not.
And the Lorde sayde vnto me: they haue well spoken:
I will rayse them vp a prophete from amonge their brethren lyke vnto the, and wyll put my wordes in hys mouthe, and he shall speake vnto them all that I shall commaunde hym.
And whosoeuer will not herken vnto the wordes which he shall speake in my name, I wyll requyre it of hym.
But the prophete which shall presume to speake a worde in my name, whych I haue not commaunded hym to speake, or that speaketh in the name of straunge goddes, the same prophete shall dye.
And yf thou saye in thyne hert: howe shall we knowe the worde whych the Lorde hath not spoken?
Euen when a prophete speaketh in the name of the Lord, yf the thynge folowe not nor come to passe, that is the thynge whiche the Lord hath not spoken. But the prophete hath spoken it presumptuously: Thou shalt not therfore be afrayed of him.
When the Lorde thy God hath roted out the nacyons, whose lande the Lorde thy God geueth the, and thou succedest in their enheritaunce, and dwellest in theyr cyties, and in theyr houses:
thou shalt appoynte .iij. cyties for the in the myddes of the lande whych the Lorde thy God geueth the to possesse it:
thou shalt prepare the waye, and deuyde the coastes of thy lande, whych the Lorde thy God geueth the to enherete, into .iij. partes, that whosoeuer commytteth murther, maye flee thyther.
For thys cause must the slayer flye thyther, that he maye lyue.
Who so kylleth hys neyghboure ignorantly, and hated hym not in tyme passed: And when a man goeth vnto the wodd wt his neyghboure to hewe wood, and as his hande fetcheth a stroke wyth the axe do cut downe the tre, the heade slyppeth from the helue, and smyteth hys neyghboure that he dyeth: the same shall flye vnto one of the same cyties Ꟶ lyue.
Lest the executer of bloude folowe after the slayer whyle hys herte is whote, and ouertake hym, because the wayes is longe, and slaye hym, and yet there is no cause worthy of death in hym, in as moche as he hated him not in tyme passed.
Wherfore I commaunde the, sayinge: thou shalt appoynte out .iij. cyties for the.
And yf the Lorde thy God enlarge thy coastes (as he hath sworne vnto thy fathers) and geue the all the lande whych he sayde he wold geue vnto thy fathers,
thou shalt kepe all these commaundmentes to do them, whych I commaunde the thys daye, that thou loue the Lorde thy God, and walke in his wayes euer, and adde .iij. cyties mo for the vnto those .iij.
that innocent bloude be not shed in thy lande, whych the Lorde thy God geueth the to enheret, and so bloude come vpon the.
But and yf any man hate hys neyghboure, and laye awayte for hym, and ryse agaynst hym, and smyte him that he dye, and then flyeth vnto any of these cyties:
the elders of his cytie shall sende, and fetche him thence, and delyuer hym into the handes of the iustyce of bloude, that he maye dye.
Thyne eye shall not spare hym, but thou shalt put a waye innocent bloude, from Israel, that it maye go well wyth the.
Thou shalt not remoue thy neyghbours marke, whych they of olde tyme haue sett in thyne enheritaunce, that thou shalt enheret in the lande, whych the Lorde thy God geueth the to enioye it.
One wytnesse shall not ryse agaynst a man for any maner trespace, or for any maner synne, or for any maner faute, that he offendeth in. But at the mouthe of two wytnesses or of .iij. wytnesses shall the matter be stablyshed.
If an vnryghteous wytnesse ryse vp agaynst a man to accuse him of trespace:
then both the men whych stryue together, shall stande before the Lorde, before the Preastes and the iudges, which shalbe in those dayes,
and the iudges shall make dyligent inquisicyon. And yf the witnesse be founde false, and that he hath geuen false wytnesse agaynst hys brother
then shall ye do vnto hym, as he had thought to do vnto hys brother, and thou shalt put euell awaye from the.
And other shall heare, Ꟶ feare, and shall henceforth commyt nomore any soche wyckednesse amonge you.
And thyne eye shall haue no compassyon, but soale for soule, eye for eye, toth for toth, hande for hande, fote for fote.
When thou goest out to battel agaynst thyne enemyes, and seest horses and charettes, and people mo then thou, be not afrayed of them, for the Lorde thy God is wyth the, whyche broughte the out of the lande of Egypte.
And when ye are come nye vnto battell, the Preaste shall come forth to speake vnto the people,
and shall saye vnto them: Heare O Israel, ye are come vnto battell agaynste youre enemyes let not youre hartes faynte, nether feare, nor be amased nor adread of them.
For the Lord youre God goeth wt you, to fighte for you agaynste youre enemyes, Ꟶ to saue you.
And let the offycers speake vnto the people, sayinge: If any man haue bylt a newe house, and haue not dedicate it, let hym go Ꟶ returne to hys house, lest he dye in the battell, and another man dedicate it.
And yf any man haue planted a vyneyarde, Ꟶ haue not made it comen let him go Ꟶ returne agayne vnto hys house, lest he dye in the batell, and another make it comen.
And yf any man be betrauthed vnto a wyfe, and haue not taken her, let him go and returne agayne vnto hys house, lest he dye in the battell, and another man take her.
And let the offycers speake further vnto the people, and saye: If any man feare and be faynte herted, let hym go and returne vnto hys house, lest he make hys brothers hert faynte as well as hys.
And when the offycers haue made and ende of speakynge vnto the people, they shall make captaynes of warre ouer them:
When thou comest nye vnto a cytie to fyght agaynst it offre them peace.
And yf they answere the agayne peasably, and open vnto the, then let all the people that is founde therin, be tributaryes vnto the, and serue the.
And yf they wyll make no peace wt the, but make warre agaynste the, thou shalt besege it.
And when the Lorde thy God hath delyuered it into thyne handes, thou shalt smyte all the males therof wyth the edge of the swerde:
But the wemen and the chyldren, and the catell, and all that is in the cytie, and all the spoyle therof, shalt thou take vnto thy selfe, and eate the spoyle of thyne enemyes, which the Lorde thy God hath geuen the.
Thus shalt thou do vnto all the cyties whych are a greate waye of from the, and not of the cyties of these nacyons.
But of the cyties of these nacions, which the Lorde thy God shall geue the to enheret, thou shalt saue alyue nothinge that bretheth.
But shalt destroye them without redempcyon, namely the Hethites, the Amorites, the Cananites, the Pherezites, the Heuites, and the Iebusites, as the Lorde thy God hath commaunded the,
that they teache you not to do after all their abhominacyons, whych they haue done vnto their goddes, Ꟶ so ye shulde synne agaynst the Lorde youre God.
When thou hast beseged a cytie longe tyme, and made warre agaynst it to take it, destroye not the trees therof, that thou woldest thrust an axe vnto them: But eate of them, and cut them not downe. For the trees of the feldes are no men, to come agaynst the and so besege the.
Onely those trees whych thou knowest that they are not frutefull. those shalt thou destroye and cutt downe, Ꟶ make bulworkes agaynst the cytie that maketh warre wyth the, vntyll thou subdue it.
If one be founde slayne in the lande, whych the Lorde thy God geueth the to possesse it, and lyeth in the felde: and it is not knowne who hath slayne hym:
Then thyne elders and thy iudges shall come forth, and mete vnto the cyties that are rounde aboute the slayne.
And let the elders of that cytie whych is next vnto the slayne man, take out of the droue, an heyffer that is not laboured wyth, nor hath drawen in the yocke,
and let the elders of that cytie brynge the heyffer vnto a harde valeye, whych is nether eared nor sowen, and strike of the heyffers necke there in the valey.
And the Preastes the sonnes of Leui (whom the Lorde thy God hath chosen to mynistre, and to blesse in the name of the Lorde) shall come furth, and at theyr mouthe shall all stryfe and plage be tryed.
And all the elders of the cytie that come furth to the slayne man, shall washe their handes ouer the heyffer that is beheaded in the valley,
and shall answere and saye: oure handes haue not shede thys bloud, nether haue oure eyes sene it.
Be mercyfull Lorde vnto thy people Israel, whych thou hast delyuered and laye no innocent bloude vnto thy people of Israels charge: Ꟶ the bloude shalbe forgeuen them.
And so shalt thou put innocent bloude from the, when thou shalt haue done that whych is ryght in the syght of the Lorde.
When thou goest to warre agaynst thyne enemyes, and the Lorde thy God hath delyuered them into thyne handes, and thou hast taken them captyue,
and seest amonge the captyues a bewtifull woman, and hast a desyre vnto her, that thou woldest haue her to thy wyfe,
Thou shalt brynge her home to thyne house, and let her shaue her heade Ꟶ let her nayles growe,
and put her rayment that she was taken in from her, and let her remayne in thine house, and be wepe her father and her mother a moneth longe, and after that shalt thou go in vnto her, and marye her, Ꟶ she shall be thy wife.
And yf thou haue no fauoure vnto her, then let her go whether she lusteth: and sell her not for money, nor make cheue saunce of her, because thou hast humbled her.
If a man haue two wyues, one loued and another hated, Ꟶ they haue borne him chyldren, both the loued and also the hated:
If the fyrst borne be the sonne of the hated: then when the tyme commeth that he dealeth hys goodes, amonge hys chyldren, he maye not make the sonne of the beloued fyrstborne, before the sonne of the hated whyche is in deade the fyrstborne:
But he shall knowe the sonne of the hated for the fyrstborne, and geue hym dowble porcyon of all that he hath. For he is the fyrst of his strength, and to hym belongeth the ryght of the fyrst borne.
Yf any man haue a sonne that is stoburne and disobedient, that he wyll not herken vnto the voyce of hys father and voyce of his mother, and they haue chastened him, and he wolde not herken vnto them:
Then shall hys father and hys mother take hym, Ꟶ brynge hym out vnto the elders of that cytie, and vnto the gate of that same place,
Ꟶ saye vnto the elders of the cytie: Thys oure sonne is stoburne and disobedyent, and wyll not herken vnto oure voyce, he is a ryoter, Ꟶ a dronckarde.
And all the men of that cytie shall stone him with stones vnto death. And thou shalt put euell a waye from the, and all Israell shall heare, and feare.
If a man haue committed a trespace worthy of death, Ꟶ is put to death for it, Ꟶ thou hangest hym on tree:
hys body shall not remayne all nyghte vpon the tree, but thou shalt burye hym the same daye. For the curse of God is on him that is hanged. Defyle not thou thy lande, whych the Lorde thy God geueth the to enheret.
Thou shalt not se thy brothers oxe or shepe go astraye, Ꟶ withdrawe thy selfe from them: But shalt brynge them agayne vnto thy brother.
And yf thy brother be not nye vnto the, or yf thou knowe hym not, then brynge it vnto thyne awne house, Ꟶ it shall remayne wyth the, vntyll thy brother aske after them, and then delyuer him them agayne.
In lyke maner shalt thou do with his asse and so shalt thou do with hys rayment: and withall lost thynges of thy brother which he hath lost Ꟶ thou hast founde, shalt thou do lykewise, and thou mayst not withdrawe thy selfe.
Thou shalt not se thy brothers asse or oxe falle doune by the waye, Ꟶ wythdrawe thy selfe from them: but shalt helpe hym to heue them vp agayne.
The woman shall not weare that whiche pertayneth vnto the man, nether shall a man put on womans rayment. For all that do so, are abhominacyon vnto the Lorde thy God.
If thou chaunce vpon a byrdes nest by the waye, in whatsoeuer tree it be or on the grounde, whether they be younge or egges, and the damme syttynge vpon the younge or vpon the egges: Thou shalt not take the damme with the younge.
But shalt in any wyse let the damme go, and take the younge to the, that thou mayst prospere and prolonge thy dayes.
When thou byldest a newe house, thou shalt make a batelment on the rouffe, that thou lade not bloude vpon thyne house, yf any man fall therof.
Thou shalt not sowe thy vyneyarde with dyuerse seedes: lest the frute of the seede which thou hast sowen, and the frute of thy vyneyarde be defyled.
Thou shalt not plowe with an oxe Ꟶ an asse together.
Thou shalt not weare a garment made of woll and flaxe together.
Thou shalt make the gardes vpon the .iiij. quarters of thy vesture, where with thou couerest thy selfe.
If a man take a wyfe, and when he hath lyen wyth her, hate her,
and laye shamefull thynges vnto her charge, and brynge vp an euell name vpon her, and saye: I toke thys wyfe, and when, I came to her, I founde her not a mayde:
Then shall the father of the damsell and the mother brynge forth the tokens of the damsels virginite, vnto the elders of the cytie in the gate.
And the damsels father shall saye vnto the elders: I gaue my daughter vnto this man to wyfe, and he hateth her:
and lo, he layeth shamefull thynges vnto her charge, sayinge: I founde not thy daughter a mayde. And yet these ar the tokens of my daughters virginyte. And they shall sprede the vesture before the elders of the cytie.
And the elders of that cytie shall take that man and chastyce him,
and mearce hym in an hundred sycles of syluer, and geue them vnto the father of the damsell, because he hath brought vp an euell name vpon a mayde of Israel. And she shalbe hys wyfe, Ꟶ he maye not put her a waye all hys dayes.
But and yf the thynge be of a suertye, that the damsell be not founde a virgen,
they shall brynge the damsell to the dore of her fathers house, and the men of that cytie shall stone her wyth stones to death, because she hath wrought folye in Israel, to playe the whore in her fathers house. And so thou shalt put euell a waye from the.
If a man be founde lyenge wyth a woman, that hath a wedded husbande, they shall dye ether other of them: both the man that laye with the wyfe, Ꟶ also the wyfe: and so thou shalt put awaye euell from Israel.
If a mayde be handfasted vnto an husbande, and then a man fynde her in the towne and lye with her,
ye shall brynge them both out vnto the gates of the same cytie, Ꟶ shall stone them with stones to death: The damsell, because she cryed not beynge in the cytie: And the man, because he hath humbled hys neyghbours wife, and thou shalt put a waye euell from the.
But yf a man fynde a betrauthed damsell in the felde, and force her, and lye wyth her. Then the man that laye wyth her shall dye alone,
but vnto the damsell thou shalt do no harme: because there is in the damsell no cause of death. For as when a man ryseth agaynste his neyghboure Ꟶ sleyeth him, euen so is thys matter.
For he founde her in the feldes, and the betrouthed damsell cryed: and there was no man to suckoure her.
If a man fynde a mayde that is not betrauthed, and take her, and lye with her, and they be founde:
Then the man that laye wyth her, shall geue vnto the damsels father .l. sycles of syluer. And she shall be hys wyfe, because he hath humbled her, and he maye not put her a waye all hys dayes.
No man shall take hys fathers wyfe, nor vnhele hys fathers couerynge.
None that is gelded or hath hys preuye membres cutt of, shall come into the congregacyon of the Lorde.
And he that is borne of a comen woman, shall not come into the congregacyon of the Lorde, no not in the tenth generacyon he shall not entre into the congregacyon of the Lorde.
The Ammonites and the Moabites shall not come into the congregacyon of the Lorde, no not in the tenth generacyon, nor they shall neuer come into the congregacyon of the Lorde,
because they met you not wyth bread and water in the waye, when ye came out of Egypt, and because they hyred agaynst the. Balaam the sonne of Beor of Pethor, of Mesopotamia, to curse the.
Neuerthelesse the Lorde thy God wolde not herken vnto Balaam, but the Lorde thy God turned the curse to a blessynge vnto the, because the Lorde thy God loued the.
Thou shalt not seke the prosperyte or welth of them all thy dayes for euer.
Thou shalt not abhorre an Edomite, for he is thy brother: nether shalt thou abhorre an Egipcian, because thou wast a straunger in hys lande.
The chyldren that are begotten of them shall come into the congregacyon of the Lorde in the .iij. generacyon.
When thou goest out wyth the host agaynst thyne enemyes, kepe the from all wickednesse.
If there be amonge you any man that is vncleane, by the reason of vnclennesse that chaunceth hym by nyght, let hym go out of the host,
and not come in agayne, into the hoost, but at euen let hym wasshe hym selfe wyth water, Ꟶ then when the sonne is doune, let him come into the host agayne.
Thou shalt haue a place also without the host, whether thou shalt resorte to,
and thou shalt haue a sharpe poynte vpon thy wepon: and when thou wylt ease thy selfe, dygge therwith, Ꟶ turne and couer that whych is departed from the.
For the Lord thy God walketh in the middes of thyne host, to rydd the, and to set thyne enemies before the. Therfore shall the place of thyne host be pure, that he se no vncleane thynge in the, and so turne him selfe from the.
Thou shalt not delyuer vnto his master the seruaunt whych is escaped from hys master vnto the.
He shall dwell with the, euen amonge you in what place he hym selfe lyketh best, in one of thy cyties where it is good for hym, and thou shalt not vexe hym.
There shalbe no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor whore keper of the sonnes of Israel.
Thou shalt nether brynge the hyer of an whore nor the pryce of a dogge into the house of the Lorde thy God, in any maner of vowe, for euen both of them are abhominacyon vnto the Lorde thy God.
Thou shalt not hurt thy brother by vsury of money, ner by vsury of corne, ner by vsury of any thynge that he maye be hurt withall.
Unto a straunger thou mayst lende vpon vsurye, but not vnto thy brother, that the Lorde thy God may blesse the in all that thou settest thyne hande to, in the lande whether thou goest to conquere it.
When thou hast vowed a vowe vnto the Lorde thy God, thou shalt not slacke to paye it. For the Lorde thy God wyll surely requyre it of the, and it shalbe synne in the.
If thou shalt leue vowynge, it shalbe no synne in the:
but that which is once gone out of thy lyppes, thou must kepe and do, accordynge as thou hast vowed vnto the Lorde thy God of a frewyll, and as thou hast spoken wyth thy mouth.
When thou commest into thy neyghbours vyneyarde, thou mayst eate grapes thy belly full at thine awne pleasure: but thou shalt put none in thy vessell.
Euen so whan thou commest into thy neyghbours corne, thou mayst plucke the eares with thyne hande, but thou shalt not moue a sycle vnto thy neyghbours corne.
When a man hath taken a wyfe and maried her, yf she finde no fauour in his eyes, because he hath spied some vnclennesse in her. Then let him wryte her a bylle of deuorcement, and put it in her hande, and sende her out of hys house.
And when she is departed out of hys house, let hir go, and be another mans wyfe.
And yf the seconde husbande hate her, let him wryte her also a letter of deuorcement, and put it in her hande and sende her out of hys house: or yf the seconde man dye whych toke her to wyfe,
her fyrst man whych sent her a waye, maye not take her agayne to be hys wyfe, after that she is defyled. For that is abhominacyon in the syght of the Lorde. And thou shalt not cause the lande to synne, whych the Lorde thy God shall geue the to enheret.
When a man taketh a newe wyfe, he shall not go a warrefare, nether shalbe charged wyth any busynesse: but shalbe fre at home one yere, Ꟶ reioyse with hys wyfe whych he hath taken.
No man shall take the nether or the vpper mylstone to pledge, for then he shall hurt a mans lyfe.
If any man be founde stealynge any of his brethren the chyldren of Israel, and abuseth him, or selleth him, the thefe shall dye. And thou shalt put euell awaye from the.
Take heade to thy selfe as concernynge the plage of leprosye, that thou obserue diligently. And ye shall do accordynge to all that the Preastes the Leuytes shall teache you: Euen as I commaunded them, so ye shall obserue to do.
Remembre what the Lorde thy God dyd vnto Mir Iam by the waye, after that ye were come out of Egypte:
Whan thou doest lende thy brother any thinge, thou shalt not go into his house to fetche a pledge from thence:
but shalt stande without, and the man that borowed it of the, shall brynge the pledge out vnto the.
Forthermore, yf it be a pore body, thou shalt not slepe with hys pledge,
but delyuer hym the pledge agayne whan the sonne goth doune that he maye slepe in his awne rayment, and blesse the. And it shalbe ryghteousnes vnto the, before the Lord thy God
Thou shalt not defraude an hyred seruaunte that is nedye and poore, whether he be of thy brethen, or of the straungers that are in thy lande with in thy gates.
But shall geue him his hyer the same daye, and lett not the sonne go doune theron. For he is nedye, and therwith susteyneth his lyfe, lest he crye agaynst the vnto the Lorde, and it be synne vnto the.
The fathers shall not dye for the chyldren, nor the chyldren for the fathers: but euery man shall dye for hys awne synne.
Thou shalt not hynder the ryght of the straunger nor of the fatherlesse, nor take a wedowes rayment to pledge.
But remembre that thou wast a seruaunte in Egypte, and howe the Lorde thy God delyuered the thence: And therfore I commaunde the to do thys thynge.
When thou cuttest doune thyne herueste in thy felde, and hast forgotte a shefe in the felde, thou shalt not go agayne to fett it. But it shalbe for the straunger, the fatherlesse Ꟶ the wedowe, that the Lord thy God maye blesse the in all the workes of thyne hande.
When thou beatest doune thyne olyue tree, thou shalt not turne agayne to gather vp that thou leftest behynde the: but it shalbe for the straunger, the fatherlesse and the wedowe.
When thou getherest thy vineyarde, thou shalt not gether the grapes cleane after the: but leaue them for the straunger, the fatherlesse and the wedowe.
And remembre that thou also wast a seruaunte in the lande of Egipte: and therfore I commaunde the to do thys thynge.
If there be stryfe betwene men, they shall come vnto the lawe, and let the iudges geue sentence betwene them, and iustifye the ryghteous, Ꟶ condemne the vngodly.
And yf any man be vngodly, and worthy of strypes, then let the iudge cause to take hym doune, and to beate hym before hys face accordynge to hys trespace vnto a certayne nombr
.xl. strypes he shall geue hym and not passe: lest yf he shulde exceade and beate hym aboue that with many strypes, thy brother shulde appere vngoodly before thyne eyes.
Thou shalt not mosell the oxe that treadeth out the corne.
Yf brethren dwell together, and one of them dye and haue no chylde, the wyfe of the deed shall not mary without vnto a straunger: but hys brother shall go in vnto her, and take her to wyfe, and occupye the rowme of his kynsman.
And the eldest sonne which she beareth, shall succede in the name of hys brother whych is deed, that his name be not put out of Israel.
And yf the man wyll not take hys brothers wyfe, then let her go vp to the gate vnto the elders, and saye: My husbandes brother refuseth to sterre vp vnto hys brother a name in Israel, nether will he marye me.
Then the elders of hys cytie shall call hym, and comen with hym. And yf he stande and saye: I wyll not take her,
then shall hys kynswoman come vnto him in the presence of the elders, Ꟶ loose hys showe of hys fote, Ꟶ spyt in hys face, and answere, Ꟶ saye: So shall it be done vnto that man, that doth noth bylde vp hys brothers house.
And hys name shall be called in Israel, the vnshodhouse.
If when men stryue together, one with another, the wyfe of the one ronne to, for to ryd her husbande out of the handes of hym that smyteth hym, and put forth her hande, Ꟶ take him by the secrettes:
Thou shalt cut of her hande, and lett not thyne eye pytie her.
Thou shalt not haue in thy bagge two maner of weightes, a greate and a small:
nether shalt thou haue in thyne house dyuerse measures, a great Ꟶ a small.
But thou shalt haue a right, and iust weight, and a perfect, and a iust measure shalt thou haue: that thy dayes maye be lengthed in the lande, whych the Lorde thy God geueth the.
For all that do soche thynges and all that do vnryght, are abhominacion vnto the Lorde thy God:
Remembre what Amalech dyd vnto the by the waye, whan ye were come out of Egipte,
how he met the by the waye, Ꟶ smote the hyndmost of you, all that were feble Ꟶ came behynde, when thou wast faynted and werye, and he feared not God.
Therfore when the Lorde thy God hath geuen the reast from all thyne enemyes rounde aboute, in the lande whych the Lorde thy God geueth the to enheret and possesse: se that thou put oute the remembraunce of Amalech from vnder heauen and forget not.
When thou art come into the lande whych the Lorde thy God geueth the to enheret, and hast enioyed it and dwellest therin:
take of the fyrst of all the frute of the erthe, and brynge it out of thy lande that the Lord thy God geueth the, and put it in a maunde, and go vnto the place whych the Lorde thy God shall chose to sett his name in it.
And thou shalt come vnto the Preaste, that shalbe in those dayes, and saye vnto hym: I knowledge thys daye vnto the Lorde thy God, that I am come vnto the contre which the Lorde sware vnto oure fathers for to geue vs.
And the Preaste shall take the maunde out of thyne hande, and set it doune before the aulter of the Lorde thy God.
And thou shalt answere, and saye before the Lord thy God: The Sirians went aboute to destroye my father, and he went doune into Egypte, and so soiourned there wyth a fewe folcke, Ꟶ grewe there vnto a nacion greate, myghtie, and full of people.
And the Egyptyans vexed vs, and troubled vs, and laded vs wyth most cruel bondage.
And whan we cried vnto the Lorde God of oure fathers, the Lord hearde oure voyce, and loked on oure aduersyte, laboure and oppressyon.
And the Lorde brought vs out of Egypt in a myghtye hande, Ꟶ a stretched out arme, and in great terreblenesse, and signes, and wonders.
And he hath brought vs into this place, and hath geuen vs this lande, that floweth with mylke Ꟶ honye.
And nowe loo, I haue brought the fyrst frutes of the lande whych thou (O Lorde) hast geuen me. And thou shalt set it before the Lorde thy God, Ꟶ worshippe before the Lorde thy God,
and reioyse in all the good thynges, which the Lorde thy God hath geuen vnto the and vnto thyne house, thou and the Leuite, and the straunger that is amonge you.
When thou hast made an ende of tythinge all the tythes of thyne encrease the thyrde yere, which is the yere of tythynge: thou shalt geue it vnto the Leuite, the straungers, the fatherlesse and the wedowes, that they maye eate wythin thy gates, and fyll them selues.
And thou shalt saye before the Lorde thy God. I haue brought the halowed thynges out of myne house, and haue geuen them vnto the Leuites, the straungers, the fatherlesse and the wedowes accordynge to all thy commaundmentes which thou hast commaunded me: I haue not ouerskypped thy commaundementes, nor forgotten them.
I haue not eaten therof in my mournynge nor suffred ought to peryshe thorowe vnclennesse, ner geuen ought therof for the deed, but haue herkened vnto the voyce of the Lorde my God, Ꟶ haue done after all that thou hast commaunded me.
Loke doune therfore from thy holy habitacyon euen from heauen, and blesse thy people Israel, and the lande which thou hast geuen vs (as thou swarest vnto oure fathers) a lande that floweth with mylke and honye.
Thys daye the Lorde thy God hath commaunded the to do these ordinaunces and lawes: kepe thou them, and do them wythall thyne herte, and all thy soule.
Thou hast sett vp the Lorde thys daye to be thy God, and to walke in hys wayes, and to kepe hys ordinaunces, hys commaundementes Ꟶ hys lawes, and to herken vnto his voyce.
And the Lorde hath sett the vp thys daye, to be a seuerall people vnto hym (as he hath promysed the) and that thou kepe hys commaundementes,
and to make the hye aboue all nacyons (which he hath made) in prayse in name and honoure: and that thou mayest be an holy people vnto the Lorde thy God, as he hath sayde.
And Moses wyth the elders of Israel commaunded the people, sayinge: kepe all the commaundementes which I commaunde you thys daye.
And when ye be come ouer Iordan vnto the lande whych the Lorde thy God geueth the, thou shalt set the vp greate stones, and plaster them wyth plaster,
and wryte vpon them all the wordes of thys lawe, when thou arte come ouer: because thou art come into the lande whych the Lorde thy God geueth the: a lande that floweth with mylke and honye, as the Lord God of thy fathers had promised the.
Therfore when ye be come ouer Iordan, ye shall set vp these stones, which I commaunde you thys daye in mount Ebal, and thou shalt plaster them wyth plaster.
And there shalt thou bylde vnto the Lord thy God, an altare of stones, Ꟶ lyfte vp no yron vpon them:
Thou shalt make the altare of the Lorde thy God of whole stones, and offer burntofferynges theron vnto the Lorde thy God.
And thou shalt offer peaceofferinges, Ꟶ shall eate there, Ꟶ reioyse before the Lorde thy God.
And thou shalt wryte vpon the stones all the wordes ofthys lawe, manifestly and well.
And Moses and the Preastes the Leuites spake vnto all Israel sayinge: take hede Ꟶ heare (O Israel) thys daye thou art be come the people of the Lorde thy God.
Thou shalt herken therfore vnto the voyce of the Lorde thy God, and do hys commaundementes, and his ordinaunces which I commaunde the thys daye.
And Moses charged the people the same daye, sayinge:
These shall stande vpon mount Garizim to blesse the people, when ye are come ouer Iordan: Symeon, Leui, Iuda, Isachar, Ioseph, and Ben Iamin.
And these shall stande vpon mount Eball to curse: Ruben, Gad, Aser, zabulon, Dan Nephthali.
And the Leuites shall answere and saye vnto all the men of Israel wyth a loude voyce.
Cursed be the man that maketh any carued or molten ymage (an abhominacyon vnto the Lorde, the worke of the handes of the craftesman) and putteth it in a secret place: and all the people shall answere and saye Amen.
Cursed be he that curseth hys father, Ꟶ hys mother, and all the people shall saye Amen.
Cursed be he that remoueth his neyghbours marke, Ꟶ all the people shall saye Amen.
Cursed he be that maketh the blynde go out of his waye, Ꟶ all the people shall saye Amen.
Cursed be he that hyndreth the ryght of the straunger, fatherlesse and wedowe, and all the people shall saye Amen.
Cursed be he that lyeth wyth hys fathers wyfe and vnhealeth his fathers couerynge, and all the people shall saye, Amen.
Cursed be he that lyeth with any maner of beast, Ꟶ all the people shall saye, Amen.
Cursed be he that lyeth with hys syster the daughter of hys father, or the daughter of his mother, Ꟶ all the people shall saye, Amen.
Cursed be he, that lyeth with hys mother in lawe, and all the people shall saye, Amen.
Cursed be he that smyteth his neyghboure secretly, and all the people shall saye, Amen.
Cursed be he that taketh a rewarde to slaye the soule of innocent bloude, and all the people shall saye, Amen.
Cursed be he that contynueth not in all the wordes of thys lawe to do them, and all the people shall saye, Amen.
If thou shalt herken diligently vnto the voyce of the Lorde thy God, and obserue and do all hys commaundementes, whych I commaunde the thys daye, The Lorde wyll set the on hye aboue all nacyons of the erth.
And all these blessinges shall come on the, and ouertake the, yf thou shalt herken vnto the voyce of the Lord thy God.
Blessed shalt then be in the towne, and blessed in the feldes:
blessed shalbe the frute of thy body, and the frute of thy grounde, and the frute of thy cattell, the frute of thyne oxen, Ꟶ the flockes of thy shepe:
blessed shall be thy basket and thy store.
Blessed shalt thou be, when thou goest out, and blessed when thou comest in.
The Lorde shall geue ouer thyne enemyes that ryse agaynst the, that they maye fall before thy face. They shall come out agaynst the one waye, and flee before the seuen wayes.
The Lorde shall put the blessynge vpon the in thy store houses, Ꟶ in all that thou settest thyne hande to, Ꟶ will blesse the in the lande which the Lorde thy God geueth the.
The Lorde shall make the an holye people vnto hym selfe, as he hath sworen vnto the: yf thou shalt kepe the commaundementes of the Lorde thy God, and walke in hys wayes.
And all nacyons of the erth shall se, that the name of the Lorde, is called vpon ouer the, and they shalbe aferde of the.
And the Lorde shall make the plenteous in goodes, in the frute of thy body, in the frute of thy catell, and in the frute of thy grounde, in the lande whych the Lorde sware vnto thy fathers, to geue the.
The Lorde shall open vnto the his good treasure, euen the heauen to geue rayne vnto thy lande in due ceason, and to blesse all the laboures of thyne hande. And thou shalt lende vnto many nacyons, but shalt not borowe thy selfe.
And the Lord shall set the before and not behynde, Ꟶ thou shalt be aboue only, and not beneth: yf that thou herken vnto the commaundementes of the Lorde thy God, which I commaunde the thys daye, to kepe and to do them.
And se that thou bowe not asyde from any of these wordes, which I commaunde the thys daye, ether to the ryght hande or to the lefte, that thou woldest goo after straunge goddes to serue them.
But and yf thou wylt not herken vnto the voyce of the Lorde thy God, to kepe Ꟶ to do all hys commaundementes and his ordinaunces, which I commaunde the this daye: all these curses shall come vpon the, and ouertake the:
Cursed shalt thou be in the towne, and cursed in the felde:
cursed shall thy baskett be, Ꟶ thy store.
Cursed shall be the frute of thy body, and the frute of thy lande, and the frute of thyne oxen, and the flockes of thy shepe.
Cursed shalt thou be when thou goest in, and cursed when thou goest out.
The Lorde shall sende vpon the, cursynge, destruccyon, and rebuke in all that thou settest thyne hande to, and that thou doest: vntyll he destroye the, and brynge the to nought quyckely, because of the wyckednesse of thyne inuencyons, and because thou hast forsaken me.
The Lorde shall make the pestilence cleaue vnto the, vntyll he haue consumed the from of the lande, whether thou goest to enioye it.
The Lorde shall smyte the with swellynge, wyth feuers, heet, burnynge, and wyth the swerde, with wetherynge, and with blastynge. And they shall folowe the vntyll thou peryshe.
And the heauen that is ouer thy head shalbe brasse, and the erthe that is vnder the, yron.
The Lorde shall turne the rayne of the lande vnto powder and dust: euen from heauen shall they come doune vpon the, vntyll thou be brought to nought.
And the Lorde shall plage the before thyne enemyes: Thou shalt come out one waye agaynst them, and flee seuen wayes before them, and shall be scatered amonge all the kyngdomes of the erthe.
And thy carkesse shalbe meate vnto all maner foules of the ayre, and vnto the beastes of the erthe, and no man shall fraye them awaye.
The Lord wyll smyte the wt the botche of Egypte, and the emarodes, scalle, Ꟶ mangenesse, that thou mayest not be healed therof.
And the Lord shall smyte the with madnesse, and blyndnesse and dasynge of herte.
Thou shalt grope at noone dayes, as the blinde gropeth in darkenesse, and shalt not prosper in thy wayes. Thou shalt be oppressed wyth wronge, and be polled euermore, Ꟶ no man shall sucker the.
Thou shalt be betrowthed vnto a wyfe, and another man shall lye wyth her. Thou shalt buylde an house, and not dwell therin. Thou shalt also plante a vyneyarde, and shalt not gather the grapes.
Thyne oxe shalbe slayne before thyne eyes, and thou shalt not eate therof. Thyne asse shalbe violently taken a waye euen before thy face, and shall not be restored to the agayne. Thy shepe shalbe geuen vnto thine enemyes, and no man shall rescue them.
Thy sonnes and thy daughters shall be geuen vnto another nacyon, and thyne eyes shall se it, Ꟶ dase vpon them all the daye longe, and there shalbe no myghte in thyne hande.
The frute of thy lande and all thy laboures shall a nacion whych thou knowest not, eate, Ꟶ thou shalt continually suffre violence onely, and be oppressed alwaye:
so that thou shalt be cleane besyde thy selfe, for the syghte of thyne eyes whych thou shalt se:
The Lorde shall smyte the in the knees and legges, wyth a myscheuous botche that can not be healed: euen from the sole of thy fote vnto the toppe of thy head.
The Lorde shall brynge the and thy kynge (which thou shalt set ouer the) vnto a nacyon, which nether thou nor thy fathers haue knowne, that there thou mayest serue straunge Goddes: euen wodd and stone.
And thou shalt be wondred at, spoken of, Ꟶ iested at amonge all nacyons, whether the Lorde shall carye the.
Thou shalt carye moche seed out in to the felde, and shalt gether but lytle in: for the greshoppers shall destroye it.
Thou shalt plante a vyneyarde and dresse it, but shalt nether dryncke of the wyne, nether gether the grapes, for the wormes shall eate it.
Thou shalt haue oliue trees thorowe out all thy coastes, but shalt not anoynte thy selfe wyth the oyle, for thyne olyue trees shalbe roted out.
Thou shalt beget sonnes, and daughters, but shalt not haue them: for they shalbe caryed a waye captyue.
All thy trees and frute of thy lande shalbe marred wyth blastynge.
The straunger that is amonge you, shall clyme aboue the vp on hye, and thou shalt come doune beneth alowe.
He shall lende the, Ꟶ thou shalt not lende hym: he shalbe before, Ꟶ thou behynde.
Moreouer, all these curses shall come vpon the, and shall folowe the and ouertake the, tyll thou be destroyed: because thou herkenedst not vnto the voyce of the Lorde thy God, to kepe hys commaundementes, and hys ordinaunces, whych he commaunded the,
and they shalbe vpon the as myracles and wonders, and vpon thy seed for euer,
because thou seruedst not the Lorde thy God wyth ioyfulnesse and wyth a good herte, whan thou haddest aboundaunce of all thynges,
therfore thou shalt serue thyne enemye, whych the Lorde shall sende vpon the in hunger and thyrst, in nakednesse, and in nede of all thynge: and he shall put a yocke of yron vpon thy necke, vntyll he haue broughte the to nought.
And the Lord shall brynge a nacyon vpon the from a farre, and from the ende of the worlde, as swifte as an egle flyeth: a nacyon whose tonge thou shalt not vnderstande:
a harde fauoured nacyon, whych shall not regarde the person of the olde, nor haue compassyon on the younge.
The same shall eate the frute of thy catell, and the frute of thy londe, vntyll he haue destroyed the: and shall leaue the nether corne, wyne, nor oyle, nether the encrease of thyne oxen, nor the flockes of thy shepe: vntyll he haue brought the to nought.
And he shall kepe the in, in all thy cyties, vntyll he haue cast downe thy hye walles and stronge holdes, wherin thou trustedst, thorowe out all the lande. And he shall besege the in all thy cyties thorowe out all thy lande, whych the Lorde thy God hath geuen the.
And thou shalt eate the frute of thyne awne bodye: the fleshe of thy sonnes, and of thy daughters, whych the Lorde thy God hath geuen the, in that straytenesse and sege, wherwith thyne enemye shall besege the:
so that it shall greue the man (that is tender Ꟶ exceadynge delycate amonge you,) to loke on hys brother and vpon hys wyfe that lyeth in hys bosome, and on the remnaunte of hys chyldren, whych he hath yet lefte:
for feare of geuynge (vnto anye of them) of the fleshe of hys chyldren, whom he shall eate, because he hath nothynge left hym in that straytenesse Ꟶ sege, wherwith thyne enemye shall besege the in all thy cyties.
Yee and the woman that is so tender and delycate, that she dare not aduenture to set the sole of her foote vpon the grounde, (for softnesse and tendernesse) shalbe greued to loke on her husbande that lyeth in her bosome, Ꟶ on her sonne and on her daughter:
and on hyr after byrthe (that is come out from betwene her legges,) and her chyldren whych she shall beare: For whan all thynges lack, she shall eat them secretly, in the sege Ꟶ straytenesse, wherwith thyne enemye shall besege the in thy cyties.
If thou wylt not kepe and do all the wordes of thys lawe (that are wrytten in thys boke,) and feare thys gloryous and fearfull name of the Lorde thy God:
the Lorde will sende vnto the and thy seed, greate plages and of longe continuaunce,
euell sycknesses and of longe duraunce. Moreouer he will bringe vpon the all the diseases of Egypte, and those whych thou wast afrayed of shall cleaue vnto the.
And all maner syckenesses, and all maner plages whych are not wrytten in the boke of thys lawe, wyll the Lorde brynge vpon the, vntyll he bringe the to noughte.
And ye shalbe lefte fewe in nombre, where before ye were as the starres of heauen in multytude: because thou woldest not herken vnto the voyce of the Lorde thy God.
And it shall come to passe, that as the Lord reioysed ouer you, to do you good, Ꟶ to multiplye you: euen so he wyll reioyse ouer you, to destroye you, Ꟶ to brynge you to nought. And ye shalbe wasted from of the land, whether thou goest to enioye it.
And the Lorde shall scater the amonge all nacions, from the one ende of the worlde vnto the other, and there thou shalt serue straunge goddes, whych thou nor thy fathers haue knowne: euen wodd and stone.
And amonge these nacyons thou shalt fynde no ease, neyther shall the sole of thy foote haue rest. But the Lorde shall geue the there an vnquyet herte, and dasyng eyes, and sorowe of mynde.
And thy lyfe shall hange before the and thou shalt feare both daye, and nyghte, Ꟶ shalt haue no trust in thy lyfe.
In the mornynge thou shalt saye, wolde God it were nyght. And at nyght thou shalt saye: wolde God it were mornynge: for feare, of thyne harte whych thou shall feare Ꟶ for the syghte of thyne eyes, whych thou shalt se.
And the Lorde shall brynge the into Egipt agayne wyth shyppes, by the waye which I bad the, that thou shuldest se it no moare. And there ye shalbe solde vnto youre enemies, for bondmen and bondwemen: Ꟶ no man shall bye you.
These are the wordes of the appoyntment, which the Lorde commaunded Moses, to make wyth the chyldren of Israel in the lande of Moab, besyde the appoyntment which he made wyth them in Horeb,
and Moses called all Israel, and sayde vnto them: Ye haue sene all that the Lorde dyd before youre eyes in the lande of Egipt, vnto Pharao and vnto all hys seruauntes, and vnto all hys lande,
the greate temptacions which thyne eyes haue sene, those greate myracles and wonders:
and yet the Lorde hath not geuen you an herte to perceaue, and eyes to se, and eares to heare vnto thys daye.
And I haue led you .xl. yeare in the wyldernesse: and youre clothes are not waxed olde vpon you, and thy showe is not waxed olde vpon thy fote.
Ye haue eaten no bread, nor droncke wyne or stronge dryncke, that ye myghte knowe, howe that I am the Lord youre God.
And ye came vnto this place, Ꟶ Sehon the kynge of Hesbon, and Og kynge of Basan came out agaynst vs vnto battell, and we smote them,
and toke theyr lande, Ꟶ gaue it for an inheritaunce vnto the Rubenites Ꟶ Gadites, and to the halfe trybe of Manasse.
kepe therfore the wordes of this appoyntment and do them, that ye maye vnderstande all that ye ought to do.
Ye stande thys daye euery one of you before the Lorde your God: youre captaynes, youre trybes, your elders, youre offycers, and all the men of Israel:
youre chyldren also, youre wyues Ꟶ the straunger that is in thyne hoste from the hewer of thy wodd, vnto the drawer of thy water:
that thou shuldest go into the appoyntment of the Lord thy God, Ꟶ into his othe which the Lord thy God maketh wyth the this daye.
For to make the a people vnto him selfe, and that he maye be vnto the a God, as he hath sayde vnto the, and as he hath sworne vnto thy fathers Abraham, Isahac and Iacob.
I make not thys bonde Ꟶ this othe wyth you only:
but both wyth hym that standeth here wyth vs this daye before the Lord oure God, and also wyth hym that is not here with vs this daye.
For ye knowe, howe we haue dwelt in the lande of Egypte, and how we came thorowe the myddes of the nacions whych ye passed by.
And ye haue sene theyr abhominacyons and theyr ydolles: (wod Ꟶ stone, syluer and golde) whych were amonge them.
Lest there be amonge you man or woman, kynred or trybe, whose hert turneth awaye this daye from the Lorde oure God, to go and serue the goddes of these nacyons: Ꟶ lest there be amonge you some roote that beareth gall Ꟶ worm wod,
so that when he heareth the wordes of thys ooth, he blesse hym selfe in hys hert, sayinge. I shall haue peace. I wyll walke in the meanynge of myne owne hert, (Thou put the dronken to the thyrstye.)
And so the Lorde wyll not consent to be mercyfull vnto hym, but then the wrath of the Lorde and hys gelousye shall smoke agaynst that man, Ꟶ all the curses that are wryten in this boke shall lyght vpon hym, and the Lorde shall do out hys name from vnder heauen,
and the Lorde shall separate him vnto euell out of all the tribes of Israel, accordyng vnto all the curses of the appoyntment, that are wrytten in the boke of thys lawe.
So that the generacyon to come of youre chyldren, that shall ryse vp after you, and the straunger that shall come from a farre lande shall saye, when they se the plages of that lande, and the diseases wherwith the Lorde hath smytten it,
howe all the lande is burnt vp with brymstone Ꟶ salt, Ꟶ that it is nether sowen nor beareth, nor any grasse groweth therin, lyke as in the place of the ouerthrowynge of Sodome, Gomor, Adama, Ꟶ zeboim: whych the Lorde ouerthrewe in hys wrath and angre:
Euen then shall all nacions saye: wherfore hath the Lorde done of this facyon vnto thys lande? O howe fearse is thys great wrath?
And men shalt saye: because they lefte the testament of the Lorde God of theyr fathers whych he made with them, when he brought them out of the lande of Egypt.
For they went, and serued straunge goddes, Ꟶ worshipped them: Goddes whych they knewe not, and whych had geuen them nought.
And the wrath of the Lorde waxed whote agaynst thys lande, to brynge vpon it all the curses that are written in this boke.
And the Lorde cast them out of theyr lande in angre, wrath, and greate indignacyon, and cast them into a straunge lande, as this daye beareth wytnesse.
The secrettes of the Lorde oure God are opened vnto vs, and to oure chyldren for euer, that we maye do all the wordes of thys lawe.
When all these wordes are come vpon the, the blessynge and the curse which I haue set before the, thou shalt turne vnto thine hert, amonge all the nacyons whether the Lorde thy God hath thruste the,
and come agayne vnto the Lorde thy God, and herken vnto his voyce in all these thynges that I commaunde the thys daye: thou Ꟶ thy chyldren wythall thyne herte and all thy soule:
And the Lord thy God wyll turne thy captiuite, and haue compassyon vpon the, Ꟶ wyll turne, and fet the agayne from all the nacions, amonge whych the Lorde thy God shall haue scatered the.
Though thou wast cast vnto the extreme partes of heauen: euen from thence wyll the Lorde thy God gether the, Ꟶ from thence wyll he fett the,
Ꟶ the Lorde thy God wyll brynge the into the lande whych thy fathers possessed, Ꟶ thou shalt enioye it. And he wyll shewe the kyndnesse, and multiplie the aboue thy fathers.
And the Lorde thy God wyll circumcyse thyne hert, and the hert of thy seed, that thou mayest loue the Lord thy God wythall thyne hert, and all thy soule, that thou mayst lyue.
And the Lord thy God wyll put all these curses vpon thyne enemyes, and on them that hate the, Ꟶ that persecute the.
But thou shalt turne, and herken vnto the voyce of the Lorde, and do all hys commaundementes, which I commaunde the thys daye.
And the Lord thy God wyll make the plenteous in all the workes of thyne hande, in the frute of thy bodye, and in the frute of thy catell, and in the frute of thy lande for thy welth. For the Lorde wyll turne agayne and reioyse ouer the to do the good, as he reioysed ouer thy fathers:
If thou herken onely vnto the voyce of the Lord thy God, to kepe his commaundementes and his ordinaunces whych are wrytten in the boke of this lawe, and yf thou turne vnto the Lorde thy God wythall thyne hert and all thy soule.
For the commaundement which I commaunde the this daye, is not separated from the, nether farre of.
It is not in heauen, that thou neadest to saye: who shall go vp for vs to heauen, and fet it vs, that we maye heare it, and do it?
Nether is it beyonde the see: that thou shuldest saye: who shall go ouer the see for vs, and fet it vs, that we maye heare it, and do it?
But the worde is very nye vnto the: euen in thy mouth and in thyne hert, that thou do it.
Beholde I haue set before the this daye lyfe and good, death and euell:
For where as I commaunde the thys daye, to loue the Lorde thy God, to walke in hys wayes, and to kepe hys commaundementes, his ordinaunces, and hys lawes (yf thou so do) thou shalt lyue and multiplye, and the Lorde thy God shall blesse the in that lande, whether thou goest to possesse it.
But and yf thyne herte turne awaye, so that thou wylt not heare: but shalt goo astraye, and worshyppe straunge goddes, and serue them,
I pronounce vnto you also this daye, that ye shall surely perysh, and that ye shall not prolonge youre dayes vpon the lande whether thou passest ouer Iordan, to go and possesse it.
I call heauen Ꟶ erth to recorde this daye agaynst you, that I haue set before you lyfe and death, blessynge Ꟶ cursynge: Therfore chose lyfe, that both thou and thy seed maye lyue,
that thou mayest loue the Lorde thy God, and be obedient to hys voyce, Ꟶ cleaue vnto him. For he is thy lyfe, and the length of thy dayes, that thou mayst dwell vpon the erth whych the Lorde sware vnto thy fathers: Abraham, Isahac and Iacob, to geue them.
And Moses went and spake these wordes vnto all Israel,
and sayd vnto them: I am an hundred and .xx. yeare olde thys daye, and can nomore go out and in. Also the Lorde hath sayde vnto me thou shalt not goo ouer thys Iordan.
The Lorde your God he wyll go ouer before the, and he wyll destroye these nacyons before the, Ꟶ thou shalt conquere them. And Iosua he shall go before the, as the Lorde hath sayde.
And the Lorde shall do vnto them, as he dyd to Seon and Og kynges of the Amorites, and vnto the lande of them, whom he destroyed.
And the Lorde shall geue them ouer before youre face, that ye maye do vnto them, accordinge vnto all the commaundementes which I haue commaunded you.
Plucke vp youre hartes therfore, and be stronge, dreade not, nor be aferde of them: for the Lord thy God him selfe doth go wyth the. He shall not fayle the, nor forsake the.
And Moses called vnto Iosua, and sayde vnto hym in the syghte of all Israel: Be stronge Ꟶ bolde, for thou must go with thys people vnto the lande, which the Lorde hath sworne vnto their fathers, to geue them, Ꟶ thou shalt geue it them to enheret.
And the Lorde he doth go before the: He shall not fayle the, neyther forsake the: feare not therfore, nor be discomforted.
And Moses wrote this lawe, and delyuered it vnto the preastes the sonnes of Leui (whych bare the arcke of the testament of the Lorde) and vnto all the elders of Israel,
Ꟶ Moses commaunded them, sayinge: At the poynt of .vij. yeares in the solempnyte of the fre yeare, euen in the feast of Tabernacles,
when all Israel is come to apeare before the Lord thy God, in the place whych he hath chosen: thou shalt reade thys lawe before all Israel in theyr eares.
Gether the people together: men, wemen and chyldren, and the straunger that is wythin thy gates, that they maye heare, and lerne and feare the Lorde your God, and kepe, and obserue all the wordes of thys lawe,
and that their chyldren whych knowe nothynge, maye heare, and lerne to feare the Lord your God, as longe as ye lyue in the lande, whether ye go ouer Iordan to possesse it.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: Beholde thy dayes are come, that thou must dye. Call Iosua therfore, and stande ye in the tabernacle of wytnesse, that I maye geue hym a charge. And Moses and Iosua went, and stode in the tabernacle of wytnesse:
And the Lorde apeared in the tabernacle: euen in the pyller of the cloude. And the pyller of the cloude stode ouer the dore of the tabernacle.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: beholde, thou shalt slepe wyth thy fathers, and thys people wyll ryse vp, and go a whorynge after straunge goddes of the lande (whether they go) and will forsake me, and breake the appoyntment, whych I haue made wyth them.
And then my wrath wyll waxe whote agaynst them, and I wyll forsake them, and wyll hyde my face from them, Ꟶ they shalbe consumed. And moch aduersyte and tribulacyons shall come vpon them, so that then they wyll saye: Are not these troubles come vpon me, because God is not wyth me?
And I also wyll surely hyde awaye my face in that daye, for all the euels sake whych they shall haue wrought in that they are turned vnto straunge Goddes.
Now therfore write ye thys songe for you, and teache it the chyldren of Israel, and put it in theyr mouthes, that thys songe maye be my wytnesse agaynst the chyldren of Israel.
For I wyll bryng them into the lande, (which I sware vnto theyr fathers) that floweth wt mylke and honye, Ꟶ they shall eate, and fyll them selues, and waxe fatt, and turne vnto straunge goddes, and serue them, and blaspheme me, and breake my couenaunt.
And then when moch myschefe and tribulacyon is come vpon them, thys songe shall answere them, as a wytnesse. For it shall not be forgotten out of the mouthes of theyr seed: for I knowe theyr imaginacyon, whych they goo about euen nowe, before I haue broughte them into the lande which I sware.
Moses therfore wrote thys songe the same ceason, and taught it the children of Israel.
And he gaue Iosua the sonne of Nun a charge, and sayd: be bolde, Ꟶ stronge, for thou shalt bryng the chyldren of Israel into the lande, whych I sware vnto them, and I wyll be with the.
And when Moses had made an ende of wrytynge out of the wordes of this lawe in a boke vnto the ende of them,
Moses commaunded the Leuites, whych bare the arke of the testament of the Lorde, sayinge:
take ye the boke of thys lawe, and put it in the syde of the arcke of the testament of the Lorde your God, that it maye be there for a witnesse against the:
For I knowe thy stuburnesse and thy styffe necke: whyle I am yet a lyue with you this daye, ye haue bene disobedient vnto the Lord: and howe moch more after my death?
Gather vnto me all the elders of youre trybes, Ꟶ youre offycers, that I maye speake these wordes in theyr eares, and call heauen, and erth to recorde agaynst them.
For I am sure that after my death, ye wyll vtterly be corrupte, and turne from the waye whych I haue commaunded you, and tribulacyon wyll come vpon you in the later dayes, because ye shall haue wrought wyckednesse in the syght of the Lorde, to prouoke hym thorow the workes of your handes.
And Moses spake in the eares of all the congregacion of Israel the wordes of thys songe, vntyll he had ended them.
Heare O ye heauens, Ꟶ I shall speake, and let the erth heare the wordes of my mouth,
My doctrine shall droppe as doeth the rayne, Ꟶ my speach shall flowe as dothe the dewe, as the shower vpon the herbes, Ꟶ as the droppes vpon the grasse.
For I wyll call on the name of the Lorde: Ascrybe ye honoure vnto oure God.
Perfecte is the worke of the most myghtye God: for all hys wayes are iudgement. He is a God of trueth, without wickednesse: ryghteous, and iust is he.
Frowardly haue they done against him thorowe their deformities: not his owne children, but a wycked Ꟶ frowarde generacyon.
Do ye so rewarde the Lorde, O foolyshe nacyon Ꟶ vnwyse? Is not he thy father Ꟶ thyne owner? hath he not made the, and ordeyned the?
Remembre the dayes of the worlde that is past: consydre the yeres from tyme to tyme. Aske thy father, and he wyll shewe the: thy elders, Ꟶ they wyll tell the.
When the most highest, deuyded the nacyons, and whan he separated the sonnes of Adam, he put the borders of the nacyons, fast by the multitude of the chyldren of Israel.
For the Lordes parte is hys folke, and Iacob is the porcyon of hys enheritaunce.
He founde him in a deserte lande, in a voyde grounde, Ꟶ in a rorynge wyldernesse. He led hym aboute, he gaue hym vnderstandynge, and kepte him as the apple of his eye.
As an egle that stereth vp her nest and flotereth ouer her younge, Ꟶ stretcheth out hir winges, so doth he take them vp, Ꟶ beareth them on his shoulders.
The Lorde alone was hys guyde, Ꟶ there was no straunge God wt him.
He caried him vp to an hye lande, that he myght eate the encrease of the feldes, And he fedd him wyth honye out of the rocke, and with oyle out of the most harde stone.
Wyth butter of kyne, Ꟶ mylcke of the shepe, wyth fat of the lambes and of fat rammes and he goates, with the fat of most plenteous wheate: and that thou myghtest drynke the most pure bloude of the grape.
But he that shulde haue bene vpryght, whan he waxed fatt, spurned with his hele. Thou art well fedd, thou art growen thick: thou art euen laden with fatnesse. And he forsoke God his maker, Ꟶ regarded not the God of his saluacyon.
They prouoked hym to angre with straunge goddes: euen wt abhominacyons prouoked they him
They offered vnto deuels, and not to God, euen to goddes whom they knewe not: to newe goddes that came newly vp, whom their fathers feared not.
Of the rocke that begat the, thou arte vnmyndefull, and hast forgotten God that made the.
The Lorde therfore sawe it, and was angrye, because of the prouokynge of hys sonnes and of hys daughters.
And he sayde: I wyll hyde my face from them, Ꟶ will se what their ende shall be. For they are a very fro warde generacion, chyldren in whom is no fayth.
They haue angred me wyth that whych is no God, and prouoked me wyth their vanyties. And I also wyll prouoke them with those whych are no people, I wyll anger them wyth a folyshe nacion.
For fyre is kyndled in my wrath, Ꟶ burneth vnto the botome of hell. And hath consumed the earth with her encrease, and sett a fyre the botoms of the mountaynes.
I will heape mischeues vpon them, Ꟶ wyll destroye them wyth myne arowes.
They shalbe burnt with hunger, and consumed wt heate, and with bytter destruccion: I wyll also sende the teeth of beastes vpon them, with the furiousnes of serpentes in the dust.
Without forth, shall the swerde robbe them of their chyldren: and within in the chamber, feare: both younge men and younge wemen and the suckelynges wyth the men of gray heades.
I haue sayde: I will skater them abrode, and make the remembraunce of them to ceasse from amonge men.
Were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemye, lest their aduersaries shulde vtterly wythdrawe them selues, and lest they shulde saye: oure hye hande hath done all thys, and not the Lorde.
For it is a nacyon without forecast, nether is there any vnderstandynge in them:
O that they were wyse, and vnderstode thys, that they wolde consyder their later ende.
Howe shulde one chace a thousande, and two put ten thousande to flyghte: excepte their maker had solde them, and excepte the Lorde had shutt them vp?
For their God is not as oure God oure enemyes also themselues are iudges.
For their vyne is of the vinyarde of Sodome, and of the feldes of Gomorra: Theyr grapes are grapes of gall, and their clusters be bytter.
Their wyne is the poyson of draggons Ꟶ the cruell gall of aspes.
Is not thys layde in store with me, Ꟶ sealed vp amonge my treasures?
Uengeaunce is myne, and I wyll rewarde: their fete shall slyde in due tyme. For the daye of their destruccyon is at hande, and the thynges that shall come vpon them make haste.
For the Lorde shall iudge hys people, and haue compassyon on hys seruauntes: whan he seyth that their power is gone, and that they be in a maner shut vp, or brought to naught and forsaken.
And he shall saye wher are their goddes? their God, in whom they trusted?
The fat of whose sacrifyces they dyd eate and drancke the wyne of their dryncke offringes? let them ryse vp and helpe you, and be youre proteccyon.
Se nowe, howe that I I alone am God, Ꟶ there is none but I: I kyll, and wyll make alyue: I wounde, and I wyll heale: nether is there any that can delyuer out of my hande.
For I wyll lyfte vp myne hande to heauen, and wyll saye: I lyue euer.
If I whett the edge of my swerde, Ꟶ myne hande take holde to do iustice, I wyll recompence vengeaunce on myne enemyes, Ꟶ wyll rewarde them that hate me.
I will make myne arowes droncke with bloude, and my swerde shall eate fleshe, Ꟶ that for the bloude of the slayne, Ꟶ for their captiuite, sens the begynnynge of the wrath of the enemye.
Prayse ye hethen his people, for he will auenge the bloude of hys seruauntes, Ꟶ wyll auenge hym of his aduersaries, and wylbe mercyfull vnto his lande, and to hys people.
And Moses came and spake all the wordes of thys songe in the eares of the people, he and Iosua the sonne of Nun.
And Moses: spake all these wordes vnto the ende to all the people of Israel,
and sayde vnto them: Sett youre herte vnto all the wordes which I testyfye vnto you thys daye: and ye shall commaunde them vnto youre chyldren, that they maye obserue and do all the wordes of thys lawe.
And let it not be a vayne worde vnto you: for it is youre lyfe, and thorowe thys worde ye shall prolonge youre dayes in the lande whether ye go ouer Iordan, to conquere it.
And the Lorde spake vnto Moses the selfe same daye, sayinge:
get the vp in to this mountayne Abarim. vnto mount Nebo, whych is in the lande of Moab ouer agaynst Iericho. And beholde the lande of Canaan, which I geue vnto the chyldren of Israel to possesse:
And dye in the mount whych thou goest vp vnto, and thou shalt be gathered vnto thy people. As Aaron thy brother dyed in mounte Hor, and was gethered vnto hys people:
because ye trespased agaynst me amonge the chyldren of Israel at the waters of stryffe, at Cades in the wyldernesse of zin: for ye sanctifyed me not amonge the chyldren of Israel.
Thou shalt therfore se the lande before the, and shall not goo thyther vnto the lande whych I geue the chyldren of Israel.
Thys is the blessynge wherwyth Moses the man of God blessed the chyldren of Israell before hys death,
and sayde: The Lorde came from Sinai and shewed hys beames from Seir vnto them, and apeared from mount Pharan, and he came wyth thousandes of sayntes, and in his ryghte hande a lawe of fyre for them.
And he loued the people. All hys sayntes also are in thy handes. They were smytten to go after thy fete, and to receaue of thy wordes.
Moses gaue vs a lawe to be an enheritaunce of the congregacyon of Iacob.
And he was in Israel kynge when the heades of the people, and the trybes of Israel were gathered together.
Let Ruben lyue, and not dye: and be fewe in nombre.
Thys same also happen to Iuda. And he sayde: heare Lorde the voyce of Iuda, and brynge hym vnto hys people: hys handes shalbe good ynough for him, yf thou helpe hym agaynst hys enemyes.
And vnto Leui he sayde: Thumim Ꟶ vrim shalbe with the, Ꟶ wyth euery one that is godly in the. Thou dyddest proue him also in the tentacyon Ꟶ striuedst wyth hym at the waters of stryfe.
He that hath sayde vnto his father and to his mother: I haue not sene him, And he that knewe not his brethren, ner knewe his awne chyldren, those are they that haue obserued thy worde, and shall kepe thy couenaunt.
They shall teache Iacob thy iudgementes, and Israel thy lawe. They shall put cens before thy nose, and the burnt sacrifyce vpon thyne altare.
Blesse Lord his fyrst frutes and accept the worke of his handes: smyte the loynes of them that ryse agaynst him, and of them that hate him, that they ryse not agayne.
And of Ben Iamin he sayde. The Lordes derlynge shall dwell in saffetye vpon hym Ꟶ the Lorde shall couer him all the daye longe, and he shall dwell betwene his shoulders.
And of Ioseph he sayde: blessed of the Lord is his lande for the frutes of heauen, thorowe the dewe and sprynges that lye beneth,
and for the swete frutes of the encrease of the sonne, and rype frutes of the mone:
for the fyrst frutes of the principall mountaynes, and for the frutes that the hylles brynge furth for euer,
and for the frutes of the erth, and fulnesse therof: and for the good wyll of hym that dwelt in the bushe, shall the blessynge come vpon the heade of Ioseph, Ꟶ vpon the toppe of the heade of him that was separated from amonge his brethren
his firstborne oxe hath be wtie, and his hornes are as the hornes of an vnycorne. And wyth them he shall trouble the nacyons together, euen vnto the endes of the worlde. These are also the many thousandes of Ephraim, Ꟶ the thousandes of Manasses.
And vnto zabulon he sayde: Reioyse zabulon in thy goynge out, and thou Isachar in thy tentes.
They shall call the people vnto the hyll, and there they shall offer offerynges of ryghteousnes. For they shall sucke of the abundance of the see, and of treasure hyd in the sande.
And vnto Gad he sayde: blessed be the rowme maker Gad: he dwelleth as a Lyon, that catcheth the arme wyth the heade.
He sawe therfore his begynninge, and that there was a porcyon there to hyde the lawgeuer, and he came with the heades of the people, and executed the ryghteousnes of the Lorde and his iudgementes with Israel.
And vnto Dan he sayde: Dan is a lyons whelpe, he shall flowe from Basan.
And vnto Nephthali he sayde, Nephthali hath abundaunce of Gods good pleasure, Ꟶ is fylled with the blessynge of the Lorde, Ꟶ shall haue his possessyons towarde the southwest.
And to Aser he sayde: Aser shalbe blessed with chyldren: he shalbe acceptable vnto his brethren, Ꟶ shall dyppe his fote in oyle:
Thy dwellynge be yron and brasse, and thyne age be as thy youth.
There is none lyke vnto the God of Israel: which though he sit vpon the heauen as vpon a horse, yet is he thy helper, whose glory is in the celestiall places.
The eternall God is thy refuge, Ꟶ vnder the armes of the Euerlastynge God shalt thou lyue. He shall cast out the enemye before the, and saye, destroye.
Israel then shall dwell in safetye, Ꟶ alone. And the eye of Iacob shalbe vpon a lande of corne and wyne, and hys heauens shall droppe the dewe.
Happye art thou o Israel, who is lyke vnto the? O people, that art saued in the Lorde, which is the shylde of thy helpe, and swerde of thy glorye. Thyne enemies haue lost their strength to the warde, and thou shalt treade vpon the heygth of them.
And Moses went from the playne of Moab vp into mount Nebo and vnto the toppe of the hyll that is ouer agaynst Iericho. And the Lorde shewed hym all the lande of Gilead, euen vnto Dan,
and all Nephthali and the lande of Ephraim Ꟶ Manasse, Ꟶ all the lande of Iuda: euen vnto the vtmost see,
and the south, and the region of the playne of Iericho the cytie of paulmetrees, euen vnto zoar.
And the Lorde sayde vnto hym. Thys is the lande whych I sware vnto Abraham, Isahac and Iacob sayinge: I wyll geue it vnto thy seed. I haue caused the also to se it wyth thyne eyes, but thou shalt not goo ouer thyther.
So Moses the seruaunte of the Lorde dyed there in the lande of Moab accordynge to the worde of the Lorde.
And he buryed him in a valey in the lande of Moab ouer agaynst the house of Peor, but no man knoweth of his sepulchre vnto this daye.
Moses was an hundred and twentye yere olde when he dyed: hys eye was not dymme, nor hys naturall coloure abated.
And the chyldren of Israell wepte for Moses in the playne of Moab thyrtye dayes. And the dayes of wepynge Ꟶ mournynge for Moses were ended.
And Iosua the sonne of Nun was full of the spryte of wysdome: for Moses had put hys handes vpon hym. And the chyldren of Israel were obedient vnto hym, and dyd as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And there arose not a prophet sence in Israel lyke vnto Moses, whom the Lorde knewe face to face,
accordynge vnto all the myracles and wonders which the Lorde sent him to do in that lande of Egypte, vnto Pharao Ꟶ all his seruauntes Ꟶ before all his lande:
Ꟶ accordynge to all that myghtie hande, Ꟶ all the greate visions, which Moses shewed in the syght of all Israell.
After the death of Moses the seruaunt of the Lorde, it happened also that the Lorde spake vnto Iosua the sonne of Nun Moses minister saying:
Moses my seruaunt is deed. Now therfore vp Ꟶ goo ouer Iordan: thou Ꟶ all this people, vnto the lande the whych I geue vnto the children of Israel.
All the places that the sooles of youre fete shall treade vpon, haue I geuen you, as I sayde vnto Moses:
from the wildernes Ꟶ this Libanon vnto the greate ryuer Euphrates: all the lande of the Hethites, euen vnto the great see towarde the going downe of the sonne, shalbe youre coaste.
There shall not a man be able to withstande that all the dayes of thy lyfe. For as I was with Moses, so will I be with the and will not fayll the, nor forsake the.
Be strong therfore and bolde: for vnto this people shalt thou deuyde the lande which I sware vnto their fathers to geue them.
Onely be thou strong Ꟶ as bolde as thou canst, that thou mayest obserue Ꟶ do according to all the lawe, which Moses my seruaunt commaunded the. Tourne therfrom nether to the right hand, nor to the lefte: that thou mayste do wysely in all thou takest in hande:
let not the boke of this lawe departe out of thy mouthe: But recorde therin daye Ꟶ night that thou mayst obserue, Ꟶ do according to all that is written therin. For then shalt thou make thy waye prosperouse, and then thou shalt do wysely.
Haue not I commaunded the, that thou shuldest be stronge Ꟶ hardye Ꟶ not feare ner be faynt harted? For I the Lord thy God am with the, whether soeuer thou goest.
Then Iosua commaunded the officers of the people, sayinge:
Goo thorowe the myddes of the hoste, Ꟶ comaunde the people, saying: prepare you vitayles: for after thre dayes ye shall passe ouer this Iordan, to goo in Ꟶ enioye the lande which the Lord youre God geueth you, to possesse it.
And vnto the Rubenites, Gadites, Ꟶ half the trybe of Manasses spake Iosua saying:
Remember the worde, which Moses the seruaunt of the Lorde commaunded you, sayinge: the Lorde youre God hathe geuen you reast, Ꟶ hathe geuen you this land.
Youre wyues, youre children, and youre catell shall remayne in the lande which Moses gaue you on this syde Iordan: But ye shall go before youre brethren armyd, all that be men of warre, and helpe them
vntill the Lorde haue geuen youre brethren reast, as he hathe you, and vntill they also haue obtayned the lande, which the Lorde youre God geueth them. And then shall ye retourne vnto the lande of youre possession Ꟶ enioye it, which lande Moses the Lordes seruaunt gaue you on this syde Iordan towarde the sonne rysynge.
And they answered Iosua sayinge: All that thou hast commaunded vs, we will do, and whether soeuer thou sendest vs, we wyll go.
According as we obeyed Moses in all thinges, so wyll we obeye the: onlye the Lorde thy God be with the as he was with Moses.
And whosoeuer he be that doth dysobeye thy mouth, and will not herken vnto thy wordes in all that thou commaundest him, let him dye: Onlye be strong and of good courage.
And Iosua the sonne of Nun sent out of Settim two men to spye secretlye, sayinge: go Ꟶ vewe the lande and also Iericho. And they went, and came into a harlotes house, named Rahab, Ꟶ lodged there.
And it was tolde the kynge of Iericho, and sayd: Beholde, there came men in hyther to nyght, of the children of Israel, to spye out the countrey.
And the kyng of Iericho sent vnto Rahab saying: brynge forth the men that are come to the, Ꟶ which are entred into thyne house: for they be come to searche out all the lande.
And the woman toke the two men Ꟶ hid them. And sayde thus: in dede there came men vnto me, but I wist not whence they were.
And aboute the tyme of the shuttynge of the gate when it was darcke, the men went out, whether the men went I wot not: folowe ye after them quycklye, Ꟶ ye shall ouer take them.
But she brought them vp to the rooffe of the house, and hydd them wt the stalckes of flaxe, which she had lyinge abroade vpon the rooffe.
And the men of the cytye pursued after them, the waye to Iordan, euen vnto the ferie, and as sone as they which pursued after them were gone out, they shutt the gate.
And or euer they were a slepe, she came vp vnto them vpon the rooffe,
Ꟶ sayde vnto the men: I knowe, that the Lorde hathe geuen you the lande for the feare of you is fallen vpon vs, Ꟶ the enhabiters of the land faynt at the presence of you.
For we haue heard, how the Lorde dried vp the water of the redd see before you when you came out of Egypte, Ꟶ what you dyd vnto the two kynges of the Amorites, that were on the other side Iordan Sehon, Ꟶ Og, whom ye vtterlye destroyed.
And as sone as we had heard these thynges oure hertes dyd fainte. And there remayned no moare courage in any man at the presence of you. For the Lord youre God, he is the God in heauen aboue, Ꟶ on the erth benethe.
Now therfore (I pray you) sweare vnto me by the Lorde, that as I haue shewed you mercie, ye shall also shewe mercie vnto my fathers house, Ꟶ geue me a true token.
And that ye shall saue alyue, bothe my father, Ꟶ my mother, my brethren, Ꟶ my systers, and all that they haue. And that ye shall delyuer oure soules from death.
And the men answered her: oure liues for you to dye, yf ye vtter not this oure busines. And when the Lord hathe geuen vs the land, we will deale mercifully Ꟶ truly with the.
And then she lett them downe by a coarde, thorow a windowe: For her house was by the towne wall. And she dwelt by the towne wall.
And she sayd vnto them: gett you into the mountayne, lest the pursuers mete you, Ꟶ hyde youre selues there thre dayes, vntill the pursuars be returned and then shall ye goo youre awne waye.
And the men sayde vnto her: we will be blamelesse of this thy othe, which thou hast made vs sweare.
Beholde, when we come into the lande, thou shalt bynde this purple coarde in the window, which thou lattest vs downe bye. And thou shalt bring thy father, Ꟶ thy mother, thy brethren, and all thy fathers houshold, euen into thy house.
And then whosoeuer doth go out at the dores of thy house, into the streat, his bloude shalbe vpon his awne head, Ꟶ we wilbe giltlesse. And whosoeuer shalbe with the in the house, hys bloude shall be on oure heade, yf any mannes hande touche him:
And yf thou vtter these oure wordes, we wilbe quyte of thy othe, which thou hast made vs sweare.
And she sayde: accordinge vnto youre wordes, so be it: and she sent them awaye to departe. And she bounde the purple coarde in the window.
And they departed, and came into the mountayne, and there aboade thre dayes, vntill the pursuars were returned. And the pursuars sought them thorowe out all the waye but founde them not.
And the two men returned, Ꟶ descended from the mountayne, and passed ouer, and came to Iosua the sonne of Nun, and tolde hym all that had chaunced them.
And they sayd vnto Iosua: the Lord truly hathe delyuered into oure handes all the lande, and all the inhabiters of the contrey faynte at the presence of vs.
And Iosua rose erlye: and they remoued from Settim, Ꟶ came to Iordan, he and all the children of Israel, and lodged there, before they went ouer.
And after thre dayes it fortuned, that the officers went thorow out the hoste,
and commaunded the people sayinge: when ye se the arcke of the testament of the Lord youre God, Ꟶ the preastes that are Leuites bearing it: ye shall departe from youre place, Ꟶ go after it.
So yet that there shall be a space betwene you Ꟶ it, aboute a two thousande cubites by measure. And ye shal not come nye vnto it, that ye maye knowe the waye, by which ye must go: for ye haue not gone this waye in tymes past
And Iosua sayd vnto the people: Sanctifie youre selues, for tomorowe the Lorde shall do wonders amonge you.
And Iosua spake vnto the preastes, saying: Take vp the arcke of the couenaunt: Ꟶ go before the people. And they toke vp the arcke of the testament, and went before the people.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Iosua: this daye will I begynne to magnifie the, in the syght of all Israel, that they maye knowe how that as I was with Moses so wyll I be with the.
And thou shalt commaunde the preastes that beare the arcke of the couenaunt saying: when ye are come to the edge of the waters of Iordan, ye shall stande still in it.
And Iosua sayde vnto the children of Israel: come hither, Ꟶ heare the wordes of the Lord youre God.
And Iosua sayde, Herbye ye shall knowe that the liuyng God is among you, Ꟶ that he will wythout fayle cast out before you, the Cananites, Ꟶ the Hethites, the Heuites, the Pheresites, the Gergesites, the Amorites, Ꟶ the Iebusites.
Beholde, the arcke of the apointment of the Lord of all the worlde goeth before you into Iordan.
Now therfore take from amonge you twelue men out of the tribes of Israel, out of euery tribe a man.
And as sone as the sooles of the fete of the preasts (that beare the arcke of the Lord the Gouernour of all the world) tread in the waters of Iordan, the waters of Iordan shall be deuided: Ꟶ the waters that come from aboue, shall stande still vpon an heape.
And it fortuned, that when the people were departed from their tentes to goo ouer Iordan, the preastes bearyng the arcke of the appointment, went before the people.
And as sone as they that bare the arcke came vnto Iordan, Ꟶ the fete of the preastes that bare the arcke were dipped in the brym of the water (For Iordan vseth to fill all hys banckes all the tyme of haruest)
the waters also that came downe from aboue, did ryse vp vpon an heape and departed farre from Adam, that was besyde zarthan, And the waters that were beneth to ward the see of the wildernes, fell awaye Ꟶ departed into the salt see, and the people went ryght ouer agaynst Iericho,
And the preastes that bare the arcke of the appointement of the Lorde, stoode drye within Iordane ready prepared, Ꟶ all the Israelites went ouer thorow the drye, vntill all the people were gone cleane ouer thorow Iordan,
And it fortuned, that whan the people. were all gone ouer Iordan, the Lorde spake vnto Iosua, sayinge:
Take you twelue men out of the people, out of euery trybe a man. And commaunde you them, sayinge: take you hence out of the myddes of Iordan
(euen out of the place where the preastes stoode in a redynes) twelue stones, which ye shall take awaye with you, and leaue them in the place, where you shal lodge this night.
And Iosua called the twelue men, which he had prepared of the children of Israel, out of euery trybe a man,
and Iosua sayde vnto them: gett you before the arcke of the Lord youre God, euen thorow the myddes of Iordan and take vp euery man of you a stone vpon his shulder, according vnto the nombre of the trybes of the children of Israel,
that this maye be a signe among you. That when youre children aske thier fathers in tyme to come, sayinge: what meane these stones with you?
Ye maye answere them how that the waters of Iordan deuyded at the presence of the arcke of the appoyntement of the Lorde. For whan it went ouer Iordan, the waters of Iordan deuided: And these stones are become a memoriall vnto the children of Israel for euer.
And the children of Israel dyd euen so as Iosua commaunded, and toke vp twelue stones out of the myddes of Iordan, as the Lorde sayde vnto Iosua, accordynge to the nombre of the tribes of the children of Israel, Ꟶ caryed them awaye with them vnto the place where they lodged, Ꟶ layed them doune there.
And Iosua set vp twelue stones also in the myddes of Iordan, in the place where the fete of the preastes which bare the arcke of the testament, stode. And there haue they continued vnto this daye.
For the preastes which bare the arcke stode in the myddes of Iordan, vntill all was finisshed that the Lorde commaunded Iosua to saye vnto the people, according to all that Moses charged Iosua. And the people hasted, and went ouer.
It fortuned also, that whan all the people were cleane ouer, the arke of the Lord went ouer also, Ꟶ the preastes before the people.
And the children of Ruben, Ꟶ the children of Gad, Ꟶ halfe the tribe of Manasses went before the children of Israel armed, as Moses charged them.
Euen fourty thousande prepared for warre, went before the Lorde vnto battell, thorow the playne of Iericho.
That daye the Lorde magnified Iosua in the sight of all Israel, and they feared him, as they feared Moses all dayes of his lyfe.
And the Lord spake vnto Iosua, saying:
commaunde the preastes that beare the arcke of witnesse, to come vp out of Iordan.
Iosua therfore commaunded the preastes, saying: Come ye vp out of Iordan,
And when the preastes that bare the arcke of the apoyntment of the Lorde were come vp out of the myddes of Iordan, and as sone as the soales of the preastes fete were set on the drye land, the waters of Iordan retourned agayne vnto their place, Ꟶ went ouer all their banckes, as they dyd before.
And the people came vp out of Iordan the tenth daye of the fyrst moneth, and pitched in Gilgal, euen in the east border of the cyte Iericho.
And the twelue stones which they toke out of Iordan, did Iosua pitche in Gilgal
And he spake vnto the children of Israel, saying: Yf youre children aske their fathers in tyme to come, Ꟶ saye: what meane these stones?
ye shal shewe youre children, Ꟶ saye: Israel came ouer this Iordan on drie land.
For the Lord youre God dryed vp the water of Iordan before you, vntill ye were gone ouer, as the Lorde youre God dyd the red see which he dryed vp before vs, tyll we were gone ouer:
that all the people of the worlde maye knowe the hande of the Lord, how myghtie it is, and that ye might feare the Lord youre God for euer.
And it fortuned that when all the kinges of the Amorites which are beyond Iordan west warde, Ꟶ all the kinges of the Cananites which were by the see, hearde, how the Lorde had dryed vp the waters of Iordan before the children of Israel, vntill they wer gone ouer theyr hertes fainted for feare. And ther was no sprete in them any moare, for the presence of the children of Israel.
That same tyme the Lorde sayde vnto Iosua: Make the sharpe knyues (of stone) Ꟶ goo to agayne and circumcise the children of Israel the seconde tyme.
And Iosua made him sharpe knyues (of stone) Ꟶ circuncised the children of Israel in the place called the hille of the foreskynnes.
And this is the cause why Iosua circucised all the people that came out of Egipte: Namely such as were males because that all the men of warre, died in the wildernes by the waye, after they came out of Egypte.
For all the people that came out were circumcised. But all the people that were borne in the wildernesse by the waye after they came out of Egypte, were not circumcised.
For the children of Israel walked fourty yeres in the wildernesse, tyll all the people of the men of warre that came out of Egipte were consumed, because they harkened not vnto the voyce of the Lorde. Wherfore the Lorde sware, that he wolde not shewe them the land which the Lord sware vnto theyr fathers, that he wolde geue vs, euen a lande that floweth wyth milke Ꟶ honye.
And their children whom he sett vp in their stead: them Iosua circumcised: for they were vncircumcised, because they circumcised them not by the waye.
And when they had circumcised all the people, they abode styll together in the hoste till they were whole.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Iosua: this daye I haue taken awaye the shame of Egipte from you: wherfore the name of the same place is called Gilgal vnto this daye.
And the children of Israel abode in Gilgall and helde the feast of passeouer the fourtene daye of the moneth at euen in the playne of Ierico.
And they did eat of the corne of the land on the morowe after passeouer swete cakes Ꟶ parched corne in the selfe same daye.
For the Manna ceased on the morowe, after they had begonne to eat of the corne of the lande, nether had the children of Israel Manna any moare, but dyd eat of the corne of the lande of Canaan that yere.
And it fortuned that when Iosua was nye to Iericho, he lyfte vp his eyes Ꟶ loked: and behold, there stode a man against him, hauyng a swerde drawen in his hande. And Iosua went vnto him, and sayde vnto him: arte thou on oure syde or on oure aduersaries.
And he sayde, Naye, but as a captayne of the hoste of the lord am I now come. And Iosua fell on his face to the erth, and dyd reuerence, Ꟶ sayde vnto hym, what sayth my Lorde vnto hys seruaunt?
And the captayne of the Lordes hoste sayde vnto Iosua: do thy shoo of thy fote, for the place wheron thou standest, is holy. And Iosua did so.
And Iericho was shut vp, Ꟶ locked because of the children of Israel, nether myght anye man go out or in.
And the Lord sayd vnto Iosua: beholde, I haue geuen into thyne hand Iericho and her kynge and the strong men of warre.
And ye shall compasse the cytie, all ye that be men of warre, Ꟶ go rounde aboute it once and so shall you do syxe dayes.
And seuen preastes shall beare before the Arke, seuen trompettes of rammes hornes. And the seuenth daye, ye shal compasse the cytie seuen tymes, and the preastes shall blowe with the trompettes.
And when they make a longe blaste wyth the rammes horne, Ꟶ ye heare the sounde of the horne, all the people shal showte wt a great showte. And then shall the wall of the citie fall doune, and the people shall ascende vp, euery man streight before him.
And Iosua the sonne of Nun, called the preastes, and sayde vnto them: take vp the arcke of the appointement, Ꟶ lett seuen preastes beare seuen trompettes of rammes hornes before the arcke of the Lorde,
And he sayde vnto the people, go and compasse the cytie: and lett him that is harnessed, go before the arcke of the Lorde.
And when Iosua had spoken vnto the people, the seuen preastes bare the seuen trompettes of rammes hornes, and went forth before the arcke of the Lorde, Ꟶ blewe with the trompettes, and the arcke of the couenaunt of the Lorde folowed them.
And all the men of armes went before the Preastes, that blewe with the trompettes, and the commen people came after the arke: and the prestes that went blewe with trompettes.
And Iosua commaunded the people sayinge: Ye shall not showte, ner make any noyse wt youre voyce, neither shal any worde procede out of youre mouthe, vntill the daye I bid you showte, then shall ye showte.
And so the arcke of the Lord compased the cytie, and went aboute it once: and they retourned into the hoste, and lodged there.
And Iosua rose erly in the mornyng, and the Preastes toke vp the arcke of the Lorde,
and seuen Preastes bare seuen trompettes of rammes hornes, Ꟶ went before the arcke of the Lorde, and blew with the trompettes. And all the men of armes went before them, but the comen people came after the arcke of the Lorde, which went before with the blowing of the trompettes.
And the seconde daye they compased the cytie once, Ꟶ retourned agayne into the hoste, Ꟶ so they dyd sixe dayes.
And when the seuenth daye came, they rose erlye: euen with the dawninge of the daye, and compased the cytie after the same maner seuen tymes: only that daye they compased the cytie seuen tymes.
And at the seuenth tyme, whan the preastes blewe wt the trompettes, Iosua sayd vnto the people: showt, for the Lorde hath geuen you the cytie.
And the cytie shalbe damned bothe it and all that are therin, vnto the Lorde: onlye Rahab the harlot shall lyue, and all that are with her in the house, because she hidd the messengers that we sent.
And in anywise be ye ware of the excommunicate thinges, lest ye make youre selues excommunicate, Ꟶ take of the excommunicate thinges, and make the hoste of Israel excommunicate and trouble it.
But all the siluer, golde, vesselles of brasse, Ꟶ yron shalbe consecrate vnto the Lorde, Ꟶ shal come into his treasurie.
And the people showted, and blewe wyth trompettes. And when the people heard the sounde of the trompe, they showted wt a great showt: Ꟶ the wall fell downe, so that the people went vp into the cytie, euery man streyght before him,
Ꟶ toke the citie. And they vtterly destroyed all that was in the cytie, bothe man and woman, younge and olde, oxe, shepe Ꟶ Asse, with the edge of the swerde.
Then Iosua sayde vnto the two men that had spyed out the contreye: goo into the harlottes house, and bringe out thense the woman, and all that she hath, as ye sware to her,
And the younge men that were spyes, went in, and brought out Rahab, and her father and mother and her brethren, and all that she had. And they brought out all her kinred, Ꟶ put them without the hoste of Israel
And they burnt the cytie with fier, and all that was therin. Only the siluer and the golde, the vessels of brasse and yron, they put vnto the treasure of the house of the Lord
And Iosua saued Rahab the harlott, Ꟶ her fathers housholde, and all that she had, Ꟶ she dwelt in Israel, euen vnto this daye because she hidd the messengers, which Iosua sent to spye out Iericho.
And Iosua sware at that tyme, sayinge: cursed be the man before the Lorde, that riseth vp, Ꟶ bildeth this citie Iericho: he shall laye the foundacion in his eldest sonne, and in his youngest sonne shal he sett vp the gates of it.
And so the Lord was wt Iosua, and his fame was noysed thorowe out all landes.
But yet the children of Israel trespased in the excommunicate thynges: And Acan the sonne of Carmy, the sonne of zabdi, the sonne of zareh of the tribe of Iuda, toke of the excommunicat thinges. And the wrath of the Lorde waxed whote agaynst the children of Israel.
And Iosua sent men from Iericho to Hai, which is besyde Bethauen, on the east syde of Bethel, Ꟶ spake vnto them, sayinge: gett you vp, Ꟶ vewe the countrey. And the men went vp, Ꟶ spyed out Hai.
And retourned to Iosua, and sayde vnto him, lett not all the people go vp, but let as it were a two or thre thousande men goo vp, and smyte Hai and make not all the people to laboure thether, for they are but fewe.
And so there went vp thether of the people, aboute a thre thousande men, Ꟶ they fledd before the men of Hai.
And the men of Hai smote of them vpon a thyrtye and sixe men: for they chased them from before the gate euen vnto Sebarim, Ꟶ smote them in the goyng doune. Wherfore the hertes of the people for feare melted awaye like water.
And Iosua rent his clothes, and fell to the erth vpon his face before the arcke of the Lorde vntill the euen tyde, he and the elders of Israel, Ꟶ put erth vpon their heddes.
And Iosua sayde Alas, O Lorde God, wherfore hast thou brought thys people ouer Iordan, to diliuer vs into the hande of the Amorites, and to destroie vs: wold to God we had bene content, Ꟶ dwelt on the other syde Iordan.
Oh Lorde what shall I saye, when Israel turneth their backes before their enemyes:
Surely the Cananites, and all the enhabiters of the lande shall heare of it, Ꟶ shall conspire agaynst vs, Ꟶ destroye the name of vs out of the worlde. And what wilt thou do vnto thy myghtie name?
And the Lorde sayde vnto Iosua, gett the vp, wherfore lyest thou thus vpon thy face?
Israel hath synned, Ꟶ they haue transgressed myne appointement, which I commaunded them: for they haue taken of the excommunicate thinges, and haue stolen, and dissembled, Ꟶ put them vnto their awne stuffe
And therfore is it that the children of Israel cannot stande before their ennemyes, but shall turne their backes before their ennemyes because they be excommunicate. Nether will I be wt you any moare, excepte ye rote out the excommunicate from amonge you.
Up therfore, Ꟶ sanctifie the people, and saye: sanctifie youre selues against to morowe: for so sayd the Lord God of Israel There is a damned thinge amonge you (O Israel) Ꟶ therfore ye cannot stande against youre ennemyes, vntill ye haue put the damned thinge from amonge you.
Tomorowe morning therfore ye shall be brought according to youre tribes. And the tribe which the Lord taketh, shal come according to the kynreds therof. And the kynred which the Lord shall finde gyltie, shall come by housholders And the housholde which the Lord shall finde fautye, shall come man by man.
And he that is founde in the excommunicacion, shalbe burnt with fire, he and all that he hath, because he hath transgressed the couenaunt of the Lord and wrought folye in Israell.
And so Iosua rose vp erly in the morning and brought Israell by their tribes: and the tribe of Iuda was caught.
And he brought the kynredes of Iuda, and toke the kynred of the zarehites. And he brought the kynred of the zarehites, man, by man, Ꟶ zabdi was caught.
And he brought his housholde man by man, and Acan the sonne of Carmy, the sonne of zabdi, the sonne of zareth in the tribe of Iuda was caught.
And Iosua sayde vnto Acan: my sonne, I beseche the, geue glorie to the Lord God of Israell, Ꟶ geue him praise, Ꟶ shewe me what thou hast done, hyde it not from me.
And Acan answered Iosua, Ꟶ sayde: of a truthe I haue synned agaynst the Lorde God of Israell, Ꟶ thus Ꟶ thus haue I done.
I sawe among the spoyle a goodlye Babylonishe garment, Ꟶ two hundred sicles of siluer, Ꟶ a tonge of golde of fyftie sicles weyghte, and I coueted them, Ꟶ toke them. And beholde, they lye hydde in the erthe in my tente and the siluer is ther vnder.
And so Iosua sent messengers: which whan they ranne vnto his tent, beholde, they were hid in his tent, and the syluer there vnder.
Therfore they toke them out of the myddest of his tent, and brought them vnto Iosua, and vnto all the children of Israell, Ꟶ layed them out before the Lorde.
And Iosua toke Acan the sonne of zareh, and the siluer, Ꟶ the garment, and the tonge of golde, and his sonnes Ꟶ his daughters, his oxen, Ꟶ his asses, his shepe, Ꟶ his tent, Ꟶ all that he had: and all Israell wyth hym brought them vnto the valeye of Acor.
And Iosua sayde: In as moche as thou haste troubled vs, the Lord shall trouble the this daye. And all Israell stoned him with stones, and burned them with fire,
and ouerwhelmed them with stones. And they cast vpon him a great heape of stones vnto this daye. And so the Lorde turned from the wrathe of his indignacion. And the name of the place is called the valeye of Acor vnto this daye.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Iosua: feare not, nether be thou faynt harted. Take all the men of warre wyth the and vp, and gett the to Hai, Beholde, I haue geuen into thy hande, the kyng of Hai, and his people, hys cytie and hys lande.
And thou shalt do to Hai Ꟶ her kyng, as thou dydest vnto Iericho and her kyng, Neuerthelesse the spoyle and catell therof, shall ye take vnto youre selues: And laye a watch vnto the towne, on the backsyde therof.
And so Iosua arose, and all the men of warre, to go vp agaynst Hai. And Iosua chose oute thyrtie thousande stronge men of warre, Ꟶ sent them a waye by nyght.
And he commaunded them, sayinge: beholde, ye shall lye awayte vnto the towne on the backesyde therof. Go not very farre from the cytie, but be all readye.
And I and all the people that are with me, will approche vnto the cytie. And when they come out agaynst vs, as they did at the first tyme then will we flee before them.
For they will come oute after vs Ꟶ we will bring them out of the cytie. For they will saye: they flee before vs, as at the first tyme:
Ꟶ we will flee before them. In the meane tyme shall ye ryse vp from lying awayte, Ꟶ destroye the cytie: For the Lorde youre God will deliuer it into youre hande.
And whan ye haue taken the cytie, ye shall set it on fire. Accordinge to the commaundement of the Lord shal ye do: beholde, I haue charged you.
Iosua therfore sent them forth, Ꟶ they went to lye awayte, Ꟶ abode betwene Bethel and Hai, on the west syde of the cite of Hai. But Iosua lodged that nyght amonge the people.
And Iosua rose vp erlye in the mornynge, and nombred the people, Ꟶ went vp, he Ꟶ the elders of Israel before the people agaynst Hai.
And all the men of warre that were with him, went vp and drue nye, and came agaynst the cytie, and pitched on the north syde of Hai, Ꟶ there was a valeye betwene them and Hai.
And he toke vpon a fyue thousande men, and put them to lye awayte, betwene Bethel Ꟶ Hai, on the westsyde of the cytie.
And they put the people (euen all the hoste that were on the northsyde) agaynst the cytie, and the lyers awayte on the west. And Iosua walked the same nyght in the myddes of the valeye.
And it fortuned, that when the kyng of Hai sawe it they hasted and rose vp earlye, and the men of the cytie went oute agaynst Israell to battell, he Ꟶ all his people, at a tyme apoynted, euen before the playne, and wist not that there were lyers awayte on the backsyde of the cytie.
And Iosua Ꟶ all Israel fayned them selues to be put to the worsse before them, Ꟶ fled towarde the wildernesse.
And all the people of the towne were called together, to folowe after them. And they folowed after Iosua Ꟶ were drawen a waye from the cytie:
And there was not a man left in Hai Ꟶ in Bethel, that went not out after Israell. And they left the cytie open, Ꟶ folowed after Israell.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Iosua: stretch out the spere that is in thine hand, towarde Hai, for I will geue it into thy hand. And Iosua stretched out the spere that he had in his hande, towarde the citie.
And the lyers awayte rose quicklye oute of their place, Ꟶ ranne assone as Iosua had stretched oute his hande, and they entred into the citie and toke it, Ꟶ hasted, Ꟶ sett the cite on fire.
And when the men of Hai loked backe after them, they sawe the smoke of the citie assende vp to heauen. And they had no leysure to flee ether thys waye or that, Ꟶ the people that fledd to the wyldernesse, turned backe agayne vpon the folowers.
And when Iosua Ꟶ all Israel sawe that the lyers awayte had taken the citie, Ꟶ that the smoke of it ascended, they turned agayne and layed on the men of Hai.
And the other yssued oute of the citie agaynst them. And so were they in the middes of Israel: for these were on the one syde of them, Ꟶ the reste on the other syde. And they layed vpon them, so that they lett none of them skape, nor remayne.
And the kyng of Hai they toke alyue, Ꟶ brought hym to Iosua.
And when Israell had made an ende of slaying all the enhabiters of Hai in the felde of the wyldernesse, where they chased them, Ꟶ when they were all fallen on the edge of the swerde, vntyll they were wasted, all the Israelites returned vnto Hai, Ꟶ smote it in the edge of the swerde,
And all that fell that daye, both of men Ꟶ wemen, were twelue thousande, euen all the men of Hai.
For Iosua plucked not hys hand backe agayne, which he stretched oute vpon the spere, vntyll he had vtterlye destroyed all the enhabitatoures of Hai.
Only the catell and the spoyle of the citie, Israel toke vnto them selues, according vnto the worde of the Lorde, which he commaunded Iosua.
And Iosua sett Hai on fyre, and made it an heape for euer, and a wyldernesse, euen vnto thys daye.
And the kyng of Hai he hanged on tree, vntyll euen. And assone as the sonne was downe, Iosua commaunded that they shulde take the carkas doune of the tree, and caste it at the entering of the gate of the citie, and laye theron a great heape of stones, that remayneth vnto this daye.
Then Iosua bylt an altare vnto the Lorde God of Israell, in mount Eball,
as Moses the seruaunt of the Lorde commaunded the children of Israell, and as it is written in the boke of the lawe of Moses: an altare of whole stones, ouer which noman hath lyft any tole of yron. And they sacrifyced theron burnt sacrifyces vnto the Lorde, and offered peace offrynges.
And he wrote there vpon the stones, a rehearsall of the lawe of Moses, and wrote it in the presence of the chyldren of Israell.
And all Israell and the elders therof, and their officiers Ꟶ Iudges stode, parte on this syde the arcke, Ꟶ parte on that syde, before the Preastes, that were Leuites, which bare the arcke of the apoyntement of the Lorde: as well the straunger, as they that were borne amonge them: halfe on them on the forefronte of the mounte Garizim, and halfe of them on the forefronte of mount Eball: as Moses the seruaunt of the Lorde had commaunded before, that they shulde blesse the people Israell.
Afterward he red all the wordes of the lawe, the blessinges and cursynges, according to all that is wrytten in the boke of the lawe:
And there was not one worde of all that Moses commaunded, which Iosua read not before all the congregacyon of Israell: The wemen and chyldren, (and the straungers that were come) stondyng amonge them.
And it fortuned that when all the kynges that dwell on thys syde Iordan in the hilles and valeys, and alonge by all the coastes of the great see, ouer agaynst Libanon (Namely the Hethites, the Amorites, the Cananites, the Pheresites, the Heuites, and the Iebusytes) herd therof,
they gathered them selues together, to fyght agaynst Iosua and agaynst Israell with one accorde.
And the enhabitoures of Gibeon heard what Iosua had done vnto Iericho, and to Hai:
And they did worke wylylye, Ꟶ went, and made them selues ambasadoures, and toke olde sackes vpon their Asses, and wyne bottelles olde, and rent and worne,
and olde clouted shoes vpon their fete, and their rayment was olde, and all their prouysion of bread was dyred vp, and hored,
And they came vnto Iosua into the hoste, to Gilgall, and sayde vnto him and vnto all the men of Israell: we be come from a farre contreye, and now make ye agrement with vs.
And the men of Israell sayde vnto the Heuite: paraduenture thou dwellest amonge vs, and then howe can I make peace wyth the?
And they sayde vnto Iosua: we are thy seruauntes. And Iosua sayde vnto them agayne: what are ye? and whence come ye?
They answered him: From a verye farre contrye thy seruauntes are come, for the name of the Lorde thy God: for we haue heard the fame of him, and all that he did in Egypte,
and all that he dyd to the two kynges of the Amorites that were beyonde Iordan, Sehon kynge of Hesbon, and Og kyng of Basan, which was at Astharoth.
Wherfore oure elders and all the enhabytoures of oure contrey spake to vs, sayinge: take vitayles wt you to serue by the waye, Ꟶ go mete them, and saye vnto them: we are youre seruauntes. And now make ye a couenant of peace with vs.
Thys oure foode of bread, we toke with vs oute of oure houses whotte, the daye we departed to come vnto you. And now behold, it is dyred vp, and hored.
And these bottelles of wyne which we filled, were newe: and se, they be rent. And these oure garmentes and shoes are worne for oldnesse, by the reason of the exceadyng long Iourneye.
And the men toke of their vitayles, and counceled not with the mouthe of the Lord.
And Iosua made peace wyth them, and made a couenaunt with them, that they shulde be suffred to lyue: Ꟶ the Lordes of the congregacyon sware vnto them.
And it fortuned, that thre dayes after they had made peace wyth them, they hearde that they were their neyboures, Ꟶ that they dwelte amonge them.
And the chyldren of Israel toke their Iourney, and came vnto their cyties the thyrde daye: and their cyties were Gibeon, Ꟶ Caphira, Beeroth and kariat Iarim.
And the children of Israell slewe them not, because the Lordes of the congregacyon had sworne vnto them by the Lorde God of Israell. And all the multitude murmured against the Lordes.
But all the Lordes sayde vnto all the congregacyon: we haue sworne vnto them by the Lord God of Israel, Ꟶ therfore we maye not hurte them.
But this we wyll do to them: We will lett them lyue, lest wrath be vpon vs, because of the othe which we sware vnto them.
And the Lordes sayd vnto them agayne: Let them lyue, and hewe wodd, and drawe water vnto all the congregacion, and they did as the Lordes sayde vnto them.
And Iosua sent for them, Ꟶ talked wyth them, and sayde: wherfore haue ye begyled vs, sayeng: We dwell farre from you, whan ye dwell amonge vs?
and now are you curssed, Ꟶ there shall not cease to be of you, bond men and hewers of wodd Ꟶ drawers of water for the house of my God.
And they aunswered Iosua and sayde: it was tolde thy seruauntes, how that the Lord thy God had commaunded his seruaunt Moses to geue you all the lande, and to destroye all the enhabytoures therof oute of youre syght, Ꟶ therfore we were exceadyng sore afrayed for oure lyues at the presence of you, Ꟶ haue done this thinge,
Ꟶ beholde we are in thine hande, as it semeth good Ꟶ ryght in thyne eyes to do vnto vs, so do.
And euen so dyd he vnto them, and ridde them oute of the hande of the children of Israel, and they slewe them not.
And Iosua made them that same daye hewers of wodd, Ꟶ drawers of water for the congregacyon and for the aulter of God vnto thys daye, in the place which God shulde chose.
And it fortuned, that when Adonizedec kyng of Ierusalem had heard how Iosua had taken Hai, Ꟶ had destroyed it, and how that as he had done to Iericho and her kyng, euen so he had done to Hai and her kyng, and how the Inhabitoures of Gibeon had made peace wyth Israell, and were amonge them, they feared excedinglye,
for Gibeon was a great cytie, as any cytie of the kyngdome, Ꟶ was greater then Hai, and all the men therof were very myghtye.
Wherfore Adonizedec kyng of Ierusalem sent vnto Hoham kyng of Hebron, and vnto Pirea kyng of Iarmuth, Ꟶ vnto Iaphia kyng of Lachis, and vnto Debir kyng of Eglon, saying:
Come vp vnto me, Ꟶ healpe me, that we may smyte Gibeon: for they haue made peace with Iosua and wyth the children of Israell.
Therfore the .v. kynges of the Amorites, the kyng of Ierusalem, the kyng of Hebron, the kyng of Iarmuth, the kyng of Lachis, the kyng of Eglon geathered them selues to geather, they withall their hostes, Ꟶ beseged Gibeon, and made warre agaynst it.
And the men of Gibeon sent vnto Iosua Ꟶ to the hoste to Gilgal, sayinge: withdrawe not thy hande from thy seruauntes, come vp to vs, to saue vs, Ꟶ to helpe vs: For al the kinges of the Amorites which dwell in the mountaynes are geathered togeather against vs.
And so Iosua ascended from Gilgall, he and all the people of warre with him, Ꟶ all the men of myghte,
and the Lord sayde vnto Iosua, feare them not, for I haue delyuered them into thyne hande. Nether shal any of them stande agaynst the.
Iosua therfore came vnto them sodenlye, and went vp from Gilgall all nyght.
And the Lord troubled them before Israell, and slewe them with a great slaughter at Gibeon, and chased them a longe the waye that gothe vp to Bethoron, and smote them to Esaka Ꟶ Makeda.
And it fortuned, that as they fled from Israell, Ꟶ were in the goyng doune to Bethoron, the Lorde cast downe great stones from heauen vpon them, vntyll Esaka. And there were mo deed with hayle stones, then they were, whom the chyldren of Israell slewe wyth the swerde.
Then spake Iosua before the Lorde, in the daye when the Lorde delyuered the Amorites before the chyldren of Israell, and he sayde in the syght of Israell. Sonne stande thou still vpon Gibeon, and thou Mone, in Aialon.
And the sonne abode, and the mone stode styll, vntyll the people aduenged them selues vpon their enemyes. Is not this written in the boke of the ryghtwes? The sonne (I saye) abode in the myddes of heauen and hasted not to goo doune by that space of a whole daye.
And there was no daye lyke that, before it, or after it, that the Lorde heard the voyce of a man. For the Lorde fought for Israell.
And Iosua returned and all Israel with hym, vnto the hoste to Gilgall:
but the fyue kynges fledde, and were hyd in a caue at Makeda.
And it was tolde Iosua of one saying, the fyue kynges are founde hid in a caue which is at Makeda.
And Iosua sayd rowle great stones vpon the mouthe of the caue, and set men by it, for to kepe them.
And stande ye not stylle, but folowe after youre enemyes, and smyte all the hindmost, And soffre them not to entre into theyr cyties, for the Lorde youre God hath delyuered them into youre hande.
And it fortuned, when Iosua and the chyldren of Israell had made an ende of slaying them wyth an excedinge great slaughter tyll they were wasted, the rest that remayned of them, entred into walled cyties.
And all the people returned to the hoste, to Iosua at Makeda in peace, neither dyd any man moue hys tong agaynst the chyldren of Israel.
Then sayde Iosua: open the mouth of the caue, and bryng oute these .v. kynges vnto me oute of the caue.
And they dyd so, and brought those fyue kynges vnto hym, oute of the caue, euen the kynge of Ierusalem, the kyng of Hebron, the kyng of Iarmuth, the kyng of Lachis, and the kynge of Eglon.
And it fortuned, that when they brought oute those kynges vnto Iosua: Iosua called for all the men of Israell, and sayde vnto the chefe of the men of warre, which wente with hym: come nere, Ꟶ put youre fete vpon the neckes of these kynges. And they cam neare: and put their fete vpon the neckes of them.
And Iosua sayde vnto them: Ye shall not feare, ner be faynt harted. But be strong and plucke vp youre hertes, for thus shall the Lorde do to all youre enemyes agaynst whom ye fyght.
And then Iosua smote them, and slewe them, Ꟶ hanged them on fyue trees. And they hanged still vpon the trees vntill the euening.
And at the going doune of the sonne it fortuned that Iosua gaue commaundement, and they toke them doune of the trees, and cast them into the caue, (where in they had bene hyd), Ꟶ layed great stones on the caues mouthe, which remayne vnto this daye.
And that same daye Iosua toke Makeda, and smote it wyth the edge of the swerde, and the kynge therof also destroyed he vtterly, wyth all the soules that were therin, and let nought remayne. And he dyd to the kynge of Makeda as he dyd to the kynge of Iericho.
Then Iosua went from Makeda, and all Israell with hym vnto Libna, Ꟶ fought against Libna.
And the Lorde delyuered it and the kynge therof into the hand of Israell, and he smote it wyth the edge of the swerde, and all the soules that were therin. He let nought remayne in it, but dyd vnto the kyng therof as he dyd vnto the kynge of Iericho.
And Iosua departed from Libna, and all Israell wyth hym, vnto Lachis, and beseged it, and assaulted it.
And the Lord delyuered Lachis into the hande of Israell which toke it the seconde daye, and smote it with the edge of the swerde, Ꟶ all the soules that were therin, doing accordyng to all, as he had done to the cite of Libna.
Then Horam kynge of Geser came vp to helpe Lachis: And Iosua smote hym Ꟶ his people, vntill naught remayned of hym.
And from Lachis Iosua departed, vnto Eglon, and all Israell with hym, and they beseged it, and assaulted it,
and toke it the same daye, and smote it with the edge of the swerde, and all the soules that were therin he vtterlye destroyed the same daye, according to all that he had done to Lachis.
And Iosua departed vp from Eglon and all Israel with him, vnto Hebron. And they fought agaynst it,
and whan they had taken it, they smote it with the edge of the swerde, and the kyng therof, and all the townes that pertayned to it, and all the soules that were therin, and he lefte nought remayning: but did according to all, as he had done to Eglon, and destroyed it vtterlye, and all the soules that were therin.
And Iosua returned, and all Israell with him to Dabir, and fought agaynst it.
And whan he had taken it, and the kyng therof, and all the townes that pertayned therto. they smote them with the edge of the swerde, and vtterlye destroyed all the soules that were therin, nether let he ought remayne. Euen as he dyd to Hebron, so he dyd to Dabir and the kyng therof, as he had done also to Libna and her kynge.
Iosua therfore smote all the hill contreys, and the southe contreys, and the valeyes, and the hill sydes, Ꟶ all their kynges, Ꟶ lett nought remayne of them, but vtterly destroyed all that breathed, as the Lorde God of Israell commaunded.
And Iosua smote them from Cades barne vnto Asah, and all the contrey of Gosan, euen vnto Gibeon.
All those kynges and their lande dyd Iosua take at one tyme: because the Lorde God of Israell fought for Israell.
And Iosua and all Israel returned, vnto the hoste that was in Gilgall.
And it fortuned, that when Iabin kyng of Hazor had hearde those thinges: he sent to Iobab kynge of Madon, Ꟶ to the kyng of Simron, and to the kynge of Achsaph,
and vnto the kynges that are by northe in the mountaynes, Ꟶ playnes toward the southesyde of Ceneroth, and in the lowe countreys, Ꟶ in the borders of Dor westward
and vnto the Cananytes bothe by Easte Ꟶ weste, Ꟶ vnto the Amorites, Hethites, Pheresites, and Iebusites in the mountaynes: Ꟶ vnto the Heuites that were vnder Hermon in the lande of Mizpa:
And they came out and all their hostes with them, a multytude of folke, euen as the sande that is on the see shore in a greate nombre with horsses Ꟶ charettes exceding manye.
And all these kynges mett together, and came, and pytched together at the waters of Merom, for to fight agaynst Israell.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Iosua: be not afrayde at the presence of them: for tomorowe aboute this tyme will I delyuer then all slayne before Israell: thou shalt hough their horsses, Ꟶ burne their charettes with fire.
And so Iosua came and all the men of warre with hym agaynst them by the waters of Merom, Ꟶ sodenlye fell vpon them.
And the Lorde delyuered them into the hande of Israell: and they smote them, and chased them vnto great Sidon, Ꟶ vnto the whott waters, and vnto the valeye of Mizpa which is Eastwarde: and smote them vntyll they had none remaynyng of them.
And Iosua dyd vnto them, as the Lorde bad hym: he houghed their horsses, and burnt their charettes with fyer.
And Iosua at that tyme turned backe, Ꟶ toke Hazor, Ꟶ smote the kyng therof with the swerde. And Hazor before tyme was the head of all those kingdomes.
And they smote all the soules that were therin with the edge of the swerde, vtterlye destroying all: Ꟶ nothing that breathed, was let remayne. And he burnt Hazor wt fyer.
And all the cyties of those kynges, and all the kynges of them, dyd Iosua take, and smote them wyth the edge of the swerde, and vtterlye destroyed them as Moses the seruaunt of the Lorde commaunded.
But Israell burnt none of the cyties that stode styll in their strength, saue Hazor onlye that Iosua burnt,
And all the spoyle of the sayde cyties and the catell, the children of Israel caught vnto them selues. But the men onlye they smote with the edge of the swerde vntill they had destroyed them nether left they ought that had breath.
As the Lorde commaunded Moses hys seruaunt, so dyd Moses commaunde Iosua, and euen so dyd Iosua so that he mynysshed no worde, of all that the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And so Iosua toke all the lande, the hylles and all the southe contreye, and all the lande of Gosan, and the lowe contrey, and the playne, and the mountayne of Israell, Ꟶ the lowe countrey of the same,
euen from the mounte of partyng, that gothe vp to Seir vnto the playne of Gad in the valeye of Libanon, vnder mounte Hermon. And all the kynges of the same he toke, Ꟶ smote them, and slewe them.
Iosua made warre longe tyme wt those kynges:
nether was there anye citie that made peace with the children of Israell, saue those Hethites that enhabited Gibeon, and therfore all other they toke wyth battell,
for it came of the Lorde, wich dyd harden theyr hartes, that they shulde come agaynst Israell in battell: Ꟶ that they shulde destroye them vtterlye, and shewe them no mercy, but to bryng them to naught, As the Lord commaunded Moses.
And that same ceason came Iosua, and destroyed the Enakites out of the mountaynes: Namely, out of Hebron, Dabir, Anab, and out of all the mountaynes of Iuda, and out of all the mountaynes of Israell. And Iosua destroyed them vtterlye with their cities.
There was not one Enakite leafte in the lande of the chyldren of Israell, only in Asah Geth, and Asdod, there remayned of them.
And Iosua toke the whole lande, according to all that the Lord sayd vnto Moses, and Iosua gaue it for a possessyon vnto Israel according to their partes and trybes: Ꟶ the lande rested from warre.
These are the kynges of the lande whych the chyldren of Israell smote, and possessed theyr land on the other syde Iordan eastwarde, from the ryuer Arnon, vnto mounte Hermon, and all the playne estwarde:
Sehon kynge of the Amorites, that dwelt in hesbon, and ruled from Aroer, whych is besyde the ryuer of Arnon, and from the middell of the ryuer, and from halfe Gilead vnto the ryuer Iabock, whych is the border of the chyldren of Ammon:
And from the playne vnto the see of Cynneroth eastward, and vnto the see in the playne: euen the salt see eastwarde, the waye to Beth Iesymoth, and from the southe vnder the sprynges of the hill.
And the coaste of Og kyng of Basan which was of the remnaunt of the Gyauntes, and dwelt at Astharoth, and Edrai:
Ꟶ rayned in mount Hermon, and in Salcah: and in all Basan, vnto the border of the Gesurites Ꟶ the Macathites, Ꟶ halfe mount Gilead, vnto the borders of Sehon kynge of Hesbon.
Moses the seruaunt of the Lorde Ꟶ the children of Israel smote them, and Moses the seruaunt of the Lorde, gaue their lande for a possession, vnto the Rubenites, Gaddites, and halfe the trybe of Manasses.
These are the kynges of the countreye, which Iosua Ꟶ the children of Israel smote on thys syde Iordan, westwarde, from the playne of Gad which is in the valey of Libanon, euen vnto the partyng mount that gothe vp to Seir. Which land Iosua gaue vnto the trybes of Israel to possesse, to euery man his parte:
in the vpper lande, Ꟶ nether lande, in playnes, and hyll sydes, in the wildernesse, and southe contrey: the Hethites, the Amorites, the Cananites, the Pheresites, the Heuites, and the Iebusites:
The kynge of Iericho: was one. The kynge of Hai which is besyde Bethel: one.
The kynge of Ierusalem: one. The kynge of Hebron: one.
The kynge of Iarmuth: one. The kynge of Lachys: one.
The kynge of Eglon: one. The kyng of Gaezer: one.
The kynge of Debir: one. The kynge of Geder: one.
The kynge of Horma: one. The kynge of Arad: one.
The kinge of Libna: one. The kynge of Adullam: one.
The kynge of Makeda: one. The kynge of Bethel: one.
The kynge of Tapuah: one. The kynge of Hepher: one.
The kinge of Aphek: one. The king of Lasaron: one.
The kynge of Madon: one. The kyng of Hasor: one.
The king of Simron meron: one. The kyng of Achsaph: one.
The kynge of Thaenach one. The kyng of Megiddo: one.
The kynge of Kaedes: one. The kynge of Iokneam of Charmell: one.
The kynge of Dor in the contreye of Dor: one. The kynge of the nacions of Gilgall: one.
The kynge of Thirza: one. All the kynges togeather thyrtye and one.
Iosua was olde, and strycken in yeares, and the Lorde sayde vnto hym: thou art olde and strycken in yeres,
and there remayneth yet excedynge moche lande to be possessed: This is the lande that yet remayneth: all the regyons of the Philistines: Ꟶ all Gesuri:
from Nilus which is on the outwarde parte of Egipt, vnto the borders of Aeckron northward, which lande is counted vnto Cananye, euen fyue Lordshippes of the Philistines, the Asathites, Asdodith, Ascalonites, Gethites, Akaronites, Ꟶ the Euites.
And from the south, all the lande of the Cananites, and the caue, that is besyde the Sidonians, euen vnto Aphek, and to the border of the Amorites.
And the land of the Giblites, and all Libanon toward the sonne risynge, from the playne of Gad vnder mount Hermon, vntyl a man come to Hemath:
all the enhabitoures of the hyll country, from Libanon vnto the whotte waters, and all the Sidonians, wyll I cast out from before the children of Israel: onely se that thou in any wyse deuyde it by lotte vnto the Israelites, to enheret, as I haue commaunded the.
Now therfore deuide thys land to enheret, vnto the nyne trybes Ꟶ the halfe trybe of Manasses.
For with the other halfe the Rubenites and the Gaddites haue receaued theyr enheritaunce, whych Moses gaue them beyonde Iordan eastwarde: euen as Moses the seruaunt of the Lord gaue them:
from Aroer that lyeth on the brym of the ryuer Arnon, and from the citie that is in the myddes of the ryuer. And all the playn of Medeba vnto Dibon,
Ꟶ all the cyties of Sehon kynge of the Amorites, which raygned in Hesbon, euen vnto the border of the chyldren of Ammon:
and Gilead, Ꟶ the border of Gesuri and Machati, and all mount Hermon, with all Basan vnto Salecah:
euen all the kyngdom of Og in Basan, whyche raygned in Astharoth and Edrai, which same remayned yett of the rest of the Giauntes. These dyd Moses smyte, Ꟶ cast them out
Neuerthelesse the chyldren of Israel expelled not the Gesurites Ꟶ the Machathites: But the Gesurites and the Machathites dwell amonge the Israelites euen vnto this daye,
Only vnto the trybe of Leui, he gaue none enheritaunce: But the offrynge of the Lorde God of Israel is theyr enheritaunce, as he sayde vnto them.
Moses gaue vnto the trybe of the chyldren of Ruben enheritaunce accordyng to theyr kynredes.
And theyr coast was from Aroer that lyeth on the bancke of the ryuer Arnon, Ꟶ from the citie that is in the myddes of the ryuer, and all the playne which is by Medeba,
Hesbon, wyth all their townes that that lye in the playne: Dibon and the hyll places of Baal, and the house Baalmeon:
and Iahazah, and kedemoth and Mephaah
Kiriathaim, Sabamah and zarath zahar in the mounte of the valley,
the house of Peor, and the sprynges of the hylles: and Bethiesimoth:
and all the cyties of the playne. And all the kyngdome of Sehon kynge of the Amorites, whych raygned in Hesbon, which Moses smote with the lordes of Madian, Eui, Rekem, zur, and Hur and Reba, the which were dukes of Sehon dwellyng in the contrey.
And Balaam also the sonne of Beor the sothesayer, dyd the children of Israel slaye with the swerde, among other of them that were slayne.
And the border of the chyldren of Ruben was Iordan with the contrey that lyeth theron. This was the enheritaunce of the chyldren of Ruben after their kynredes, cyties Ꟶ villages pertaynynge therto.
And Moses gaue enheritaunce vnto the trybe of Gad, euen vnto the chyldren of Gad he gaue by theyr kynredes.
And theyr costes were Iazer, Ꟶ all the cyties of Gilead, and halfe the lande of the chyldren of Ammon, vnto Aroer that lyeth before Rabba.
And from Hesbon vnto Ramoth, Mazphah, Ꟶ Betonim: and from Mahanaim vnto the borders of Lidbir.
And in the valeye they had Betharan Bethnimra, Socoth, and zaphon, the rest of the kyngdome of Sehon kyng of Hesbon, vnto Iordan and the costes that lye theron, euen vnto the edge of the see of Ceneroth, on the other syde Iordan eastward.
This is the enheritaunce of the children of Gad after their kynredes, their cyties and villages.
And Moses gaue enheritaunce vnto the halfe trybe of Manasses. And this was the possession of the halfe trybe of Manasses by theyr kynredes.
Theyr coste was from Mahanaim, euen all Basan, Ꟶ all the kyngdom of Og kynge of Basan, and all the townes of Iair which lye in Basan, euen thre skore cyties,
Ꟶ halfe Gilead, Astaroth, Ꟶ Edrai, cyties of the kyngdome of Og in Basan whiche pertayne vnto the chyldren of Machir the sonne of Manasses, euen the halfe porcion of the chyldren of Machir by theyr kynredes.
These are the thinges which Moses did distribute in the feldes of Moab, on the other syde Iordan ouer against Iericho eastward.
But vnto the trybe of Leui, Moses gaue none enheritaunce, for the Lorde God of Israell is their enheritaunce, as he sayd vnto them.
And these are the contreyes which the chyldren of Israell enhereted in the lande of Canaan, which Eleazer the preaste, and Iosua the sonne of Nun and the auncient heades of the trybes of the chyldren of Israell, distributed to them.
By lotte they receaued their possessions as the Lorde commaunded by the hande of Moses, to geue vnto the nyne trybes, Ꟶ vnto the halfe trybe.
For Moses had geuen enheritaunce vnto two trybes and an halfe on the other syde Iordan. But vnto the Leuites he gaue none enheritaunce amonge them.
For the children of Ioseph were two tribes, Manasses Ꟶ Ephraim. And therfore they gaue no parte vnto the Leuites in the land, saue cyties to dwell in with the suburbes of the same, for their beastes and cattell.
As the Lorde commaunded Moses: euen so the children of Israel did when they deuided the lande.
And the children of Iuda came vnto Iosua in Gilgall. And Caleb the sonne of Iephune the kenesyte sayde vnto hym: thou wottest what the Lorde sayd vnto Moses the man of God, about my matter and thyne in Cades Barne.
Fourty yeare olde was I when Moses the seruaunt of the Lorde sent me from Cades Barne to spie out the lande. And I brought hym worde agayne euen as it was in myne herte.
Neuerthelesse my brethren that went vp wyth me, dyscouraged the herte of the people. And I folowed the Lorde God.
And Moses sware the same daye, saying: the lande wheron thy fete haue troaden, shalbe thyne enheritaunce and thy chyldrens for euer, because thou hast folowed the Lorde God.
And beholde, the Lorde hath kept me alyue (as he sayde) this fourtye and fyue yeares, euen sence the Lord spake this word vnto Moses, whyle the chyldren of Israell wanderyd in the wyldernesse. And now lo, I am this daye foure skore Ꟶ fyue yere old:
Ꟶ yet am as stronge at this tyme, as I was when Moses sent me: looke how stronge I was then, so strong am I now whether I go to warre, or come agayne.
Now therfore geue me thys mountayne wherof the Lorde spake in that daye, for thou herdest in that daye, how the Enakins are there, and the cities great Ꟶ walled. Peraduenture the Lorde wilbe with me, Ꟶ I shall he able to dryue them out, as the Lorde sayd.
And Iosua blessed him, Ꟶ gaue vnto Caleb the sonne of Iephune, Hebron to enheret.
And Hebron therfore became the enheritaunce of Caleb the sonne of Iephune the kenesite, vnto thys daye: because he folowed the Lord God of Israell.
And the name of Hebron was called in olde tyme, kariatharbe. For the same was a great man amonge the Enakims. And the lande ceased from warre.
This was the lotte of the trybe of the chyldren of Iuda by theyr kynredes: Namely, towarde the border of Edom in the wyldernesse of zin, southwarde, euen from the vtmoost parte of the southe coste.
And theyr south coste was from the brynke of the salt see, from a rock that leaneth southward.
And it went out to the south syde toward the goynge vp to Acrabim, Ꟶ went a longe to zinna, and ascended vp on the south syde vnto Cades Barne, Ꟶ went a longe to Hezron, and went vp to Adar, and fette a compase to Karca.
From thence went it a longe to Azmon, and reached vnto the ryuer of Egypt: and the ende of that cost was on the west syde. And this is theyr south coste.
Their east coste is the salt see, euen vnto the edge of Iordan.
And their border in the north quarter was from the rocke of the see and from the edge of Iordan. And the same border went vp to Bethhagla, and went a long by the northsyde of Betharabah, and vp from thence to the stone of Bohen the sonne of Ruben.
And agayne, thesame border went vp to Dabir from the valeye of Acor, and so northwarde, turnyng towarde Gilgall, that lieth before the goyng vp to Adonim, whych is of the southe syde of the ryuer. And the same border went vp to the waters of the fountayne of the Sonne, and ended at the well of Rogell.
And then went vp to the valeye of the sonne of Hennom, euen vnto the southe syde of Iebusi: the same is Ierusalem. And then went vp to the toppe of the hille that lyeth before the valeye of Hennon, westwarde, and by the edge of the valeye of the Giauntes northwarde:
And then it compaseth from the toppe of the hill vnto the fountayne of the water of Nephthoah, and gothe out at the cities of mount Ephron: and draweth to Baala, whiche is kiriathiarim,
and then it compaseth from Balah westwarde vnto mount Seir, Ꟶ then goeth a longe vnto the syde of mount Iarim, (which is Chesalon) on the north syde. And cometh downe to Bethsames, and gothe to Thamnah,
and gothe out agayne vnto the syde of Akaron northwarde: And then draweth to Secron and gothe a longe to mounte Balah, and goeth out at Iabnel: Ꟶ the endes of the coastes leaue at the west see.
And the west border was the gaeat see, and the same coaste was the coast of the chyldren of Iuda rounde about in theyr kynredes.
And vnto Caleb the sonne of Iephune dyd Iosua geue a parte among the children of Iuda, accordynge to the mouthe of the Lorde, euen kiriatharbe of the father of Enock, whiche cytye is Hebron.
And Caleb droue thence the thre sonnes of Enack, Sesai, and Ahman, and Thalmai, which were, the sonnes of Enack.
And he went vp thence, to the enhabitoures of Dabir. And the name of Dabir in the olde tyme was kariath sephar.
And Caleb sayde: he that smyteth kariath sepher, Ꟶ taketh it: to hym wyll I geue Acsah my daughter to wyfe.
And Othniel, the sonne of kenes, the brother of Caleb toke it. And he gaue hym Acsah hys daughter to wyfe.
And as she went in vnto hym, she moued hym, to aske of her father a felde. And she alyghted of her asse. And Caleb sayde vnto her, what ayleth the?
Who answered: gyue me a blessyng: for thou hast geuen me a south lande: geue me also springes of water. And he gaue her sprynges of water, bothe aboue and benethe.
Thys is the enheritaunce of the trybe of the children of Iuda by their kynredes.
And the vttmost cyties of the tribe of the children of Iuda, towarde the coastes of Edom southwarde, were: Kabzel, Eder Ꟶ Iagur:
kinah, Dimonah, and Adada:
kedes, Hazor and Iethnan:
ziph, Telem and Baloth,
Hazor, Hadathah, karioth, Hesron (which is Hazor)
Eman, Sami, and Moladah:
Hazargadah, Hasmon Ꟶ Bethpheleth:
Hasar sual, Bersabe, and Bazothah:
Baalah, Iim, and Azen:
Eltholad, Cecill, and Horma:
zikelag, Medemenah Ꟶ Sensenah:
Labaoth, Selhim, Ain and Rimon: all these cyties are twentye and nyne with their villages.
And in the lowe contreye they had Esthaol, zareah, and Asenah:
zoneah, Enganim, Thaphuah Ꟶ Enam:
Iarmuth Adulam, Socoh, Ꟶ Azkah:
Saarem, Adithaim, Gederah, and Gederothaim: Fourtene cyties with their villages.
zenan, Hadazah, and Magdalgad:
Deleam, Mizpa, and Iektheel:
Lachis, Bazcath and Eglon:
Cabon, Lahamam, and Cethli
Gaderoth, Bethdagon, Maamah and Makedah: Syxtene cyties with their villages.
Lebnah, Ether, and Asan:
Iephthah, Asnah, and Nezib:
keilah, kahezip and Maresah: nyne cyties wyth theyr vyllages.
Akron with her townes Ꟶ villages.
From Akron Ꟶ from the west, all that lyeth aboute Asdod wt their villages.
Asdod with hertownes Ꟶ villages. Azah with her townes Ꟶ villages, euen vnto the ryuer of Egypte and the great see was their coaste.
And in the mountaynes, they had Samir Iathir, and Socoh,
Danah: and kariah senath, which is Dabir:
Anab, Esthemoh, Ꟶ Anim,
Gozen, Holon, Ꟶ Giloh, a leuen cyties with their villages.
Arab, Dumah, Ꟶ Esean:
Ianim, Beththaphuah Ꟶ Apheah.
Humatah, Ꟶ kariath arbe: which is Hebron and zior: nyne cyties wyth their villages.
Maon, Carmel, Siph, Ꟶ Iutah:
Iesraell, Iukadan, and Sanoch:
Cain, Gabaah, and Thamnah: ten cyties with their village
Halhull Bethzur and Gedor:
Maarath, Bethanoth, Ꟶ Elthecon: Sixe cyties with their villages.
Kariath Baal whych is kariath Iarim and Harabba: two cyties with their villages.
In the wildernesse they had Betharabah, Meddin Ꟶ Sacacah:
Nebson, the cytie of salt, and Engaddi: Syxe cyties wyth their villages.
Neuertheles, the Iebusites that were the enhabiters of Ierusalem, coulde not the children of Iuda cast out. But the Iebusites dwell with the children of Iuda vnto this daye.
And the lotte of the children of Ioseph felle from Iordan by Iericho, vnto the water of Iericho Estward, and to the wildernesse that goeth vp from Iericho thorow out mount Bethel:
Ꟶ goeth out from Bethel to Lus, Ꟶ runneth alonge vnto the borders of Arcimataroth:
Ꟶ goeth downe agayne westard euen to the coaste of Iaphlethi, and vnto the coaste of Bethhoron the nether, and to Gasor, and the endes of their coostes leaue at the west see.
And so the children of Ioseph Manasses Ꟶ Ephraim toke their enheritaunce.
And the border of the children of Ephraim was by their kinreds. Their border on the east syde, was: Ataroth, Ador, euen vnto Bethhoron the vpper,
Ꟶ went out westward to Machmathah on the Northside, and returneth Estward vnto Thaanath Silo, and past it on the Estside vnto Ianoah,
Ꟶ went downe from Ianoah to Atharoth Ꟶ Naarath, Ꟶ came to Iericho, Ꟶ went out at Iordan.
And their border went from Thaphuah westwarde vnto the ryuer kanah, and the endes were the west see. This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of the children of Ephraim by their kynredes.
And the separate cyties for the children of Ephraim, were amonge the enheritaunce of the children of Manasses: euen the cyties with their villages.
And they draue not out the Cananites y dwelte in Gasor: but the Cananites dwell amonge the Ephraites vnto this daye, and serue vnder tribute.
This was the lotte of the tribe of Manasses, which was the Eldest sonne of Ioseph. And Machir the Eldest sonne of Manasses which was the father of Gilead (and a man of warre) had Gilead and Basan,
This was the possession of the rest of the children of Manasses by their kinredes: Namely, of the children of Abiezer: the children of Helek: the children of Ariel: the children of Sichem, the children of Hepher: the children of Semida: for these were the male children of Manasses the sonne of Ioseph by their kinredes.
But zelaphead the sonne of Hepher, the sonne of Gilead, the sonne of Machir, the sonne of Manasses, had no sonnes but daughters whose names are these: Mahela, Noa, Hagla, Melcha Ꟶ Thirza:
which came before Eleazar the preaste, Ꟶ before Iosua the sonne of Nun, Ꟶ before the Lordes saying: the Lorde commaunded Moses to geue vs an enheritaunce amonge oure brethren. And therfore according to the commaundement of the Lord, he gaue them an enherytaunce amonge the brethren of their father.
And there felle ten porcyons to Manasses, besyde the lande of Gilead Ꟶ Basan, which is on the other syde Iordan:
because the daughters of Manasses dyd enherett amonge hys sonnes. And Manasses other sonnes, had the lande of Gilead.
And the cooste of Manasses was from Aser to Machmathah that lieth before Sichem and went a longe on the ryght hande, euen vnto the enhabiters of Entaphuah,
Ꟶ the land of Thaphuah belonged to Manasses, whych Thaphuah is besyde the border of Manasses, and besyde the border of the children of Ephraim.
And the cooste descended vnto the ryuer Canah southwarde, euen to the ryuer of the cyties of Ephraim, and betwene the cyties of Manasses. The cooste of Manasses wente also on the northsyde to the ryuer, Ꟶ the endes of it go out at the see:
so that the south pertayned to Ephraim, Ꟶ the northe to Manasses, and the see is hys border. And they mette togeather in Aser northwarde, and in Isacar eastwarde.
And Manasses had in Isacar Ꟶ in Aser, Bethsean, Ꟶ her townes: Iiblean, and hir townes: Ꟶ the enhabitoures of Dor, wyth the townes: pertaynyng to the same: Ꟶ the enhabitoures of Endor with the townes of the same: and the enhabitoures of Thaanath with her townes: and the enhabitoures of Magedo with the townes of the same, euen thre contreys.
Yet the children of Manasses coulde not ouercome those cyties. But the Cananites presumed to dwell in the same land,
Neuerthelesse, assone as the children of Israel were waxed strong, they put the Cananites vnder tribute, but expelled them not.
And the chyldren of Ioseph spake vnto Iosua saying: why hast thou geuen me but one lotte and one porcyon to enheret, seing I am a great people, Ꟶ for as moche as the Lorde hath blessed me hitherto?
and Iosua answered them: yf thou be moche people, then gett the vp to the wodde contreye, and prepare for thy selffe there in the lande of the Pheresites Ꟶ of the Giauntes, yf mounte Ephraim be to narowe for the.
And the children of Ioseph sayd: The hill is not ynough for vs: Ꟶ all the Cananites that dwel in the lowe contreye haue charettes of yron, Ꟶ so haue they that enhabite Bethsean, and the townes of the same, Ꟶ they also dwel in the valeye of Iezreel.
And Iosua sayde vnto the house of Ioseph, Ephraim Ꟶ Manasses: ye be moche people, and haue great power, Ꟶ shall not therfore haue one lotte.
Therfore the hill shalbe youres, Ꟶ ye shall cut downe the wodd that is in it: Ꟶ the endes of it shalbe youres, yf ye cast out the Cananites which haue yron charettes, Ꟶ are very stronge.
And the whole congregacion of the children of Israel came together at Silo, and set vp the tabernacle of witnesse there, and the lande was in subieccion before them.
And there remayned amonge the children of Israel seuen tribes, whych had not yet receaued their enheritaunce.
And Iosua sayd vnto the children of Israel: how long are ye so slacke to come, and possesse the lande which the Lord God of youre fathers hath geuen you?
Geue out from amonge you for euery trybe thre men, that I maye sende them. And that they maye ryse, and walke thorowe the lande and distribute it according to the enheritaunce therof, and come agayne to me.
And let them deuyde it vnto them in to seuen partes. And Iuda shal abyde in their coaste on the south, and the house of Ioseph shall stande in their coastes on the northe.
Descrybe ye the lande therfore into seuen partes, and bryng the descripcion hether to me, and I shall cast lottes for you here before the Lord oure God.
But the Leuites haue no parte among you, for the preasthode of the lorde is their enheritaunce. And God, and Ruben, and halfe the tribd of Manasses haue receaued their enheritaunce beyonde Iordan eastwarde, which Moses the seruaunt of the Lorde gaue them.
And the men arose, Ꟶ went their waye. And Iosua charged them that went to describe the lande, saying: departe, Ꟶ go thorowe the lande, and describe it, Ꟶ come agayne to me, that I maye here cast lottes for you before the Lorde in Silo.
And the men departed, Ꟶ walked thorowe the lande, Ꟶ described it by cyties into seuen partes, in a booke, and retourned to Iosua into the hoste at Silo.
And Iosua cast lottes for them in Silo before the Lorde, and there Iosua deuyded the land vnto the children of Israell, to eche their porcion.
And the lotte of the tribe of the children of Beniamin came vp according to their kynredes. And the coaste of their lotte came out betwene the children of Iuda and the children of Ioseph.
And their north coaste was from Iordan, and went vp to the syde of Iericho on the northsyde, Ꟶ went vp thorowe the mountaynes westward, Ꟶ they ended at the wildernesse of Bethauen:
and went from thence to the southsyde of Lus (the same is Bethel) Ꟶ descended agayne to Atrothadar, vnto the hylle that lyeth on the southe syde of the nether Bethhoron.
And the coaste turneth thence, Ꟶ compaseth the corner of the see southwarde, euen from the hill that lyeth before Bethhoron southwarde, Ꟶ goeth out at kiriathbaal which is kiriath Iarim, a cytie of the children of Iuda: this is the west quarter:
Ꟶ the south coaste goeth from the edge of kiriathiarim, and gothe out westwarde, and thence it turneth to the waterwell of Nephthoah,
Ꟶ commeth downe agayne to the edge of the hill, that lyeth before the valeye of the sonne of Hennon, euen in the valeye of the Giauntes northwarde and descendeth into the valeye of Hennon besyde Iebusy southwarde, and gothe downe to the well of Rogell,
and compaseth from the north, and goeth forth to the well of the sonne, and departeth from thence to the places of Geliloth, which are toward the goyng vp vnto Adomim: Ꟶ goeth downe to the stone of Bohan the sonne of Ruben:
Ꟶ then goeth alonge towarde the syde of the playne, northwarde: and goeth downe into the feldes:
and goeth along to the syde of Bethhaglah northwarde, Ꟶ endeth at the pointe of the salt see north therfrom, euen at the south ende of Iordan. This is the southe coaste.
And Iordan kepeth in this coast on the east syde, and this is the enheritaunce of the children of Beniamin by their coastes rounde aboute thorow out their kynredes.
These were the cyties of the trybes of the children of Beniamin thorow out theire kynredes: Iericho, Bethhaglah, Ꟶ the playne of Kaziz:
Betharabah, zamarim, Ꟶ Bethel:
Auim, Pharah, and Ophrah:
Chepar Ammona, Ophni, Ꟶ Gabai, twelue cyties with their villages.
Gibeon, Ramah, Ꟶ Beroth:
Mazphah, Caphairah, and Mozah:
Reken, Iarephel, and Tharelah,
zela, Eleph, and Iebusi, which is Ierusalem, Gibeath, and kiriath, fourtene cyties with their villages. This is the enheritaunce of the children of Beniamin thorowe out their kynredes,
And the seconde lotte came out for the trybe of the children of Simeon by their kynredes. And their enheritaunce was in the myddes of the enheritaunce of the children of Iuda.
And they had in theyr enheritaunce, Bersabe, Sabe, Ꟶ Moladah,
Hazorsual, Balah, Ꟶ Azem,
Eltholad, Bethul Ꟶ Hormah,
zikelag, Bethmarcaboth Ꟶ Hazetsusah,
Bethlebaoth, and Saruhen thirtene cyties with their villages.
Aim, Remon, Ether, Ꟶ Asan, foure cyties wyth their villages:
Ꟶ therto all the villages that were rounde about these cyties, euen vnto Balaath, Beor, Ꟶ Ramath, southwarde. This is the enheritaunce of the tribe of the children of Simeon thorow out their kiredes.
Out of the lotte of the children of Iuda, came the enheritaunce of the children of Simeon. For the parte of the children of Iuda was to moche for them: and therfore the children of Simeon had their enheritaunce in the enheritaunce of them.
And the thyrde lotte arose for the children of zabulon thorow out their kynredes. And the coastes of their enheritaunce came to Sarid,
Ꟶ went vp westwarde, and to Marialah, and reached to Dabaseth, and came thence to the ryuer that lyeth before Iokneuen:
Ꟶ turned from Sarid eastwarde towarde the sonne rysyng vnto the border of Chisloth Thabor: and then goeth out to Dabereth, Ꟶ goeth vp to Iaphia:
and from thence goeth a longe eastwarde, to Gethah, Iepher, Ithah, Ꟶ Iazin, Ꟶ goeth to Remon, Methoar, Ꟶ Neoh.
And compaseth it on the northe syde to Nathan, Ꟶ endeth in the valeye of Iephthahel.
And Iatath, Nahalol, Semron, Iedalah, and Bethlehem: twelue cyties wyth their villages.
This is the enheritaunce of the chyldren of zabulon thorowe out their kynredes, and these are the cyties with their villages.
And the fourth lott came out for the children of Isacar by theyr kinredes.
And their coast was Iesraelah, Casuloth, Ꟶ Sunem.
Hapharaim, Sion, and Anaharath:
Harabith kision, and Abez:
Rameth. Enganim, Enhadah, Ꟶ Bethphazez.
And his coaste reacheth to Thabor, Ꟶ Sahazimah Ꟶ Bethsames, and endeth at Iordan, Syxtene cyties with there villages.
This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of the children of Isacar by their kynredes, And these are the cyties with their villages.
And the fifte lotte cam out for the trybe of the children of Aser by their kynredes.
And their coaste was: Helkath, Hali, Beten Ꟶ Achsap:
Alamelech, Amaad and Miseal: Ꟶ came to Carmel westwarde, Ꟶ to Sihor Labanath,
and turneth towarde the sonne rysyng to Bethdagon, and commeth to zabulon Ꟶ to the valeye of Iephthahell, towarde the northsyde of Bethemek Ꟶ Negel, Ꟶ goeth out on the lifte syde of Cabul:
Ꟶ to Hebron, Rohob, Ramon, Ꟶ kanah, euen vnto great Sidon.
And then the coast turneth to Ramah and to the strong cytie of zor, and turneth to Hozah, Ꟶ endeth at the see, by the possession of Achzibah:
Amah also Ꟶ Aphek and Rohob: Twentye and two cities with their villages.
This is the enheritaunce of the children of Aser by their kynredes: These are the cyties with their villages.
And the Sixte lotte cam out for the children of Nephthali by their kynredes.
And their coaste was from Heleph Ꟶ from Elom to zaananim, Adami, Nekeb and Iabneel euen to Lakum, and doth go out at Iordan.
And then the coast turneth westwarde to Asanoth Thabor, and then goeth out from thence to Hukokah, and reacheth to zabulon on the southe syde, Ꟶ goeth to Aser on the west syde, and to Iuda vpon Iordan towarde the sonne rysynge.
And their stronge cyties are zidin, zer, Hamah, Racath and Cenereth,
Adainah, Hermah Ꟶ Hazor:
kedes, Edrai, and Enhazor:
Ieron, Magdelel: Horen, Bethanah Ꟶ Bethsames: nynetene cyties wt their villages.
This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of the children of Nephthali by their kynredes: these also are the cyties Ꟶ their villages.
And the seuenth lotte came out for the trybe of the children of Dan by their kynredes.
And the coaste of their enheritaunce was: zaraah, Esthaol. Irsames,
Saelabin, Atalon Iethlah:
Eglon Ꟶ Thennathah Ꟶ Akaron:
Elthekeh, Gibethon Ꟶ Baalath:
Iehud Banebarak Ꟶ Gathermon,
Meiericon and Aarcon, wt the border that lyeth before Iapho.
And the coastes of the children of Dan went out from them. And the children of Dan went vp to fyght agaynst Lesen, and toke it, and smote it with the edge of the swerde, and conquered it, Ꟶ dwelt therin, Ꟶ called it Dan after the name of Dan their father.
This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of the children of Dan in their kynredes: these also are the cyties with their villages,
When they had made an ende of deuydyng the lande by her coastes, the children of Israell gaue an enheritaunce vnto Iosua the sonne of Nun amonge them,
according to the worde of the Lorde they gaue him the cytie which he asked, euen Thamnath serah in mounte Ephraim And he bylte the cytie Ꟶ dwelt therin.
These are the enheritaunces which Eleazar the preast and Iosua the sonne of Nun, and the auncient fathers of the trybes of the children of Israel deuided by lotte in Siloh before the Lorde, in the dore of the tabernacle of witnesse, and so they made an ende of deuiding the contreye.
The Lorde also spake vnto Iosua sayinge:
Speake to the children of Israel, and saye: Appointe out from amonge you cyties of refuge, wherof I spake vnto you by the hand of Moses,
that the slear that killetth any person vnwares and vnwittinglye, maye flee thether. And those cyties shalbe youre refuge from the auenger of bloud.
And he that doth flee vnto one of those cyties, shall stande at the entryng of the gate of the cytie, and shall shewe hys cause in the eares of the elders of the cytie. And they shall take him into the cytie vnto them, Ꟶ geue hym a place, that he maye dwell amonge them.
And yf the auenger of bloude folowe after him, they shall not deliuer the slear into his hande: because he smote his frende ignorantlye, and hated hym not before tyme.
And he shall dwell in the sayde cytie vntill he stande before the congregation in Iudgement, and vntill the death of the hye preaste that shalbe in those dayes: for then shall the slear retourne, and come vnto his awne cytie, and vnto his awne house, and vnto the cytie from whence he fled.
And they sanctified kedes in Galile, in mount Nephthali, and Sichem in mount Ephraim, and kiriatharbe (which is Hebron) in the mountaine of Iuda.
And on the other syde Iordan ouer agaynst Iericho estwarde, they appointed Bozor in the wildernesse vpon the playne, out of the tribe of Ruben: Ꟶ Ramoth in Gilead out of the trybe of Gad: and Gosan in Basan out of the trybe of Manasses.
These were the cyties appoynted for all the children of Israell, and for the straunger that soiourned amonge them, that whosoeuer killed any person ignorantlye, the same might flee thether, Ꟶ shulde not die by the hand of the auenger of bloude, vntill he stode before the congregacion.
And then came the principall fathers of the Leuites vnto Eleazar the preaste, and vnto Iosua the sonne of Nun, and vnto the auncient fathers that were ouer the trybes of the children of Israel,
Ꟶ spake vnto them at Silo in the lande of Canaan, saying: the Lorde commaunded by Moses, to geue vs cyties to dwell in, with the suburbes therof, for oure catell.
And the children of Israell gaue vnto the Leuites out of their enheritaunce at the bidding of the Lorde these cyties folowing wt their Suburbes.
And the lotte cam out for the kynred of the Cahathites: and the children of Aaron the preaste, which were of the Leuites, had geuen them by lott, out of the trybe of Iuda, out of the trybe of Simeon, and out of the trybe of Beniamin: thirtene cyties.
And the reast of the children of Cahath had by lotte, out of the kynredes of the trybe of Ephraim, out of the trybe of Dan, and out of the halfe trybe of Manasses: ten cyties.
And the children of Gerson had by lotte out of the kynredes of the trybe of Isacar, and out of the trybe of Aser, out of the trybe of Nephthali Ꟶ out of the other halfe trybe of Manasses in Basan: thirtene cyties.
And the children of Merari by their kynredes, had out of the trybe of Ruben, and out of the trybe of Gad, and out of the trybe of zabulon, twelue cyties:
And the children of Israell gaue by lotte vnto the Leuites these cyties with their Suburbes, as the Lord commaunded by Moses.
And they gaue out of the trybe of the children of Iuda, Ꟶ out of the trybe of the children of Simeon, these cyties by name:
which the children of Aaron being of the kynredes of the Cahathites, Ꟶ of the children of Leui, obtayned: for theirs was the fyrst lotte.
And they gaue them kariath Arbe of the father of Enack (which is Hebron) in the hyll contreye of Iuda, with the Suburbes of the same rounde about it.
But the londe that pertayned to the cytie, and the villages therof, gaue they to Caleb the sonne ne of Iephune, to be his possession.
And thus they gaue to the children of Aaron the preast, a cyte, to the which the slayer might flye: euen Hebron with her Suburbes: Libna with her Suburbes:
Ꟶ Iathir with her Suburbes, Ꟶ Estimoa with her Suburbes:
Holon wt her Suburbes, Dabir with her Suburbes:
Ain with her Suburbes: Iutah with her Suburbes: Bethsames with her Suburbes: nyne cities out of those two trybes.
And out of the trybe of Beniamin, they gaue Gibeon with her Suburbes: Gaba wt her Suburbes:
Anatoth with her Suburbes: Almon with her Suburbes: foure cyties.
All these cyties of the children of Aaron preastes, were thirtine cyties with theyr Suburbes.
And the kynredes of the children of Cahath that were Leuites: that is to saye the other children of Cahath, had cities geuen them for their lotte, out of the trybe of Ephraim.
For they gaue them the cytie that the slear might flye vnto: Sichem with her Suburbes, in mount Ephraim: and Gazer with her Suburbes,
and Kabzaim with her Suburbes: Ꟶ Bethhoron with her Suburbes: foure cyties.
And out of the trybe of Dan: Eltheke wt her Suburbes: Gibthon with her Suburbes:
and Aialon with her Suburbes, Gathremon with her Suburbes: foure cyties.
And out of the halfe trybe of Manasses, Thanach with her suburbes: and Gathremon with her Suburbes: two cyties.
All the cyties for the other kynredes of the children of Cahath, were ten with their Suburbes.
And vnto the children of Gerson which were of the kynredes of the Leuites, they gaue out of the other halfe trybe of Manasses, the cytie of refuge for the slear: Golan in Basan with her Suburbes: Ꟶ Beestherah with her Suburbes: two cyties.
And out of the trybe of Isacar, kision with her Suburbes: and Daberah with her Suburbes:
Ꟶ Iarimoth with her Suburbes: Enganim with her Suburbes: foure cyties.
And out of the trybe of Aser, Misael with her Suburbes: Abdon wt her Suburbes,
Halakath with her Suburbes: Ꟶ Rohob with her Suburbes: foure cyties.
And out of the trybe of Nephthali, the cytie for the slear to flye vnto: kedes in Galile with her Suburbes: Ꟶ Hamothdor with her Suburbes: Ꟶ Carthan with her Suburbes: thre cities.
All the cities of the Gersonites thorowe out their kynredes, were thirtene cyties with their Suburbes.
And vnto the other kynredes of the children of Merari, the rest of the Leuites, they gaue out of the trybe of zabulon: Iecnam with her Suburbes: Ꟶ Carthah wyth her Suburbes:
Damna with her Suburbes, Ꟶ Nahalal with her Suburbes: foure cyties,
And out of the trybe of Ruben, Bozor with her Suburbes: and Iahelah with her suburbes:
kedmoth with her Suburbes, and Maphaath with her Suburbes: foure cyties.
And out of the trybe of Gad, they gaue the cytie for the slear to flye vnto: Ramoth in Gilead with her Suburbes, and Mahanaim with her suburbes,
Hesbon with her suburbes: Ꟶ Iaser with her suburbes: foure cyties in all,
so that all the cyties of the children of Merari thorow out their kynredes (which were the rest of the kynredes of the Leuites) were by their lot, twelue cyties.
And all the cyties that the Leuites had among the possession of the children of Israel were .xlviii. with their suburbes.
And these cyties laye euery one seuerally, hauyng their suburbes rounde aboute them thorow out all the sayde cyties.
And the Lorde gaue vnto Israel all the lande which he sware to geue vnto their fathers. And they conquered it, and dwelt therin.
And the Lorde gaue them rest rounde aboute, accordyng to all that he sware vnto their fathers: and there stode not a man of all their ennemyes before them. The Lorde also delyuered all theyr enemyes into their handes.
There skaped nothing of all the good thynges, which the Lord had sayde vnto the house of Israell, But all came to passe.
Then Iosua called vnto the Rubenites, the Gaddites and to the halfe trybe of Manasses,
and sayde vnto them: ye haue kept all that Moses the seruaunt of the Lorde commaunded you, and haue obeyed my voyce in all that I commaunded you:
ye haue not lefte youre brethren of a long ceason vnto this daye, but haue kept the commaundement of the Lorde youre God.
And now that the Lorde hath geuen rest vnto youre brethren as he promysed them, therfore retourne ye, and go vnto youre tentes, Ꟶ vnto the lande of youre possession, which Moses the seruaunt of the Lorde gaue you on the other syde Iordan.
But in any wise take diligent hede, and do the commaundement and lawe, whych Moses the seruaunt of the Lorde charged you: that ye loue the Lorde youre God, and walke in all hys wayes, and kepe hys commaundementes, and cleaue vnto him, and serue him with all youre hertes, Ꟶ all youre soules.
And so Iosua blessed them and sent them awaye. And they went vnto theyr tentes.
Unto the one halfe of the trybe of Manasses Moses gaue possession in Basan: Ꟶ vnto the other halfe therof gaue Iosua amonge their brethren on this syde Iordan westwarde. And Iosua sent them awaye also vnto their tentes, and blessed them,
and sayd vnto them: retourne with moche ryches vnto youre tentes, and with a great multitude of catell, with syluer and golde, with brasse, and yron, and with moch rayment and deuide the spoyle of youre enemyes with youre brethren.
And the children of Ruben, the children of Gad, and halfe the trybe of Manasses, returned, and departed from the children of Israel out of Silo (which is in the lande of Canaan) to go vnto the contreye of Giliad, to the lande of their possession, which they had opteyned, according to the worde of the Lorde by the hande of Moses.
And when they came vnto the place of Geliloth besyde Iordan (that is in the lande of Canaan) there the children of Ruben, the children of Gad and the halfe trybe of Manasses, buylt an altare faste by Iordan, and that a great altare to se to.
Which when the children of Israel hearde of, they sayd: beholde, the children of Ruben, the children of Gad, and the halfe trybe of Manasses haue buylt an altare in the forefronte of the lande of Canaan euen in Geliloth besyde Iordan on the syde of the children of Israell.
And when the children of Israel heard of it, the whole congregacion of the children of Israell gathered them together to Silo, to make batell agaynst them.
And the children of Israell sent vnto the children of Ruben, and to the children of Gad, and to the halfe trybe of Manasses, into the lande of Gilead, Phinehes the sonne of Eleazar the preaste,
Ꟶ wyth him ten Lordes, of euery chefe house a Lord, thorow out all the tribes of Israell, which were heades of their fathers housholdes among the thousandes of Israel.
And they went vnto the children of Ruben, and to the children of Gad, Ꟶ to the children of the halfe trybe of Manasses, vnto the lande of Gilead, and they spake with them, saying.
Thus saye the hole congregacion of the Lorde what transgression is this that ye haue transgressed agaynst the God of Israell, to turne awaye this daye from the Lord in that ye haue bylded you an altare, for to rebelle this daye against the Lorde?
Is the wicked deade of Peor to lyttell for vs, wherof we are not yet cleansed vnto thys daye, and for the which there was in the congregacion of the people a plage of the Lord?
Ye also are turned awaye thys daye from the Lorde. And seynge ye rebelle to daye agaynst the Lorde, it wil come to passe, that tomorow he shall be wroth wt all the congregacion of Israel.
Notwithstandyng yf ye thinke, that the lande of youre possession is vncleane, then come ouer vnto the lande of the possession of the Lorde, where in the Lordes tabernacle dwelleth, Ꟶ take possession amonge vs. But transgresse not agaynst the Lorde, nor prouoke vs, to buylde you anye other aulter, saue the aulter of the Lorde oure God.
Dyd not Acan the sonne of zareth trespase in the excommunicate thing, Ꟶ wrath fell on all the cogregacion of Israel, which notwithstandinge that he was but one man, yet he alone perisshed not for his wickednesse?
Then the children of Ruben Ꟶ the children of Gad, and halfe the trybe of Manasses answered, and sayde vnto the heades ouer the thousandes of Israel.
The God of goddes, the Lorde, God of goddes, euen the Lord he knoweth, Ꟶ Israel also shall knowe. If it be to rebelle, or to transgresse agaynst the Lorde, then thou Lorde saue vs not thys daye.
Or elles if we haue bylt vs an aulter to turne from folowing the Lorde, or to offer theron burnt offryng or meatoffringe, or to offer peace offringes theron: let the Lorde require it.
And yf we haue not rather done it of a carefulnes Ꟶ of a sure occasion, sayenge: In tyme to come your children might saye vnto oures: what haue ye to do with the Lorde God of Israel?
the Lorde hath made Iordan a border betwene vs and you (ye children of Ruben and of Gad) ye haue no parte therfore in the Lorde: and so shall youre children make oure children ceasse from fearinge the Lorde.
Therfore we sayd: We wil make vs an aulter, not for burntofferinge, nor for sacrifice,
but for a witnesse betwene vs and you, and oure generacyons after vs, that we shulde serue the Lorde, with oure offeringes, sacrifices and peace offeringes before him: and that youre children shulde not saye to oures in time to come: ye haue no parte in the Lorde.
Therfore sayde we, that if they shulde so saye to vs or to oure generacions in tyme to come, that we wolde saye agayne: Beholde the fassion of the aulter of the Lorde, which oure fathers made, nether for burntofferynges nor sacrifices, but for a witnesse betwene vs and you.
God forbyd, that we shuld rebell agaynst the Lorde, and turne thys daye from after him, Ꟶ buyld any other aulter for burntofferinges, oblacions, or sacrifices, saue the altare of the Lord oure God, that is before his tabernacle.
And when Phinehes the Preaste, and the Lordes of the congregacion and heades ouer the thousandes of Israell which were with him, hearde these wordes that the children of Ruben, and the children of Gad and the children of Manasses spake, they were well content.
And Phinehes the sonne of Eleazar the preaste sayde vnto the children of Ruben, and to the children of Gad, Ꟶ to the children of Manasses: this daye we perceaue, that the Lord is among vs, because ye haue not done this trespase agaynst the Lorde: Now ye haue rydde the children of Israell out of the hande of the Lorde.
And Phinehes the sonne of Eleazar the Preaste wt the Lordes, retourned from the children of Ruben, and from the children of Gad out of the lande of Gilead vnto the lande of Canaan, to the children of Israel, and brought them this worde agayne.
And the sayeng pleased the children of Israel, and they blessed God, and dyd not entende to go agaynst them in batell, Ꟶ to destroye the lande which the children of Ruben and Gad dwelt in.
And the children of Ruben, and the children of Gad called the aulter: Oure witnesse, that the Lorde is God.
And it came to passe a longe ceason after that the Lorde had geuen reste vnto Israel from all theyr enemyes rounde about, that Iosua waxed olde, and was stricken in age.
And Iosua called for all Israel, and for their elders, their heades their Iudges and officers, and sayde vnto them: I am olde and stryken in age.
And ye haue sene all that the Lorde youre God hath done vnto all these nacions befo you, how the Lorde youre God hath fought for you.
Beholde, I haue subdued vnto you these nacions that remayne, to be an enheritaunce for youre tribes: euen from Iordan, and (from the lande) of all the nacions that I haue destroyed, euen vnto the great See westwarde.
And the Lorde youre God shall expell them before you, and cast them from out of youre sight, and ye shall conquere their lande, as the Lorde youre God hath saide vnto you.
Go to therfore as strongly as ye maye, that ye take hede and do all that is written in the boke of the lawe of Moses, that ye vowe not a syde therfrom, to the ryght hand or to the lefte:
and lest that whan ye come amonge these nacions, (euen amonge these that are left with you) ye make mencion or sweare by the names of their goddes: and that ye nether serue them, nor bowe youre selues vnto them.
But that ye sticke fast vnto the Lorde youre God, as ye haue done vnto this daye.
So shall the Lorde cast out before you great nacions and myghtye, as no man hath bene able to stande before you hitherto.
One man of you shall chase a thousande: for the Lorde youre God he fighteth for you, as he hath promised you.
Take good hede therfore vnto youre selues, that ye loue the Lorde youre God.
Els, yf ye go backe and cleaue vnto the rest of these nacions that remayne wyth you, and shall make mariages with them, Ꟶ go in vnto them, and they to you:
be ye sure, that the Lorde youre God will nomore cast out all these nacions from before you. But they shalbe snares and trappes vnto you and scourges in youre sydes, and thornes in youre eyes, vntyll ye peryshe from of thys good lande, whych the Lorde youre God hath geuen you.
And behold, this daye, do I entre in to the waye of all the worlde, Ꟶ ye knowe in all your hertes Ꟶ in all youre soules, that nothyng hath fayled of all the good thynges which the Lord youre God promysed you:
But all are come to passe, Ꟶ nothyng hath fayled therof. Therfore, as all good thinges are come vpon you, which the Lorde youre God promysed you, so shall the Lorde bryng vpon you all euell, vntyll he haue destroyed you from of thys good lande, whych the Lorde youre God hath geuen you,
when ye haue transgressed the appointment of the Lorde youre God, which he commaunded you: and haue gone and serued straunge goddes, and bowed youre selues to them. Then shall the wrath of the Lorde waxe whote vpon you, Ꟶ ye shall peryshe quicklye from of the good lande, which he hath geuen you,
And Iosua geathered all the trybes of Israell to Sichem, and called for the elders of Israell, and for theyr heades, Iudges and officers, and they presented them selues before God.
And Iosua sayde vnto all the people: thus sayth the Lord God of Israell: youre fathers dwelt on the other syde of the floud in olde tyme: euen Thareh the father of Abraham Ꟶ of Nachor, and serued straunge goddes.
And I toke youre father Abraham from the other syde of the floude, Ꟶ brought him thorow out all the lande of Canaan, Ꟶ multiplied his seed, and gaue him Isahac.
And I gaue vnto Isahac, Iacob Ꟶ Esau. And I gaue vnto Esau mount Seir, to possesse it. But Iacob and his children went downe into Egypte.
I sent Moses also Ꟶ Aaron. And I plaged Egypte: Ꟶ whan I had so done among them,
I brought you out, and I brought youre fathers out of Egypte. And as they came vnto the see, the Egypcians folowed after youre fathers with charettes Ꟶ horsmen, vnto the redd see.
And whan they cried vnto the Lord, the Lord put darcknesse betwene you and the Egypcians, and brought the see vpon them, and couered them. And youre eyes haue sene what I haue done to the Egypcians. And ye dwelt in the wildernesse a longe ceason.
And I brought you into the lande of the Amorites, which dwelt on the other syde Iordan. And they fought with you: and I gaue them into your hand, that ye myght conquere their contre. And I destroyed them from out of youre syght.
Then Balak the sonne of ziphor, king of Moab arose, Ꟶ warred agaynst Israell, Ꟶ sent Ꟶ called Balaam the sonne of Beor for to cursse you.
But I wolde not herken vnto Balaam, Ꟶ therfore he rather blessed you: And so I deliuered you out of his hande.
And ye went ouer Iordan, and came vnto Iericho, and the men of Iericho fought agaynst you: the Amorites, Pheresites, Canaanites, Hethites, Girgosites, Heuites, Ꟶ Iebusites, and I deliuered them in to youre hande.
And I sent hornettes before you, whych cast them out of youre sight: euen the two kinges of the Amorites: but not with your owne swerde, or with youre owne bowe.
And I haue geuen you a lande, in which ye dyd no laboure, and cyties which you bilt not, and which ye dwell in: vineyardes also, and Olyue trees which ye planted not, and whereof ye do eate.
Now therfore feare the Lorde, Ꟶ serue him in perfectnesse and truthe: And put awaye the goddes, whych youre fathers serued on the other syde of the floude, and in Egypte, and serue ye the Lorde.
And yf it seme euell vnto you to serue the Lorde, then chose you this daye whom you will serue: whether the goddes which youre fathers serued (that were on the other syde of the floude) ether the Goddes of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell. As for me and my howse, we will serue the Lorde.
The people answered and sayde: God forbyd, that we shulde forsake the Lorde, and serue straunge goddes.
For the Lorde oure God, he it is that brought vs and oure fathers out of the lande of Egypte, and from the howse of bondage, and which dyd those great miracles in oure syght, Ꟶ preserued vs in all the waye that we went, Ꟶ amonge all the nacions which we came thorow.
And the Lorde dyd cast out before vs all the nacions, specially the Amorites, which dwelt in the lande. And therfore will we also serue the Lorde, for he is oure God.
And Iosua sayd vnto the people, Ye can not serue the Lorde: for he is an holye God, and a gelous God, and cannot beare youre iniquite and synne.
Yf ye forsake the Lorde and serue straunge goddes, he will turne and do you euell, and consume you, after that he hath done you good.
And the people sayde vnto Iosua: naye, but we will serue the Lorde.
And Iosua sayde vnto the people: ye are witnesses youre selues, that ye haue chosen you the Lorde, to serue him: and they sayd: we are wytnesses.
Then put awaye (sayde he) the straunge goddes which are amonge you, and bowe youre hertes vnto the Lorde God of Israell.
The people sayde vnto Iosua: the Lord oure God will we serue, and his voyce will we obeye,
And so Iosua made a couenant with the people the same daye, and set an ordinaunce and lawe before them in Sichem.
And Iosua wrote these wordes in the boke of the lawe of God, and toke a great stone, and pitched it on ende in the sayde place, euen vnder an oke that was in the sanctuarye of the Lorde.
And Iosua sayde vnto all the people: beholde, this stone shalbe a witnesse vnto vs, for it hath hearde all the wordes of the Lorde which he spake wyth vs, It shalbe therfore a witnesse vnto you, lest ye denye youre God.
And so Iosua let the people departe, euery man vnto his enheritaunce.
And after these thinges it came to passe, that Iosua the sonne of Nun, the seruaunt of the Lorde died, beyng an hundreth and ten yeres olde.
And they buryed hym in the contrey of hys enheritaunce, euen in Thamnath Sareth, which is in mount Ephraim, on the northsyde of the hill of Gaas.
And Israel serued the Lord all the dayes of Iosua, Ꟶ all the dayes of the elders that ouer lyued Iosua, and whych had knowne all the worckes of the Lorde that he had done for Israel.
And the bones of Ioseph, which the children of Israell brought out of Egypte, buryed they in Sichem in a parcell of grounde, whych Iacob bought of the sonnes of Hemor the father of Sichem, for an hundreth peaces of syluer, and it became the enheritaunce of the children of Ioseph.
And Eleazar the sonne of Aaron dyed, whom they buryed in a hill that pertayned to Phinehes his sonne, which (hill) was geuen him in mount Ephraim.
After the death of Iosua it came to passe, that the children of Israel asked the Lorde saying: who shall go vp for vs against the Cananites, and who shall first fight agaynst them.
And the Lorde sayde: Iuda shall go vp beholde I haue delyuered the lande in to hys handes.
And Iuda sayde vnto Simeon hys brother: come vp with me in my lotte, that we maye fight agaynst the Cananites: And I lykewyse wyll go with the into thy lotte. And so Symeon went with him.
And Iuda went vp, and the Lorde delyuered the Cananites Ꟶ Pheresites into theyr handes. And they slewe of them in Bezek ten thousand men.
And they founde Adoni bezek in Bezek. And they fought against him, and slewe the Cananites and Pheresites.
But Adonibezek fled, Ꟶ they folowed after hym, and caught hym, and cut of his thombes and his great toes.
And Adonibezek sayde: thre skore Ꟶ ten kynges hauing their thombes and great toes cut of, geathered their meate vnder my table: as I haue done, so God hath done to me againe. And they brought him to Ierusalem, and there he dyed.
The children of Iuda fought agaynst Ierusalem, and toke it and smote it wyth the edge of the swerde, and set the cytie on fire,
After warde the children of Iuda went to fight against the Cananites, that dwelt in the mountayne, and towarde the south, Ꟶ in the lowe contreye.
And Iuda went against the Cananites that dwelt in Hebron, which before time was called kariath Arbe. And slew Sesai, Ahiman Ꟶ Thalmai.
And from thence they went to the inhabiters of Dabir, whose name in olde tyme was called kariathsepher.
And Caleb sayde he that smyteth Kariathsepher, Ꟶ taketh it, to him will I geue Acsah my daughter to wyfe.
And Othoniel the sonne of kenez Calebs younger brother toke it: to whom he gaue Acsah hys daughter to wyfe,
and as they went, she counceled hym to aske of her father a felde. And then she lyghted of her asse: and Caleb sayde vnto her: What ayleth the?
She answered vnto hym: geue me a blessynge: for thou hast geuen me a Southward (or drie) lande, geue me also sprynges of water. And Caleb gaue her springes both aboue Ꟶ benethe.
And the children of the kenite Moses father in lawe went vp out of the cytie of palme trees with the children of Iuda into the wyldernesse of Iuda, that lieth in the Southe of Arad, and they went and dwelt amonge the people.
And Iuda went with Simeon his brother, and they slew the Cananites that enhabited zephath, and vtterlye destroyed it, and called the name of the cytie Horma.
And at the last Iuda toke Azah wyth the coastes therof, and Askalon wyth the coastes therof, and Abaron with the coastes therof,
And the lorde was wyth Iuda, and he conquered the mountaynes, but coulde not dryue out that enhabiters of the valeyes because they had charettes of yron.
And they gaue Hebron vnto Caleb, as Moses sayde, And he expelled thence the thre sonnes of Enach.
And the children of Beniamin dyd not cast out the Iebusites, that enhabited Ierusalem, but the Iebusites dwell wyth the chyldren of BenIamin in Ierusalem vnto this daye.
And in lyke maner they that were of the house of Ioseph went vp to Bethel Ꟶ the lord was wyth them,
Ꟶ the house of Ioseph serched out Bethel, which before tyme was called Lus.
And the spyes sawe a man come out of the cytie, and they sayde vnto hym: shew vs the waye into the cytie, and we wyll shewe the mercy.
And whan he had shewed them the waye into the cytie, they smote it wyth the edge of the swerd, but let the man and all hys housholde goo free.
And the man went into the lande of the Hethites, and bylt a cytie, and called the name therof Lus which is the name therof vnto this daye.
Nether dyd Manasses expelle Bethsean with her townes, Thaanach wyth her townes, the enhabitoures of Dor with her townes, the enhabitoures of Ieblaam wyth her townes, nether the enhabitoures of Magedo wyth her townes, but the Cananites were bolde to dwell in the lande.
But it came to passe that as sone as Israell was waxed myghtie, they put the Cananites to tribute and expelled them not.
In lyke maner Ephraim expelled not the Cananytes that dwelt in Gazer, but the Cananytes dwelt stille in Gazer amonge them.
Nether dyd zabulon expelle the enhabytoures of ketron, nether the enhabytoures of Nahalol: But the Cananytes dwelt amonge them, and became trybutaries.
Nether dyd Aser cast out the enhabytoures of Acho, nether the enhabytoures of zidon, Ꟶ of Ahalab, Aczib, Ꟶ Halbah, Aphek, ner of Rohob,
but the Aserites dwelt amonge the Cananites the enhabytoures of the lande, for they might not dryue them out.
Nether dyd Nephthalim dryue out the enhabytoures of Bethsames, nor the enhabytoures of Bethanath, but dwelt amongest the Cananytes the enhabytoures of the lande. Neuerthelesse the enhabytoures of Bethsames Ꟶ of Bethanath became trybutaries vnto them.
And the Amorites troubled the chyldren of Dan in the mountayne, and soffered them not to come downe to the valeye.
And the Amorites were content to dwell in mount Heres in Hailon and in Salabim. And the hand of Ioseph preuayled, so that they became tributaries:
Ꟶ the coaste of the Amorytes was from the goyng vp to Acrabim, and from the rocke vpwarde.
And the angell of the Lorde came vp from Gilgall to Bochim, Ꟶ sayde: I made you to come out of Egypte, and haue brought you vnto the lande which I sware vnto youre fathers. And I sayd: I wyll not breake myne appoyntment that I made with you.
And ye also shall make no couenant wyth the enhabytoures of this lande, but shall breake downe their aultares: Neuertheles ye haue not herkened vnto my voice, why haue ye this done?
Wherfore, I haue lykewyse determyned, that I wyll not cast them out before you: but they shalbe thornes vnto you, and their goddes shalbe a snare vnto you.
And when the angell of the Lorde spake these wordes vnto all the chyldren of Israel, the people cryed out and wepte:
And called the name of the sayde place. Bochim, and offered sacrifyces vnto the Lorde.
And when Iosua had sent the people awaye, the chyldren of Israel went euerye man into hys enheritaunce to possesse the lande.
And the people serued the Lord all the dayes of Iosua, and all the dayes of the elders that out lyued Iosua, and had sene all the great workes of the lord that he dyd for Israel:
and Iosua the sonne of Nun the seruaunt of the Lorde dyed, when he was an hundred Ꟶ ten yeres olde:
whom they buryed in the costes of hys enheritaunce: euen in. Thamnath Hares in mount Ephraim on the northside of the hyll Gaas.
And euen so all that generacyon were put vnto their fathers, and there arose another generacyon after them whych nether knewe the Lorde, nor yet the worckes whych he had done for Israel.
And then the children of Israel dyd wyckedlye in the syght of the lorde, and serued Baalim,
and forsoke the Lorde God of their fathers, whych brought them out of the land of Egypte, and folowed straunge goddes, euen of the goddes of the nacyons that were round aboute them, and bowed them selues vnto them and angred the lorde.
They forsoke the lord, and serued Baal and Astharoth
and the wrath of the lorde waxed hote agaynst Israel, and he delyuered them into the handes of raueners, that spoyled them, and solde them into the handes of their enemyes rounde aboute them, so that they had no power any longer to stande before their enemyes.
But whethersoeuer they went out, the hand of the lord was agaynst them with euell lucke, euen as the lord promysed them, Ꟶ as he sware vnto them. And he punyshed them sore.
Neuerthelesse the lorde raysed vp Iudges, which delyuered them out of the handes of their oppressers,
and yet for all that they wold not harken vnto their Iudges: But rather went a whoryng after straunge goddes, and bowed them selues vnto them, and turned quicklye out of the waye, which their fathers walked in, obeying the commaundementes of the Lord: But they dyd not so.
And when the lord raysed them vp Iudges, he was with the Iudge, and delyuered them out of the handes of their enemyes all the dayes of the Iudge for the Lorde had compassyon ouer their sorowinges, whych they had, by the reason of them that oppressed them Ꟶ vexed them:
yet for all that as sone as the iudge was dead, they turned and dyd worsse that their fathers, in folowinge straunge goddes, and in seruyng them, and ceased not from their owne inuencyons, nor from their malycyouse waye.
And the wrath of the Lorde was moued agaynst Israel, Ꟶ he sayde: because this people hath transgressed myne appointement which I commaunded their fathers, Ꟶ haue not herkened vnto my voyce,
I wyll hence furth not cast out before them one man of the nacyons, which Iosua leaft when he dyed,
that through them I maye proue Israel, whether they wyll kepe the waye of the Lorde, Ꟶ walke therin, as their fathers dyd or not
And so the Lord leaft those nacions, Ꟶ droue them not out ymmedyatlye, nether delyuered them into the hande of Iosua.
These are the nacyons which the lord left, that he myght proue Israel by them: euen as manye of Israell as had not knowen all the warres of Canaam:
Onlye for the lernyng of the generacyon of the children of Israel: that he also myght teach them warre, in asmuch as they that were before them, knew nothing therof,
Of those whom he left, there were fyue lordes of the Philistines, Ꟶ all the Cananites, Ꟶ the Sodonites, and the Heuites that dwelt in mount Libanon: euen from mount Baal Hermon vnto Hemath.
Those remayned to proue Israel by, and to wete, whether they wold herken vnto the commaundementes of the lorde, which he commaunded their fathers by the hand of Moses.
And the children of Israel dwelt amonge the Cananites, Hethites, Amorites, Pheresites, Heuites, and Iubusytes,
Ꟶ toke the daughters of them to be their wyues, Ꟶ gaue their owne daughters to their sonnes, Ꟶ serued their Goddes,
And the children of Israell did wickedlye in the syght of the lord, and forgate the lord their God, and serued Baalim Ꟶ Aseroth.
Therfore the lord was angrye with Israel, Ꟶ delyuered them into the handes of Chusan Risathaim kyng of Mesopotamia, and the children of Israell serued Chusam Risathaim .viii. yeres.
And when the children of Israel cryed vnto the lorde, the lorde stered vp a sauer, to the children of Israel, Ꟶ saued them: one Othoniel the sonne of kenes. Calebs younger brother.
And the sprete of the lorde came vpon him. And he iudged Israel, and went out to warre. And the lorde delyuered Chusan Risathaim kyng of Mesopotamia into his hande, Ꟶ his hande preuayled agaynst Chusan Risathaim.
And the lande had rest fourtye yeres, and Othoniel the sonne of kenes died.
And the children of Israel went to agayne, Ꟶ committed wickednesse in the sight of the lord. And the Lord strengthed Eglon the kyng of the Moabites, agaynst the children of Israel, because they had committed wickednesse before the lord.
And this (Eglon) geathered vnto hym the children of Ammon, and the Amalekites, and went and smote Israel, Ꟶ conquered the citye of Paulme trees.
And so the children of Israel serued Eglon the king of Moab .xviii. yeres.
But when they cryed vnto the lorde, the lorde stered them vp a sauer, Ahud the sonne of Gera the sonne of Iemini a man that coulde do nothing handsomlye with his ryght hande. And by him the chyldren of Israel sent a present vnto Eglon the king of Moab:
but Ahud made him a dagger with two edges, of a cubyte length, Ꟶ he dyd gyrde yt vnto his rayment vpon his right thygh,
and caryed the present vnto Eglon the kynge of Moab: And Eglon was a very fatte man.
And it fortuned that when he had presented the present, he sent the people that bare it awaye,
but he him selfe turned agayne (from the place of grauen ymages, that was by Gilgal) and sayde: I haue a secret errand vnto the, O kyng. Which sayde: kepe sylence. And all that stode before hym, went out from hym.
And Ahud came vnto hym, and in a somer parler, which he had, sat he him selfe alone, and Ahud sayde I haue a message vnto the from God. And he arose out of hys seate.
And Ahud put forth hys lefte hande, Ꟶ toke the dagger from his ryght thyghe, Ꟶ thrust it into hys belye,
and the haft went in after the blade. And the fatte, closed the haft, so that he myght not drawe the dagger out of hys belye, but the dyrt came out.
Ahud gat him out at a posterne dore, and shut the dores of the parler about him, and locked them.
When he was gone out, hys seruauntes came, and whan they sawe that the dores of the parler were locked, they sayde: peraduenture he couereth hys fete in hys somer chamber.
And they taried tyll they were ashamed, and beholde: seyng he opened not the dores of the parler: they toke a keye, and opened them. And beholde, their Lord was fallen downe dead on the erthe.
And Ahud eskaped (whyle they taryed) and was gone beyonde, to the place of the grauen ymages, and eskaped into Seirath.
And when he was come he blewe a trompette in mount Ephraim. And the chyldren of Israel went downe wyth hym from the hyll and he went before them.
And he sayde vnto them, folowe me: for the Lord hath delyuered youre enemyes, the Moabytes into youre hande. And they descended after him, and toke the passages of Iordan, towarde Moab, and soffered not a man to passe ouer.
And they slew of the Moabites the same tyme vpon a ten thousande men, which were all fatte Ꟶ men of warre, Ꟶ there skaped not a man,
so Moab was subdued that daye, vnder the hande of Israel: and the land had rest .lxxx. yeres.
After hym was Samgar the sonne of Anath, whych slewe of the Philistines .vi. hundred men with an oxe goade, and delyuered Israel also.
And the chyldren of Israel beganne agayne to do wickedly in the syght of the Lord, when Ahud was dead.
And the Lord solde them into the hande of Iabin kyng of Canaan, that raygned in Hazor, whose captayne of warre was called Sisara, which dwelt in Haroseth of the gentiles.
And the children of Israel cryed vnto the Lorde: for he had nyne hundred charrettes of yron, Ꟶ twentie yeres he troubled the children of Israel very sore.
And Debora a Prophetysse, the wyfe of Lapidoth Iudged Israel the same tyme,
Ꟶ the same Debora dwelt vnder a paulme tree betwene Ramath and Bethell, in mounte Ephraim. And the children of Israel came vp to her for iudgement.
And she sent Ꟶ called Barak the sonne of Abinoam, out of Kedes Nephthalim, and sayde vnto him. Hath not the Lord God of Israel commaunded the, to leade wt faire wordes men to mounte Thabor, and take with the ten thousande men, of the children of Nephthalim Ꟶ of the children of zabulon?
And I will bryng vnto the to the ryuer kyson, Sisara, the Captayne of warre vnto Iabin, wt his charettes, Ꟶ his people, and will delyuer him into thyne handes.
And Barak sayde vnto her: yf thou wylt go wt me, I will go: But Ꟶ yf thou wilt not come with me, I will not goo:
She sayde: I will suerlye go with the, but this iourney that thou takest, shall not be for thyne honoure, for the Lord shall sell Sisara into the hande of a woman. Debora went with Barak to kedes.
And Barak called zabulon Ꟶ Nephthalim to kedes, Ꟶ led after hym ten thousande men: and Debora went vp with him.
But Haber the kenite (which was of the chyldren of Hobab the father in lawe of Moses) remoued from the other kenytes, Ꟶ pytched hys tente vntyll the playne of zaanaim, whych is by kedes.
And they shewed Sisara, that Barak the sonne of Abinoam was gone vp to mount Thabor.
And Sisara gathered together all his charettes, euen .ix. hundred charettes of yron, Ꟶ all the people that were wt him from of Haroseth of the gentyles, vnto the ryuer of kyson.
And Debora sayde vnto Barak: vp, for this is the daye in which the Lorde hath delyuered Sisara into thyne hande: Is not the Lorde gone out before the? And so Barak went downe from mount Thabor, Ꟶ ten thousande men after him.
But the Lorde destroyed Sisara and all his charettes, Ꟶ all his hoste with the edge of the swerde, before Barak: so that Sisara lyghted downe of his charett, Ꟶ fled awaye on hys fete.
But Barak folowed after the charettes and after the hoste, euen vnto Haroseth of the gentyles. And all the hoste of Sisara fell vpon the edge of the swerde, and there was not a man leafte.
How be it Sisara fled awaye on his fete to the tent of Iael the wyfe of Haber the kenite: for there was peace betwene Iabin the kyng of Hazor, Ꟶ the housholde of Haber the kenite.
And Iael went out to mete Sisara, and sayde vnto him: turne in my lord, turne into me, feare not. And whan he had turned in vnto her into her tent, she couered hym with a mantell.
And he sayd vnto her, geue me a lyttel water to drynk, for I am thirstye. And she opened a bottell of mylke, Ꟶ gaue hym drynck, Ꟶ couered him.
And agayne he sayde vnto her: stande in the dore of the tente, and whan any man doth come and enquere of the, whether there be any man here, thou shalt saye: naye.
Then Iael Habers wyfe toke a nayle of the tente, Ꟶ an hammer in her hand, Ꟶ went softlye vnto hym, and smote the nayle into the temples of his head, and fastened it into the ground, for he slombered sore, and was weery: And so he dyed.
And Beholde, as Barak folowed after Sisara, Iael came out to mete him, Ꟶ sayde vnto him: come, Ꟶ I wyll shew the the man, whom thou sekest. And when he came into her tente: Beholde, Sisara laye deed, Ꟶ the nayle was in his temples.
And so God brought Iaben the kyng of Canaan into subieccyon that daye before the chyldren of Israel.
And the hande of the children of Israel prospered, Ꟶ preuayled agaynst Iaben the kyng of Canaan, vntill they had brought him to naught.
Then Debora Ꟶ Barak the sonne of Abinoam sange the same daye, sayeng:
Prayse ye the Lord, for the auengyng of Israel, and for the people that became so wylling.
Heare O ye kynges, herken o ye prynces: I, euen I, will syng vnto the Lord, I wyl prayse the Lorde God of Israel.
Lord, whan thou wentest out of Seir, whan thou departedst out of the felde of Edom, the erth trembled, Ꟶ the heauens rayned: the cloudes also dropped water.
The mountaynes melted before the lord, euen as dyd Sinai, before the lorde God of Israel.
In the dayes of Samgar the sonne of Anath, in the dayes of Iael the hye wayes were vnoccupied: And the ronners of the pathes walked thorow by wayes.
The inhabiters of the townes were gone, they were gone in Israel, vntyll I Debora came vp, which came vp a mother in Israel.
They chose new goddes, and then had they (the enemye) in the gates, though there were shilde and speare. There was not a child or spere sene amonge fourtye thousande of Israel.
My hart loueth the gouerners of Israel, and them that are willing amonge the people. O prayse ye the Lorde.
Speake ye that ryde on fayre asses, Ꟶ that sitt vppermost in iudgement, Ꟶ walke by the wayes
At the cryeng of the archers amonge the drawers of water, there shall they speake of the righteousnes of the Lorde, his righteousnesse in the vnfenced places of Israel: then shall the people of the Lord go downe to the gates.
Up Debora vp, get the vp, and syng a songe: Aryse Barac, and leade the captiuyte captyue, thou sonne of Abinoam.
Then shall they that remayne, haue domynion of the proudest of the people (of Iabin:) The Lorde shall for my sake haue domynion ouer the myghtie.
Out of Ephraim was there a rote of them agaynst Amaleck, and after the, Beniamin amonge thy people. Out of Machir came rulers, Ꟶ out of zabulon they that gouerne the penne of the wryter.
And of Isachar, there were prynces with Debora, Isachar also and Barac were sent on their fete into the valley, whan in the departing awaye of Ruben there were greate men, and wyse of hert?
Why abodest thou among the shepe foldes, to heare the bleatinges of the flockes, Ꟶ to separate thy selfe awaye wt greate men and wyse of hert?
Gilead also abode beyonde Iordane: and why doth Dan remayne in shippes? Aser contynued on the see shore, and taried in hys decayed places.
But the people of zabulon haue ieoperde their lyues euen vnto the dethe, lyke as did Nephthalim in the hye places of the felde.
The kynges came Ꟶ fought, then fought the kynges of Canaan in Thamnah, by the waters of Negiddo, and wanne no money.
They fought from heauen, euen the starres in their courses fought agaynst Sisera.
The ryuer of Cyson remoued them, that auncient ryuer, the ryuer Cyson: My soule shall treade (hym) downe mightely.
Then were the horse hoffes smytten asunder by the meames of the praunsinges that their mightye men made.
Curse ye the cite of Meros (sayd the angell of the Lord) cursse the inhabitours therof, because they came not to helpe the Lorde, to helpe the Lorde with the myghtie.
Iael the wife of Haber the kenyte shalbe blessed aboue other wemen, blessed shall she be aboue other wemen in the tent.
He asked water, Ꟶ she gaue him mylck, she brought furth butter in a lordly disshe.
She put hir hande to the nayle, and hir right hande to the smythes hammer: wt the hammer smote she Sisera, and smote hys heade, wounded him, Ꟶ pearsed his temples.
He bowed hym downe at hir fete, he fell downe Ꟶ laye still: At hir fete he bowed him downe, Ꟶ fell. And when he had soncke downe, he laye still desolate.
The mother of Sisera loked out at a wyndowe, Ꟶ cried thorow the lattesse? Why is his charret so long a commyng? Why tarye the wheles of his cartes?
All the wyse ladyes answered her, ye and her awne wordes answered hir selfe.
Surely they haue founde, they deuyde the spoyles: euery man hath a damsell or two: Sisera hath a praye of diuerse couloured garmentes, euen a praye of rayment dyed wt sondrye coloures, Ꟶ that are made of nedle worke: rayment of diuerses coloures Ꟶ of nedle worke which is mete for him that is chefe in distributinge of the spoyles.
So perishe all thine enemyes: O Lord: but they that loue him, let them be as the sonne whan he ryseth in his might. And the lande had rest fourtye yeres.
And the chyldren of Israell committed wyckednes in the sight of the Lord. And the Lord delyuered them into the handes of Madian seuen yeres.
And the hande of Madian preuayled agaynst Israel, Ꟶ because of the Madianites, the chyldren of Israel made them dennes in the mountaynes Ꟶ caues and stronge holdes.
And when Israel had sowen, the Madianites, the Amalechites Ꟶ they of the east contreye came vp together against them: Ꟶ pytched their tentes against them,
Ꟶ destroyed the encrease of the erthe, euen till thou come vnto Azah: Ꟶ lefte no sustistinaunce for Israell, nether shepe, oxe or asse:
for they went vp, they and their cattell, Ꟶ came wt their tentes as a multitude of greshopers: so that bothe they Ꟶ also their camels were wt out nombre. And they entred into the lande to destroye it.
And so was Israel excedingly impouereshed in the sight of the Madianites, Ꟶ cryed vnto the Lord.
And when the children of Israel cryed vnto the Lord because of the Madianites,
the Lord sent vnto them a prophet, which sayd vnto them: Thus sayth the lord god of Israel: I fette you from Egypt Ꟶ brought you oute of the house of bondage,
Ꟶ I rydd you out of the hande of the Egypcians, Ꟶ out of the hand of all that oppressed you Ꟶ cast them out before you, Ꟶ gaue you their land.
And I sayd vnto you: I am the Lorde youre God, feare not the goddes of the Amorytes in whose lande you dwell. But you haue not obeyed my voyce.
And the Angell of the Lorde came, Ꟶ sate vnder an Oke which was in Ephrah, that pertayned vnto Ioas the father of the Eserites. And his sonne Gedeon pressed out whete out of the eares in a presse, to hyde it from the Madianites:
Ꟶ the angell of the Lord apeared vnto hym, Ꟶ sayde: the Lord is wyth the, thou mightie man of warre.
And Gedeon answered him: Oh my Lord, yf the Lord be wyth vs, why is all this come vpon vs? ye Ꟶ where be all hys myracles which oure fathers tolde vs of, and sayde? Did not the lord bring vs out of Egypte? But now the Lorde hath forsaken vs, Ꟶ delyuered vs into the handes of the Madianites.
And the Lord loked vpon him, Ꟶ sayd: Go hence in this thy might, and thou shalt delyuer Israel out of the handes of the Madianites: Haue not I sent the?
And he answered him: Oh lord, wherwith shall I saue Israel? Beholde, my kinred is poore in Manasses, and I am lytle in my fathers house.
The Lord sayde vnto him: I will be with the: and thou shalt smyte the Madianites, as they were but one man.
And he answered him: Oh: yf I haue founde grace in thy syght, then shewe me a sygne, that it is thou that talkest wt me.
Departe not hence, vntill I come agayne vnto the, and till I bring myne offryng, Ꟶ haue sett it before the. And he sayde: I wyll tarye vntyll thou come agayne.
And Gedeon went in, Ꟶ made redye a kydd, and swete kakes of an Epha of flowre, Ꟶ put it wt the fleshe in a basket, Ꟶ put the broth in a potte, Ꟶ brought it out vnto hym vnder the Oke, Ꟶ presented it.
And the angell of God sayd vnto him: take the flesh Ꟶ the swete kakes, Ꟶ laye them vpon this rocke, Ꟶ powre out the broth. And he dyd so.
Then the angell of the Lord put forth the ende of the staffe that he helde in his hande, Ꟶ touched the fleshe and the swete kakes. And there arose vp fyre out of the rocke, Ꟶ consumed the flesh Ꟶ the swete kakes. But the angell of the Lord vanished out of his syght.
And when Gedeon perceaued that it was an angell of the Lord, he sayd: Alas, O Lord God, haue I therfore sene an angell of the lord face to face, that I shulde dye?
And the Lord sayde vnto him: peace be vnto the, feare not, thou shalt not dye.
Then Gedeon made an aultare there vnto the Lord, Ꟶ called it: The Lorde of peace. And vnto thys daye it is yet in Ephrath, that pertayneth vnto the father of the Eserites.
And it fortuned that the same nyght the Lord sayde vnto him: take a yong bullock out of thy fathers droue, Ꟶ another of .vii. yeres olde, Ꟶ destroye the aultare of Baal that thy father hath, Ꟶ cutte downe the groue that is by it,
Ꟶ make an aultare vnto the Lord thy God vpon the toppe of this rocke in a conuenient place. And take the seconde bullock, Ꟶ offer burnt sacrifice vpon the wodd of the groue, which thou shalt cut downe.
Then Gedeon toke ten men of his seruauntes, Ꟶ dyd as the Lord bad him. But because he durst not do it by daye for feare of his fathers houshold Ꟶ of the men of the cytie, he dyd it by nyght.
And when the men of the cytie were vp erlye in the morning: Beholde, the aultare of Baal was broken, Ꟶ the groue cut downe that was by it, Ꟶ the seconde bullock offered vpon the aulter that was made.
And they sayde one to another: who hath done this thing Ꟶ whan they enquered Ꟶ asked, they sayde: Gedeon the sonne of Ioas hath done this thing.
Then the men of the cytie sayde vnto Ioas: bringe out thy sonne, that he maye dye? because he hath destroyed the aulter of Baal, Ꟶ cut downe the groue that was by it.
And Ioas sayde vnto all that stode by him: will ye leade Baals cause? or will ye be his defenders? he that hath medled agaynst him, let him dye or the mornynge. If he be a God, let him be auenged of him, that cast downe hys aulter.
And from that daye was Gedeon called: Ierobaal, because his father had sayde: Let Baal be auenged of hym, that hath broken downe his aulter.
All the Madianites therfore, Ꟶ the Amalekites Ꟶ they of the east, were geathered togeather, Ꟶ went, Ꟶ pitched in the valeye of Iesrael:
but the sprete of the Lord came vpon Gedeon. And he blewe a trompette, Ꟶ called Abiezer to folow him,
Ꟶ sent messengers thorow out all Manasses, Ꟶ called them, which also dyd folowe him. And he sent messengers vnto Aser, zabulon and Nephthalim, and they came to mete hym.
And Gedeon sayd vnto God: wilt thou saue Israel in my hande, as thou hast sayde:
Beholde, I wyll put a flece of wolle in the threasshyng place. And yf the dewe come on the flece onlye, Ꟶ it be drye vpon all the erth besyde, then shall I be sure, that thou wilt saue Israel by my hande, as thou saydest.
And it came so to passe. For he rose vp erlye on the morowe, and thrust the flece togeather, and wronge the dewe therout, Ꟶ fylled a bowle of water:
Ꟶ Gedeon sayd agayne vnto God: be not angrye wt me, that I speake once moare. For I wyll proue once agayne by the flece. Let it be drye onlye vpon the flece, and dewe vpon all the grounde.
And God did so that same nyght: For it was drye vpon the flece onely, Ꟶ there was dew on all the grounde.
Then Ierobaall (otherwyse called Gedeon) and all the people that were wyth hym, rose vp early, and pytched besyde the well of Harad, so that the hoste of the Madianites were on the northsyde of the rock that boweth towarde the valley.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Gedeon: the people that are with the, are to many for me to geue the Madianites into their handes, lest Israel make their vaunte agaynst me and saye: myne awne hande hathe saued me.
Now therfore make a proclamacyon in the eares of the people, Ꟶ saye: yf any man dreade or be aferde, let him returne. And the people arose erlye. And there departed Ꟶ returned of the people which weare at mount Gilead .xxii. thousand, and there abode ten thousande.
And the Lord sayde vnto Gedeon: the people are yet to many, bryng them downe vnto the water, and I wyll trye them vnto the there. And of whom I saye vnto the, thys shall go with the, the same shall go with the. And of whomsoeuer I saye vnto the, this shall not go wyth the, the same shall not go.
So he brought downe the people vnto the water, and the Lord sayde vnto Gedeon: as many as lappe the water wyth theyr tonges, as a dogge doth, them put by them selues, Ꟶ so do them that knele downe vpon their knees to drincke.
And the nombre of them that put there handes to their mouthes and lapped, were .iii. hundred men. But all the remnaunt of the people kneled downe vpon their knees to dryncke water.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Gedeon: By these thre hundred men that lapped water, wyll I saue you: and delyuer the Madianites into thyne hande. And let all the other people go euery man vnto his place.
They therfore of the people toke vitailes with them, Ꟶ their trompettes. And he sent all the rest of Israel, euery man vnto his tent, and conforted those thre hundred with him. And the host of Madian was benethe hym in a valeye.
And it fortuned that the same nyght the Lorde sayd vnto him: Aryse, get the downe vnto the hoste, for I haue delyuered it into thyne hande.
But Ꟶ yf thou feare to go downe, then go thou Ꟶ Pharah thy ladde downe to the hoost,
Ꟶ thou shalt herken what they saye, Ꟶ so shall thyne handes be strong, to go downe vnto the hoste. Then went he downe and Pharah hys ladde, euen harde vnto the men of armes that were in the hoste.
And the Madianites, the Amalekites, and all they of the East, lay a longe in the valeye, lyke a multitude of greshopers, and their camelles were without nombre, euen as the sande by the see syde in multitude.
And when Gedeon was come: Beholde, there was a man that tolde a dreame vnto his neyhgboure, Ꟶ sayde: Behold, I dreamed a dreame, and me thought that a loffe of barley bread, tombled into the hoste of Madian, and came vnto a tente, and smote it that it felle, Ꟶ ouerturned it, that the tente laye a longe.
And his felowe answerd and sayde: this is nothing elles saue the swerde of Gedeon the sonne of Ioas a man of Israell: for into his hande hath God delyuered Madian, and all the hoste.
When Gedeon hearde the tellynge of the dreame, and the interpretacion of the same, he worshypped, and returned vnto the hoste of Israel: and sayde: vp, for the Lorde hathe delyuered into youre hande the hoste of Madian.
And he deuyded the thre hundred men into thre companies, Ꟶ gaue euery man a trompet in his hande, wyth an emptye pytcher, and lampes theri,
and sayde vnto them: loke on me, and do lykewyse: that when I come to the syde of the hoste, euen as I do, so do you:
When I blowe wyth a trompet and all that are wyth me, blowe ye with trompettes also on euery syde of the hoste, Ꟶ saye: here is the swerde of the Lorde and of Gedeon.
And so Gedeon Ꟶ the thre hundred men that were with him, came vnto the syde of the host in the begynning of the myddell watche, Ꟶ reysed vp the watche men. And they blewe with their trompettes, Ꟶ brake the pytchers that were in theyr handes.
And all the thre companyes blewe wt trompettes Ꟶ brake the pytchers, Ꟶ helde the lampes in their lefte handes, and the trompettes in their ryght, to blowe wythall. And they cried: the swerde of the Lord and of Gedeon.
And they stode still, euery man in his place rounde about the hoste. And they wythin the hoste, ranne, Ꟶ cryed Ꟶ fled.
And the thre hundreth blewe wyth trompettes, Ꟶ the Lorde sett euery mannes swerde vpon hys neyghboure, thorow out all the hoste. And the hoste fled to Bethsitah, to zererath, Ꟶ to the edge of the playne of Meholah vnto Tabath.
And the men of Israel beynge geathered together out of the trybe of Nephthalim, of Aser, Ꟶ of all Manasses folowed after the Madianites.
And Gedeon sent messengers vnto all mount Ephraim, saying: come downe against the Madianites, Ꟶ take before them the waters vnto Bethbarath Ꟶ to Iordan. Then all the men of Ephraim geathered together, Ꟶ toke the waters vnto Bethbarath, Ꟶ to Iordan.
And they toke two captaynes of the Madianites, Oreb and zeb, and slew Oreb vpon the rocke Oreb, and zeb at the presse zeb, Ꟶ folowed after Madian. And brought the heades of Oreb and zeb, to Gedeon on the other syde Iordan.
And the men of Ephraim sayde vnto hym: why hast thou serued vs thus, that thou calledst vs not, when thou wentest to fyght with the Madianites? And they chode with hym a good.
And he sayde vnto them: What dede haue I done lyke vnto youres: is not a cluster of Ephraim better, then the wyne heruest of Abiezer?
God hath delyuered into youre handes the Lordes of Madian, Oreb and zeb. And what was I able to do lyke as you haue done? And then their spirites abated from of him, when he had sayde that.
And Gedeon came to Iordan to passe ouer, he Ꟶ the thre hundred men that were with hym, verye faynte, and yet folowed the chace.
And he sayde vnto the men of Socoth: geue I praye you kakes of breed vnto the people that folowe me: for they be fayntie, that I maye folowe after zebath, and zalmona kynges of Madian.
And the Lordes of Socoth sayde: are the handes of zebath Ꟶ zalmona nowe in thyne handes, that we shulde geue breed vnto thyne armye?
Gedeon sayde, therfore when the Lord hath delyuered zebath and zalmona into myne hande, I wyll teare the fleshe of you with the thornes of the wildernes and wt breers.
And he went vp thence to Phanuel, Ꟶ spake vnto them lykewyse. And the men of Phanuel answered hym, as dyd the men of Socoth.
And he sayde also vnto the men of Phanuel: when I come agayne in peace, I wyll breake downe this towre.
zebath and zalmona were in Carkar, and their hostes with them, vpon a .xv. thousand men, which were all that were lefte of all the hostes of them of the Easte: For there were slayne a hundred and twentye thousande men, that drewe swerdes.
And Gedeon went thorowe them that dwell in Tabernacles on the easte syde of Nobah and Iebahah, and smote the hoste: for the hoste did cast no perrelles.
And whan zebah and zalmona fledde, he folowed after them, and toke the two kynges of Madian, zebath and zalmona, and discomforted all the hoste.
And Gedeon the sonne of Ioas returned from battell, afore the sonne was downe,
and caught a ladde of the men of Socoth, Ꟶ enquered of him. And he wrote hym of the lordes Ꟶ Elders of Socoth .lxxvii. men.
And he came vnto the men of Socoth, and sayde: Beholde, here I haue zebath and zalmona, wt which ye did cast me in the tethe, sayinge: are the handes of zebath and zalmona allredye in thyne hande, that we shuld geue breed vnto thy faintye men?
And he toke the elders of the citie, Ꟶ thornes of the wildernesse Ꟶ breers, Ꟶ made the men of Socoth to fele them.
And he brake downe the towre of Phanuel, Ꟶ slewe the men of the cytie.
And then sayd he vnto zebath Ꟶ zalmona, what maner of men were they whom ye slew at Thabor? and they answered: the lykenesse of the and them is all one, euen after the fassyon of the chyldren of a kynge.
And he sayde: they were my brethren, euen my mothers chyldren. As trulye as the Lorde lyueth, yf ye had saued their lyues, I wolde not sleye you.
And he sayde vnto Iether his eldest sonne: vp and sleye them: But the lad drue not hys swerde, for he feared, because he was yet yong.
Then zebath Ꟶ zalmona sayde: Ryse thou, Ꟶ falle vpon vs: for as the man is, so is his strength. And Gedeon arose and slewe zebath and zalmona, Ꟶ toke awaye the ornamentes, that were on their camels neckes.
Then the men of Israel sayde vnto Gedeon: Raygne thou ouer vs, bothe thou, thy sonne Ꟶ thy sonnes sonne, for thou hast delyuered vs out of the hand of Madian.
And Gedeon sayd vnto them: I wyll not raygne ouer you, nether shall my childe raygne ouer you, but the Lord shall raygne ouer you.
And agayne Gedeon sayde vnto them: I wolde desyre a certayne request of you, euen that you wolde geue me euerye man the earynges of his praye. For they had golden earynges, because they were Ismaelites:
Ꟶ they answered: We wyll geue them. And they spreed a mantell, Ꟶ dyd cast there in euery man the earynges of hys pray:
Ꟶ the weyght of the golden earynges that he required, was a thousand Ꟶ seuen hundred sycles of golde, besyde cheynes, pommaunders and purple rayment that was on the kynges of Madian, Ꟶ besyde the cheynes, that were about their camels neckes.
And Gedeon made an Ephod therof, Ꟶ put it in his citie Ephrah And all Israell went a whoryng after it, in the same place, whych thynge became a ruyne vnto Gedeon and to his house.
Thus was Madian brought lowe before the chyldren of Israel, so that they lyfte vp their heades no moare. And the contreye was in quietnes fourtye yeres in the dayes of Gedeon.
And Ierobaall the sonne of Ioas went, and dwelte in his awne house.
And Gedeon had .lxx. sonnes of his bodye begotten, for he had many wyues.
And his concubine that was in Sichem, bare him a sonne also, whose name he called Abimelech.
And Gedeon the sonne of Ioas dyed, in a good age, and was buryed in the sepulchre of Ioas his father, euen in Ephrah, that pertayned vnto the father of the Ezrites.
But it fortuned, that as sone as Gedeon was deed, the children of Israel turned awaye Ꟶ went a whoring after Baalim, Ꟶ made a couenaunt wt Baal to be their God,
Ꟶ the children of Israel thought not on the Lorde their god, which had delyuered them out of the handes of all their enemyes on euery syde.
Nether shewed they mercy on the house of Ierobaal, other wyse called Gedeon, according to all the goodnesse which he had shewed vnto Israel.
Abimelech the sonne of Ierobaal went to Sichem, vnto his mothers Brethren, and comuned with them and with all his mothers fathers kinred, sayin
saye I praye you, in the eares of all the enhabytoures of Sychem: whether is better for you, that all the sonnes of Ierobaal (which are .lxx. personnes) raygne ouer you, ether that one raygne ouer you? Remember, that I am of youre bone, and of youre fleshe.
And his mothers brethren spake of hym in the audience of the men of Sichem all these wordes, and their hartes were moued to folowe Abimelech. For they sayde: he is oure brother.
And they gaue him .lxx. peces of syluer out of the temple of Baal Berith, where wyth Abimelech hyred vayne and lyght personnes which went with him.
And he went vnto hys fathers house at Ephrah and slewe all his brethren, the sonnes of Ierobaal, euen .lxx. personnes with one stone. Not withstandynge, yet Ioatham the youngest sonne of Ierobaal eskaped, for he hyd hym selfe.
And all the men of Sichem gathered together, and all the house of Mello, Ꟶ came and made Abimelech kyng in the playne, where the great stone was by Sichem.
And when they tolde it to Ioatham, he went and stode in the toppe of mount Garizim, and lyfte vp hys voyce, and cried, and sayde vnto them: Herken vnto me you men of Sichem, that God maye herken vnto you.
The trees went forth to anoynt a king ouer them, and sayde vnto the olyue tree: raygne thou ouer vs.
But the olyue tree sayd vnto them: shulde I leaue my fattenesse, whych both goddes and men prayse in me, and go to be promoted ouer the trees?
And the trees sayde to the fygge tree: come thou, and be king ouer vs.
The figge tree answered them: shuld I forsake my swetnes, and my good frute, and go to be promoted ouer the trees?
Then sayde the trees vnto the vyne: come thou and be kyng ouer vs.
The vyne sayde vnto them: shuld I leaue my wyne wherby I cheare bothe goddes and men, and go to be promoted ouer the trees?
Then sayde all the trees vnto the fyrre bushe: come thou, Ꟶ raygne ouer vs.
And the fyrre bushe sayde vnto the trees: yf it be true that ye will anoynt me kynge ouer you, then come, Ꟶ put youre trust vnder my shadowe. Yf no, the fyre come out of the firre busshe, and waste the Cedre trees of Libanon.
Now therfore, yf ye do trulye and vncorruptlye, to make Abimelech kyng: and yf ye haue dealte well with Ierobaal and his house, Ꟶ haue done vnto hym accordyng to the deseruyng of his handes, iudge ye.
For euen he (my father) fought for you, and aduentured his lyfe, and rydde you out of the hande of Madian.
And ye are rysen vp agaynst my fathers house this daye, and haue slayue hys chyldren, euen .lxx. personnes with one stone, and haue made Abimelech the sonne of his mayde seruaunt, kyng ouer the men of Sichem, because he is youre brother:
yf ye then haue dealte trulye and purelye with Ierobaal and with his house thys daye, then reioyse ye wyth Abimelech, and let him reioyse with you.
But yf you haue not dealt trulye, then I praye God a fyre maye come out of Abimelech, and consume the men of Sichem and the house of Mello. And that there maye come a fyre from among the men of Sichem, and out of the house of Mello, and consume Abimelech.
And Ioatham ranne awaye, and fledde, and went to Beer and dwelt there, for feare of Abimelech his brother.
When Abimelech had raygned thre yere,
God sent a sprete of hate betwene Abimelech, Ꟶ the men of Sichem. And the citezens of Sichem rayled vpon Abimelech,
Ꟶ wisshed that the wickednes done to the .lxx. sonnes of Ierobaal myght come on him, and that god wolde laye the bloude of them vnto Amelech their brother which slewe them, and vpon the other men of Sichem which ayded him in the kylling of his brethren.
And the cytezens of Sichem set men to laye awayte for hym in the toppe of the mountaynes, which men robbed all that came a longe the waye by them. And it was tolde Abimelech.
And Gaal the sonne of Abed came wyth his brethren, and they gat them to Sichem. And the men of Sichem put their confidence in him.
And they went out into the feldes, Ꟶ geathered in their grapes, and troade them, and made mery: and went into the house of their goddes, and dyd eate and drynke, and curssed Abimelech.
And Gaal the sonne of Abed sayde: what is Abimelech? and what is Sichem? that we shulde serue him? Is he not the sonne of Ieroboal? and zebul is his officer? Serue soche as come of Hemor the father of Sichem, for what reason is it that we shulde serue him?
wold God this people were vnder my hande, then wolde I take Abimelech out of the waye. And he spake against Abimelech: make thyne hoste greater, Ꟶ go out.
And when zebull the ruler of the cytie hearde the wordes of Gaal the sonne of Abed, he was wroth,
and sent messengers vnto Abimelech priuely, saying: Behold, Gaal the sonne of Abed and his brethren be come to Sichem: Ꟶ beholde, they sett the cytie against the.
Nowe therfore vp by nyght, thou and all the people that is wyth the, and lye in wayte in the felde.
And ryse erlye in the mornynge as sone as the sonne is vp, and fall vpon the citie. And yf he and the people that is with hym, come out agaynst the, do to him what thine handes shalbe able.
And Abimelech roase vp, Ꟶ all the people that were wt him by night. and they layd awayte against Sichem in foure companyes.
And Gaal the sonne of Abed went out, Ꟶ stode in the entring of the gate of the cytie. And Abimelech rose vp, Ꟶ the folcke that were wt him, from laying awayt.
And when Gaal saw the people, he sayd to zebul: beholde, there come people downe from the top of the mountaynes. And zebul sayd vnto him: the shadow of the hylles seme men vnto the
Ꟶ Gaall answered agayne, Ꟶ sayd: se, there come folcke downe by the myddell of the land, Ꟶ another company come a long by the playne of the charmars.
Then sayd zebul vnto him: where is now thi mouth that sayd: what felow is Abimelech, that we shuld serue him? Is not this the people that thou hast despysed? Goo out now Ꟶ fyght with them.
And Gaall went out before the cytizens of Sichem, Ꟶ fought wt Abimelech.
And Abimelech chased him, that he fledd before him Ꟶ many were ouerthrowen Ꟶ wounded, euen vnto the entering of the gate,
And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah. And zebul thrust out Gaal Ꟶ his brethren, that thei shulde not dwell in Sichem.
And on the morow, it happened that the people went out into the felde. And they tolde Abimelech.
And he toke the people, Ꟶ deuided them into thre companies, and layd awayte in the feldes, and loked, Ꟶ beholde, the people were come out of the cytie, and he ranne vpon them, and smote them.
And Abimelech, Ꟶ the companies that were wt him, reached forther, Ꟶ stode in the entringe of the gate of the cytie. And the two other companies ranne vpon all the people that were in the feldes, Ꟶ slue them.
And when Abimelech had fought against the cytie all that daye, he toke it, Ꟶ slew the people that was therin, Ꟶ destroyed the cytie Ꟶ sowed salt thorow it.
And when all the men of the towre of Sichem heard that, they entered into a strong holde of the house of their God Baall Berith
And it was tolde Abimelech, that all the men of the tower of Sichem were geathered together,
Ꟶ Abimelech gat him to mount zelmon, bothe he Ꟶ all the people that were wt him, Ꟶ toke axes wt him and cut downe bowes of trees, Ꟶ toke them Ꟶ bare them on his shulder, Ꟶ sayde vnto the folcke that were with hym what ye haue sene me do, spede youre selues, and do lykewyse as I haue done.
And all the men that were among the people, cut downe bowes, and folowed Abimelech, and put them into the holde, and sett the holde a fier by them: so that all the men of the tower of Sichem were slayne, vpon a thousande men and wemen.
Then went Abimelech to Thebez, and beseged it, and toke it.
But there was a strong towre with in the cytie, and thither ranne all the men and wemen, and all the chefe that were in the cytie, and shut it to them, and got them vp to the toppe of the towre.
And Abimelech came vnto the towre, and fought agaynst it, and went harde vnto the dore of the towre, to set it on fier.
And a certayne woman cast a pece of a mylstone vpon hys head, and all to brake hys brayne panne.
Then Abimelech called hastelye vnto the young man that bare hys harnesse, Ꟶ sayd vnto him: draw thy swerde and slee me, that men saye not of me: a woman slew him. And hys ladd thrust him thorow, and he dyed.
And when the men of Israel sawe that Abimelech was deed, they departed, euery man vnto his awne house.
And thus the wyckednesse of Abimelech whych he dyd vnto his father, in sleynge his seuentye brethren
and therto all the wyckednesse of the men of Sichem, dyd God bring vpon their heedes And vpon them came the cursse of Ioatham the sonne of Ierobaal.
After Abimelech there arose, to defende Israel, one Thola (the sonne of Phuah) his vncles sonne, a man of Isakar, which dwelt in Samir in mount Ephraim.
And he iudged Israell .xxiii. yere and dyed, and was buryed in Samir.
And after him arose Iair a Gileadite, and iudged Israel .xxii. yere.
And he had thyrtie sonnes that rode on thirtie Asse coltes, Ꟶ they had thirtye cyties, which are called the townes of Iair vnto thys daye, and are in the lande of Gilead.
And Iair dyed Ꟶ was buryed in Kamon.
And the children of Israel wrought wyckednesse yet agayne, in the syght of the Lord, Ꟶ serued Baalim and Astharoth, Ꟶ the goddes of Siria, the goddes of Sidon, and the goddes of Moab, the goddes of the children of Ammon, and the goddes of the Philistines, and forsoke the Lord Ꟶ serued not him
And the Lorde was wroth with Israel, Ꟶ solde them into the handes of the Philistines, Ꟶ into the handes of the children of Ammon:
which from that yere forth, pyld Ꟶ oppressed the children of Israel .xviii. yere, all that were on the other syde Iordan: in the lande of the Amorites which is in Gilead.
Moreouer, the children of Ammon went ouer Iordan to fight agaynst Iuda, Beniamin, and the house of Ephraim: so that Israel was sore combred,
And the children of Israel cryed vnto the Lord, sayinge: we haue synned agaynst the: for we haue forsaken oure awne God, and haue serued Baalim.
And the Lorde sayde vnto the children of Israel: dyd not the Egypcians, the Amorites, the children of Ammon, the Philistines,
the Sidonytes, the Amaleckites, Ꟶ the Maonites, oppresse you? And ye cryed to me Ꟶ I delyuered you out of their handes.
And for all that ye haue forsaken me, and serued straung goddes, wherfore I will helpe you no more.
Go Ꟶ crye vnto the goddes which ye haue chosen, and lett them saue you in the tyme of youre tribulacion.
And the children of Israel sayde vnto the Lorde: We haue sinned: do thou vnto vs whatsoeuer please the, delyuer vs onely this daye.
And thei put away the straung goddes from them, and serued the Lorde. And hys soule had pytie on the miserie of Israel.
Then the children of Ammon geathered togeather, Ꟶ pitched in Gilead. And the children of Israel geathered them togeather, Ꟶ pitched in Mizpa.
And the Lords of Gilead sayd eche to other: whosoeuer will beginne the battell agaynst the children of Ammon, the same shalbe hed ouer all the enhabiters of Gilead.
And there was one Iephthaha Gileadite, a strong man, the sonne of an harlott: and Gilead begat Iephthah.
And Gileads wyfe bare him sonnes, which when they were come to age, thrust out Iephthah, and sayd vnto him: thou shalt not enheret in oure fathers house, for thou art the sonne of a straung woman.
Then Iephtah fledd from his brethren, Ꟶ dwelt in the land of Tob. And there geathered ydle men to Iephthah, and went out wt him.
And it chaunced in processe of tyme, that the children of Ammon made warre agaynst Israel.
And whan the children of Ammon fought thus agaynst Israel, the elders of Gilead went to fett Iephthah out of the land of Tob
and sayd vnto him: come Ꟶ be oure captayne, that we maye fyght wt the children of Ammon.
Iephthah answered the elders of Gilead: did not ye hate me Ꟶ expell me out of my fathers house? how happeneth it then, that you come vnto me now in tyme of youre tribulacion?
And the elders of Gilead sayde vnto Iephthah: Therfore we turne agayne to the now, that thou mayest go wt vs, Ꟶ fight agaynst the children of Ammon and be oure heed ouer all the enhabiters of Gilead.
And Iephthah sayde vnto the elders of Gilead: If ye brynge me home agayn, to fight with the children of Ammon, then yf the Lord deliuer them before me, shall I be your heed?
And the elders of Gilead sayde to Iephthah: that Lorde be witnesse betwene vs yf we do not according to thy wordes.
Then Iephthah went wyth the elders of Gilead. And the people made hym heed and ruler ouer them. And Iephthah rehearsed all hys wordes before the Lorde in Mizpa.
And Iephthah sent messenges vnto the king of the children of Ammon, saying: what hast thou to do wt me, that thou art come agaynst me, to fight in my land?
The king of the children of Ammon answered vnto the messengers of Iephthah: Because Israel toke awaye my land, when they came out of Egypt: euen from Arnon vnto Iabok, and vnto Iordan. Now therfore restore those landes agayne wt faire meanes.
And Iephthah sent messegers again vnto the children of Ammon
and sayd vnto him: thus sayth Iepthah: Israel toke not awaye the land of Moab, nor the land of the children of Ammon.
But when Israel came out of Egypt, Ꟶ walked thorow the wildernesse, euen vnto the redd see, they came to Cades
Ꟶ sent messengers vnto the king of Edom, saying: let me (I praye the) go thorow thy land. But the king of Edom wolde not agre therto. And in lyke maner they sent vnto the king of Moab, but he wold not consent. And so Israel abode stil in Cades.
And then they went along thorow the wildernesse, Ꟶ compased the lande of Edom, Ꟶ the land of Moab, Ꟶ came a long by the east syde of the land of Moab, Ꟶ pitched on the othersyde of Arnon, Ꟶ wolde not come with in the coaste of Moab: for Arnon was the vtmost border of Moab.
And then Israel sent messengers vnto Schon, king of the Amorites, Ꟶ king of Hesbon, Ꟶ sayd vnto him: Lett vs passe thorow thy land vnto oure awne contreye.
But Sehon consented not to Israel, that he shulde go thorow hys coast: but gathered all his people togeather, Ꟶ pitched in Iazah, Ꟶ fought wt Israel.
And the Lord God of Israel delyuered Sehon Ꟶ all his folke into the handes of Israel. And so Israel smote them Ꟶ conquered all the land of the Amorites, the enhabiters of the sayde contrey.
And they conquered all the coastes of the Amorites, from Arnon vnto Iabok, Ꟶ from the wildernesse vnto Iordan.
So now, seyng the Lorde God of Israel hath cast out the Amorites before hys people Israel, shuldest thou possesse the land?
Naye, but what people, Camos thy God dryueth out, that land possesse thou. Euen so whatsoeuer nacion the Lorde oure God expelleth, that lande ought we to enioye.
And art thou better then Balack the sonne of zephor king of Moab? dyd he striue wt Israel or fyght agaynst them,
all the whyle Israel dwelt in Hesbon and her townes, in Aroer Ꟶ her townes, Ꟶ in all the cyties that be a longe by the coastes of Arnon, thre hundred yeres? why dydist thou not recouer them in all that space?
Wherfore I haue not synned agaynst the. But thou doest me wronge, to warre agaynst me. The Lorde therfore which is a Iudge be Iudge thys daye betwene the children of Israel, and the children of Ammon.
Howbeit the kynge of the chyldren of Ammon, harkened not vnto the wordes of Iephthah, which he sent him.
Then the sprete of the Lorde came vpon Iephthah. And he passed ouer to Gylead Ꟶ to Manasses, Ꟶ came to Mazphah that lieth in Gilead, and from thence vnto the chyldren of Ammon.
And Iephthah vowed a vowe vnto the Lord, and sayd: If thou shalt delyuer the chyldren of Ammon into my handes,
then that thinge that cometh oute of the dores of my house against me, when I come home in peace, from the chyldren of Ammon, shalbe the Lordes, and I wyll offer it vp for a burnt offering:
And so Iephthah went vnto the children of Ammon to fyght wt them. And the Lord delyuered them into hys handes.
And he smote them from Aroer tyll thou come to Menith, euen .xx. cytes: and so forth to the playne of the vyneyardes, with an exceding great slaughter. And thus the children of Ammon were brought vnder, before the chyldren of Israel
When Iephthah came to Mazphah vnto his house, se, his daughter came out agaynst him, with tymberelles Ꟶ daunses, which was his onely childe: so that besyde her, he had nether sonne, nor daughter.
And when he sawe her, he rent his clothes, and sayde: Alas my daughter, thou hast brought me lowe, and art one of them that trouble me. For I haue opened my mouth vnto the Lord, and cannot go backe.
And she sayd vnto him: my father, yf thou haue opened thy mouth vnto the Lorde, then do wt me accordyng to it that proceaded out of thy mouth, for as moch as the Lorde hath aduenged the of thyne enemyes the chyldren of Ammon.
And she sayde vnto her father: do thys moche for me: lett me alone two monethes, that I maye go downe to the mountaynes, Ꟶ be wayle my virginyte, I Ꟶ my felowes.
And he sayd: go, Ꟶ he sent her awaye two monethes. And so she went with her companions, Ꟶ lamented her maydenheed vpon the mountaynes.
And after the ende of the two monethes, she turned agayne vnto her father, which dyd with her accordynge to hys vowe which he had vowed, Ꟶ she had knowne no man. And it grewe to a custome in Israel.
The daughters of Israel came yere by yere to lament the daughter of Iephthah the Gyleadite, foure dayes in a yere
And the men of Ephraim geathered them selues together, Ꟶ went northwarde, and sayde vnto Iephthah: Wherfore wentest thou to fyght with the children of Ammon, and dydest not call vs to go with the? we will therfore burne thine house vpon the fyer.
And Iephthah said vnto them: I Ꟶ my people were at great stryfe wt the chyldren of Ammon. And when I called you, ye delyuered me not out of their handes.
And when I sawe that ye deliuered me not, I put my lyfe in my handes, Ꟶ went vpon the children of Ammon. And the Lord delyuered them into my handes. Wherfore then are ye come vpon me now, to fyght wt me?
Iephthah therfore gathered together all the men of Gilead, Ꟶ fought wt the Ephraites And the men of Gilead smote the Ephraites, because they sayd: Ye Gileadites are but runneagates of Ephraim amonge the Ephraites Ꟶ the Manassites.
Moreouer, the men of Gilead toke the passages of Iordan before the Ephraites. And when those Ephraites that were escaped, sayde: lett vs go ouer, then the men of Gilead sayd vnto them: Art thou an Ephraite? they sayde: naye.
Then sayde they vnto him: then saye: Schibboleth. And he sayde: Sibboleth: for he coulde not so pronounce. And then they toke him, and slewe hym at the passages of Iordan. And there were ouerthrowen at that tyme of the Ephraites .xlij.M.
And Iephthah iudged Israel .vi. yeare Ꟶ dyed, and was buryed in one of the cyties of Gilead.
After thys man, iudged Israell one Abezan of Bethlehem,
Ꟶ he had .xxx. sonnes and .xxx. daughters, whom he sent out, and toke .xxx. other in, for his sonnes. And when Abezan had iudged Israel .vii. yere,
he dyed, and was buryed at Bethlehem.
After him, Elon a zabulonite iudged Israel ten yere, Ꟶ Elon the zabulonite dyed,
Ꟶ was buryed in Aialon, in the countre of zabulon.
After hym, Abdon the sonne of Hellel a Pharathonite iudged Israel.
And he had .xl. sonnes, and thirty neueus, that rode on .lxx. asse coltes. And when Abdon the sonne of Hellel the Pharathonite had iudged Israell eyght yeare,
he dyed, Ꟶ was buryed in Pharthon in the lande of Ephraim, in the mount of the Amalekites.
And the chyldren of Israell began agayne to commytte wyckednes in the sight of the Lord. And the Lord delyuered them into the handes of the Philistines fourty yere.
And ther was a man in zaraah of the kynred of Dan, named Manoah, whose wyfe was barren, and bare not.
And the Aungell of the Lorde apeared vnto the woman: and sayde vnto her: Beholde, thou art barren, and bearest not: But thou shalt conceaue, Ꟶ beare a sonne.
And now beware that thou drinke no wyne. ner strong drincke, nether eate any vncleane thing:
for se, thou shalt conceaue and beare a sonne. And there may no rasor come on hys heed. For the ladd shalbe an abstayner vnto God, euen from his byrth. And he shall begynne to delyuer Israell out of the handes of the Phylistines.
Then the wyfe came, Ꟶ tolde her husband sayenge: a man of God came vnto me, Ꟶ the fassion of him was lyke the fassion of an Angell of God, excedyng fearfull. But I asked hym not whence he was, nether tolde he me hys name, but sayd vnto me:
beholde, thou shalt be with childe Ꟶ beere a sonne, and now drincke no wyne nor strong dryncke, nether eate any vncleane thyng: for the ladd shalbe an abstayner to God, euen from hys byrth, to the daye of hys death.
Then Manoah made intercessyon to the Lorde, and sayde: I praye the my Lorde, lett the man of God whych thou sendest, come once moare vnto vs, and teache vs what we shal do vnto the ladd, when he is borne.
And God hearde the voyce of Manoah, and the angell of God came agayne vnto the wyfe as she sat in the felde. But Manoah her husband was not with her.
And the wyfe made hast, and ranne, and shewed her husbande, Ꟶ sayde vnto hym: Beholde, the man apeared vnto me, that came vnto me to daye.
And Manoah arose, and went after hys wyfe, and came to the man, and sayde vnto him: art thou the man that spakest vnto my wyfe? And he sayde: I am.
Manoah sayde: now when thy saieng is come to passe: what shalbe the maner of the childe, and what shall he do?
And the angell of the Lorde sayd vnto Manoah: thy wyfe must absteyne from all that I sayde vnto her:
she maye eate of nothyng that cometh of the vyne tree, ner dryncke wyne or strong dryncke, nor eate any vncleane thynge: But must obserue all that I bad her.
Manoah sayde vnto the aungell of the Lord: we wyl kepe the styll, vntyll we haue made redye a kydd, and haue sett it before the.
And the angell of the Lorde sayde vnto Manoah: though thou make me abyde. I wyll not eate of thy bread. And yf thou wylt offre a burntoffring, thou must offer it vnto the Lorde. For Manoah wist not, that it was an angell of the Lord.
And Manoah said agayne vnto the angel of the Lord: what is thy name, that when thy sayinge is come to passe, we maye do the some worshyppe?
And the angel of the Lorde sayd vnto hym: why askest thou after my name, whych is Secrete.
And so Manoah toke a kydde wt a meateofferinge, and offered it vpon a rocke vnto the Lorde. And the angell dyd wonderouslye. Manoah and hys wyfe lokynge vpon.
And when the flame came vp toward heauen from the aultare, the angell of the Lord ascended vp in the flame of the aultare. And Manoah and hys wyfe loked vpon it, and fell flat on their faces vnto the grounde.
But the angel of the Lorde dyd nomoare apeare vnto Manoah and his wife. And then Manoah knew that it was an angel of the Lorde,
and sayde vnto hys wyfe we shall suerlye dye, because we haue sene God.
But his wife said vnto him: Yf the Lord wold kyll vs, he wolde not haue receaued a burntoffryng Ꟶ a meateoffring of oure handes, nether wolde he haue shewed vs all these thinges, nor wolde now haue tolde vs any soche.
And the wyfe bare a sonne, and called his name Samson. And the ladd grewe, and the Lorde blessed hym.
And the sprete of the Lorde beganne to moue hym in the host of Dan, betwene zaraah Ꟶ Esthaol.
Samson went downe to Thamnath, and sawe a woman in Thamnath of the daughters of the Philystines,
and he came vp, and tolde hys father and hys mother, and sayde: I haue sene a woman in Thamnath of the daughters of the Phylistynes. And now geue me her to wyfe.
Then hys father and mother sayde vnto hym: Is there neuer a woman among the daughters of thy brethren, and amonge all my people, but that thou must go, and take a wyfe of the vncircumcysed Phylistynes? And Samson sayde vnto his father: geue me thys woman, for she pleaseth me well.
But hys father and mother wyst not that it was the Lordes doynge, and that he sought an occasion agaynst the Philistynes, for at that tyme the Philistines raygned ouer Israel.
Then went Samson and hys father and his mother downe to Thamnath, and came to the vyne yardes of Thamnath. And behold a yonge lyon roared vpon hym.
And the sprete of the Lorde came vpon hym. And he tare hym, as he wolde haue rent a kydde, and yet had nothynge in hys hande, neyther tolde hys father Ꟶ mother what he had done.
And he went downe, Ꟶ talked with the woman, which semed well fauored in the syght of Samson.
And within a shorte space after, as he went thyther agayne to take her to wyfe, he turned oute of the waye, to se the carkasse of the lyon. And beholde, there was a swarme of bees, and honye in the carkasse of the lion.
And he toke of the honye in hys handes, and wente eatynge, and came to hys father and mother, and gaue them also. And they dyd eate. But he tolde not them, that he had taken the honye oute of the carkasse of the lyon.
And so hys father came vnto the woman, and Samson made there a feaste, for so vsed the yonge men to do.
And when they sawe him, they brought .xxx. companions to be with hym.
And Samson sayd vnto them: I wil now put forth a ryddle vnto you. And yf you can declare it me within .vij. dayes of the feast, Ꟶ fynde it out. I will geue you .xxx. shertes, and .xxx. chaunge of garmentes:
But Ꟶ yf you cannot declare it me, then shall ye geue me .xxx. shertes and .xxx. chaunge of garmentes. And they answered hym: put forth thy rydle, that we maye heare it.
And he sayd vnto them: Out of the eater came meate: and out of the stronge came swetnes. And they coulde not in .iij. dayes expounde the ryddle.
And when the seuenth daye was come, they sayde vnto Samsons wyfe: flater thyne husband, that he maye declare vs the ryddle, lest we burne the Ꟶ thy fathers house with fyer. Haue ye called vs hyther, to make vs beggers?
And Samsons wyfe wepte before hym and sayde: Surely thou hatest me and louest me not: for thou hast put forth a ryddle vnto the chyldren of my folcke, and hast not tolde it me. And he sayde vnto her: Beholde, I haue not tolde it my father and my mother, and shall I tell it the?
And Samsons wyfe wepte before hym .vij. dayes, whyle the feast lasted. And the .vii. daye he tolde her, because she laye so sore vpon him. And she tolde it the children of her folke.
And the men of the cytie sayd vnto hym the seuenth daye, before the sonne went downe. What is sweter then honye, Ꟶ what is stronger then a lyon? Then sayde he vnto them: If ye had not plowed with my caulfe, ye had not founde out my rydle.
And the sprete of the Lorde came vpon hym. And he went downe to Askalon, and slewe thyrty men of them, and spoyled them, and gaue chaunge of garmentes vnto them whych expounded the ryddle. And he was wroth, and went vp to hys fathers house.
But Samsons wyfe was geuen to one of hys companyons, that he had taken vnto hym.
But it chaunced within a whyle after, euen in the tyme of whete heruest, that Samson visited hys wyfe with a kydde, sayenge: I wyll go into my wyfe into the chaumber: but her father wolde not suffre hym to go in.
And her father sayd: I thought that thou haddest hated her, and therfore gaue I her vnto one of thy companions. Is not her yonger syster fayrer then she? Take her in steade of the other
Samson sayd vnto them: Now am I more blamelesse then the Philistines, and therfore wyll I do them displeasure.
And Samson went out, and caught thre hundred foxes, and toke fyrebrandes, and fastened tayle to tayle, and put a fyer brand in the myddes betwene two tayles.
And whan he had set the brandes of fyer, he sent them out into the standing corne of the Philistines, and burnt vp both the reped corne and also the standing, with the vyneyardes and olyues.
Then the Philistines sayde: who hath done thys? And it was tolde them that Samson the sonne in lawe of the Thamnite, because he had taken hys wyfe, and geuen her to hys companyon. And the Philistines came vp and burnt her and her father with fyer.
And Samson sayde vnto them: Though ye haue done this, yet will I be aduenged of you, and then I wyll cease.
And he smote them legge and thygh with a myghtye plage. And then he went and dwelt in the caue of the rocke Etam.
Then the Philistines came vp, Ꟶ pitched in Iuda, and laye in Lehi.
And the men of Iuda sayde, why are ye come vp vnto vs? They answered: to binde Samson are we come vp, and to do to hym as he hath done to vs.
Then thre thousande men of Iuda went downe to the caue of the rocke Etam, and sayde to Samson: wottest thou not that the Philistines are rulers ouer vs? Wherfore then hast thou done thus vnto vs? He answered them as they dyd vnto me, so haue I done vnto them.
And they sayd vnto hym agayne: we are come downe to bynde the, and to delyuer the into the hand of the Philistines. And Samson sayd vnto them: swere vnto me that ye shall not fal vpon me your selues.
They answered hym, sayenge: No, but we wyll bynde the, and delyuer the vnto their handes: But we wyll not kyl the. And they bounde him with two new cordes, Ꟶ brought hym from the rocke.
And when he came to Lehi, the Philistines showted agaynst him. And the sprete of the Lord came vpon hym, and the cordes that were vpon hys armes, became as flaxe that was burnt wt fyer, for the bandes lowsed from of hys handes.
And he founde a rotten Iawe bone of an asse, and put forth hys hande, and caught it, and slue a thousande men therwith.
And Samson sayde: with the Iawe of an asse, haue I made heapes of them: with the Iawe of an asse haue I slaine a thousand men.
And when he had left speakyng, he cast awaye the Iawe bone out of hys hand, and called the place Ramath Lehi.
And he was sore a thyrst, and called on the Lorde, Ꟶ sayde: Thou hast geuen this great victory, in the hande of thy seruaunt. And now I must dye for thyrst, and fall into the handes of the vncircumcised.
But God brake a great toth that was in the Iawe, and ther came water therout. And when he had droncke, his sprete came agayne, and was refresshed, wherfore the name therof was called, vnto this daye, the well of the caller on, which came of the Iawe.
And he iudged Israell in the dayes of the Philistines, twenty yeares.
Then wente Samson to Azath, and sawe ther an harlot, and went in vnto her.
And it was tolde the Azathites, sayeng: Samson is come hither. And they went aboute, Ꟶ layde awayte for hym there, all nyght in the gate of the cytie, and were still all the nyght, saying: in the mornyng whan it is daye, we shall kyll hym.
And Samson toke his rest tyll mydnyght, Ꟶ arose at mydnyght, and toke the dores of the gate of the cyte, and the two syde postes, and rent them of, with the barre and all, and put them vpon his shoulders, and caryed them vp to the top of an hyll, that is before Hebron.
And after thys, it fortuned, that by the ryuer of Sorek, he loued a woman, called Dalila:
vnto whom came the Lordes of the Philistines, and sayde vnto her: perswade hym, and se wherin his great strength lieth, and by what meane we maye ouercome him that we maye bynde him, to bryng him vnder, and euery one of vs shal geue the aleuen hundred syluerlynges.
And Dalila sayde to Samson: Oh, tell me where thy great strength lieth, and how thou myghtest be bounde, and brought vnder.
Samson answered vnto her: If they bynde me with seuen grene withes that were neuer dryed, I shalbe weake as other men.
And then the lordes of the Philistines brought her seuen wythes that were yet grene and neuer dryed, and she bounde hym therwith.
Notwithstandynge she had men lyinge in wayte with her in the chaumbre. And she sayd vnto hym: the Philistines be vpon the Samson. And immediatly he brake the cordes as a strynge of towe breaketh, when it fealeth fier. And so his strength was not knowen.
And Dalila sayde vnto Samson: Se, thou hast mocked me Ꟶ tolde me lyes. Now therfore tel me, wherwith thou mightest be bounde.
He answered her: yf they bynde me wyth new ropes that neuer were occupyed, I shalbe weake, and as another man.
Dalila therfore toke new ropes, and bounde hym therwith, and sayde vnto him: the Philistines be vpon the Samson. And there were lyers of wayte in the chamber, Ꟶ he brake them from of hys armes, as they had bene but a threde.
And Dalila sayde vnto Samson: hytherto thou hast begyled me, and tolde me lyes: yet tell me, how thou myghtest be bounde. He sayde vnto her: If thou plattedest the .vij. lokes of my head with an heare lace.
And she fastened them with a nayle, and sayde vnto hym: the Philistines be vpon the Samson. And he awaked out of his slepe, Ꟶ plucked awaye the nayle, that was in the plattinge with the heare lace.
And she sayde vnto hym agayne: How canst thou saye that thou louest me, when thyne herte is not with me? beholde, thou hast mocked me thys thre tymes, Ꟶ hast not tolde me, wherin thy greate strength lyeth.
And as she laye vpon him with her wordes continually vexyng of hym, hys soule was encombred euen vnto the death.
And so he tolde her all his hert, Ꟶ sayd vnto her: there neuer came raser vpon myne heed, for I haue bene an abstayner vnto God, euen from my mothers wombe: therfore whan I am shauen, my strength wyll go from me, and I shall waxe weake, and be lyke all other men.
And when Dalila sawe that he had tolde her all his hert, she sent and called for the lordes of the Philistines, sayeng: come vp yet this once, for he hath shewed me all hys herte. Then the lordes of the Philystines came vp vnto her, Ꟶ brought the money in their handes.
And she made him slepe vpon her knees Ꟶ she sent for a man, Ꟶ he dyd shaue of the seuen lockes of his heed, Ꟶ beganne to vexe him, Ꟶ his strength was gone from him.
And she sayde: the Philistines be vpon the Samson. And he awoke out of his slepe, Ꟶ sayd: I wil go out now as at other tymes before, Ꟶ shake my selfe, Ꟶ he wist not that the Lorde was departed from him.
But the Philistines toke hym, and put oute his eyes, Ꟶ brought hym downe to Azath, and bounde hym with two fetters of brasse. And he dyd grynde in the preson house,
howbeit the heare of hys head beganne to growe agayne after that he was shauen.
Then the lordes of the Philistines gathered them together, for to offer a solempne offrynge vnto Dagon theyr God, and to reioyse: for they sayde, oure God hath delyuered Samson oure enemy into oure handes.
And when the people sawe hym, they praysed theyr God: for they sayde: our God hath delyuered into oure handes oure enemy, and destroyer of oure countreye, whych slue manye of vs.
And when theyr hertes were merye, it fortuned, that they sayde: sende for Samson, that he maye make vs laugh. And they fette Samson oute of the preson house, and he played before them, and they set hym betwene the pyllers.
And Samson sayd vnto the ladd that leed him by the hand: sett me that I maye touche the pyllers, that the house stande vpon, and that I maye leane to them.
And the house was full of men Ꟶ women. And there were all the lordes of the Philistines. And there were vpon the roufe a thre thousande men and wemen, that behelde whyle Samson played.
And Samson called vnto the Lord, and sayde: O Lorde God, thyncke vpon me, and strengthen me, at thys tyme onlye, O God, that I maye be aduenged of the Philistines for my two eyes.
And Samson caught the two middel pillers on which the house stode, and on which it was borne vp, the one in hys ryght hande, and the other in hys lefte,
and sayde: my soule shall dye with the Philistines, and bowed them with all hys myghte. And the house fell vpon the lordes and vpon all the people that were therin. And so the deed which he slewe at hys deeth, were moo then they whych he slewe in hys lyfe.
And then hys brethren and al the house of hys father came downe, Ꟶ toke him vp, Ꟶ brought hym, and buryed hym betwene zarah and Estahol, in the buryinge place of Manoah hys father. And he iudged Israell twentye yeares.
There was a man in mount Ephraim named Micah,
and he sayde vnto hys mother: the leuen hundreth syluerlynges that were taken from the, aboute which thou cursedst, Ꟶ spakest it in myne eares. Behold, the syluer is with me, I toke it awaye. And hys mother sayde: blessed be thou my sonne, in the Lorde.
And when he had restored the leuen hundred syluerlynges to his mother agayne, his mother sayde: I vowed the syluer vnto the Lord of myne hande for the my sonne: that thou shuldest make a grauen ymage and an ymage of metall. Now therfore, I wyll geue it the agayne.
And when he restored the moneye againe vnto his mother, his mother toke two hundreth syluerlynges, and gaue them to a goldsmyth, which made therof a grauen image, and a ymage of metall, and it was in the house of Micah.
And the man Micah had a temple of goddes, and made an Ephod and Theraphim, and fylled the hande of one of hys sonnes which became hys preaste.
In those dayes there was no kyng in Israel, but euery man dyd that which was good in hys awne eyes.
And there was a yonge man out of Bethlehem Iuda, of the kynred of Iuda: which yonge man was a Leuite, Ꟶ soiourned ther.
And the man departed oute of the cytie of Bethlehem Iuda, to go dwel where he coulde fynde a conuenient place. And he came to mount Ephraim, to the house of Micah as he iourneyed.
And Micah sayde vnto hym. whence commest thou? The leuite answered hym. I am of Bethlehem Iuda, Ꟶ go to dwell where I maye fynde a place.
And Micah sayd agayne vnto him: dwell with me, and be vnto me a father and a preste. And I wyll geue the ten syluerlynges by yeare, two garmentes, and thy meate and dryncke.
And the Leuite was content to dwell wt the man, and was vnto hym as one of hys awne sonnes.
And Micah consecrated the hande of the leuite, and the yonge man became his preste, and was in the house of Micah.
Then sayde Micah: now I am sure, that the Lord wyll be good vnto me, seynge: I haue a leuyte to my preste.
In those dayes there was no king in Israell. And in those dayes the tribe of Dan sought then an enheritaunce to dwell in for vnto that tyme there fel none enheritaunce vnto them amonge the trybe of Israell.
And the children of Dan sent of their kinred fyue actyue men in feates of warre oute of theyr coastes, euen out of zaraah and Estahol, to vewe the lande and searche it out, and sayde vnto them: go, and searche out the lande. Which whan they came to mount Ephraim, euen to the house of Micah, they lodged ther
And when they were in the house of Micah, they knewe the voyce of the yonge man the leuite: and when they turned in thyther, they sayde vnto hym: who brought the hyther? what makest thou in thys place? and what hast thou here?
And he answered them: thus and thus dealed Micah with me, and hath hired me, and I am become hys preste.
And they sayde vnto hym agayne: Aske councell now of God, that we maye knowe, whether the waye whych we go, shalbe prosperous, or no.
And the preste sayde vnto them: go in peace, for the Lorde gydeth your waye which ye go.
Then the fyue men departed, and came to Lais, and sawe the people that were therin, how they dwelt careles, after the maner of the Sydons, styll, and without castynge of parelles: and that no man made any trouble in the land, or vsurped any domynion, but were farre from the Sidons, and had no busines with other men.
And they came vnto theyr brethren, to zaraah Ꟶ Estahol. And their brethren sayd vnto them: what haue ye done?
And they answered: Aryse, that we maye go vp agaynst them, for we haue sene the lande: surely a very good one. And do ye sytt stil? be not slouthful to departe: But come to conquere the lande.
Yf ye wyll go, ye shall come vnto a people that casteth no parelles, Ꟶ it is a very large countre: which God hath geuen into your handes. It is also a place, which doth lacke nothynge that is in the worlde.
And there departed thence of the kynred of the Dannites, euen out of zaraah and Esthaol, syxe hundred men appoynted with instrumentes of warre.
And they went vp, and pitched in kariath Iarim which is in Iuda. Wherfore they called the place, the hoost of Dan, vnto thys daye: and it is on the backsyde of kariath Iarim.
And they went thence vnto mount Ephraim, Ꟶ came to the house of Micah.
Then answered the fyue men that went to spye out the countre of Lais, Ꟶ sayde vnto their brethren: wot ye not that there is in these houses an Ephod, Theraphim, a grauen ymage, Ꟶ an ymage of metall? Now therfore consydre what ye haue to do.
And they turned thitherwarde and came to the house of the yong man the Leuite, euen vnto the house of Micah, and saluted hym peasably.
And the syxe hundred men gyrded with weapons of warre, which were of the chyldren of Dan, stode by the enteryng of the gate.
And the fyue men that went to spye out the lande, went in thyther and toke the kerued Image, and the Ephod, Theraphim, and the ymage of metall. And the preste stode in the enterynge of the gate with the syxe hundred men that were armed vnto batayl,
whyle the other wente into Michas house, and fet the kerued ymage, the Ephod, Theraphim, and the ymage of metall. Then sayd the preste vnto them: what do ye?
They answered hym: holde thy peace, laye thyne hande vpon thy mouth, and come with vs, to be oure father Ꟶ preste. Is it better for the to be a preste vnto the house of one man, then to be a prest vnto a trybe or a kynred in Israell?
And the preste was glad and toke the Ephod, and Theraphim, and the grauen ymage, Ꟶ went with the people.
And they turned and departed, and put the chyldren, the catell and their other substaunce before them.
And when they were a good waye from the house of Micah, the men that were in the houses, and in Micahs house, made an oute crye, and folowed after the chyldren of Dan, and called vnto them.
And they turned their faces, and sayde vnto Micah: what ayleth the, that thou makest an out crye?
And he sayd: ye haue taken awaye my goddes whych I made, and also the preste, and go your wayes with them. And what haue I more? how then saye ye vnto me, what ayleth the?
And the chyldren of Dan sayde vnto hym: let not thy voyce be hearde amonge vs, lest angrye felowes runne vpon the, and thou loose thy lyfe with the lyues of all thyne housholde.
And so the chyldren of Dan wente theyr wayes. And when Micah sawe that they were to stronge for hym, he turned and went backe vnto hys house agayne.
And they toke the thynges which Micah had made, Ꟶ the preste which he had, Ꟶ came vnto Lais, euen vnto a people that were at reast Ꟶ without mistrust, Ꟶ smote them with the edge of the swerd, Ꟶ burnt the cytie with fyre.
And there was no man to helpe, because Lais was farre from Sidon, Ꟶ they had no medelyng with any other man. And the cyte stode in the valey that lyeth by Bethrehob. And they bylt them there a cytie, Ꟶ dwelt therin.
And called it Dan, after the name of Dan their father which was borne vnto Israell. Howbeit, in very dede the name of the cytie was Lais at the begynninge.
And the chyldren of Dan set them vp the grauen ymage. And Ionathan the sonne of Gerson, the sonne of Manasses and hys sonnes were the prestes in the trybe of Dan vntyll they were caryed awaye out of the land captyue.
And they sett them vp the kerued ymage which Micah made, all the whyle that the house of God was in Silo.
It chaunced in those dayes, when there was no kyng in Israel, that a certayn leuyte sogeournynge on the syde of mount Ephraim, toke to wyfe a concubyne out of Bethlehem Iuda:
and hys concubyne played the whore by hym, and went awaye from hym, vnto her fathers house to Bethlehem Iuda, and there continued foure monethes.
And her husbande arose, and went after her, to speake frendely vnto her, and to bring her home agayne, hauynge hys ladd with hym, and a couple of asses. And she brought him vnto her fathers house, and when the father of the damosell sawe hym, he reioysed of hys comyng.
And his father in lawe the damosels father kept him. And the Leuyte aboade with hym thre dayes, and so they dyd eate and drincke, and lodged there.
The fourth daye whan they arose erly in the mornynge, the man stode vp, to departe. And the damoselles father sayd vnto his sonne in lawe: confort thyne hert with a morsell of bread, and then go your waye.
And they sate downe, and dyd eat and drincke both of them togeather. And the damoselles father sayd vnto the man: Be content I praye the, Ꟶ tarye all nyght, and let thyne herte be mery.
And when the man stode vp to departe, hys father in lawe compelled him to turne againe: and to tarie all nyght there.
And he rose vp erlye the fyfth daye to departe, and the damoselles father sayde, comforte thine herte: Ꟶ they taried vntyll after middaye. And they dyd eate bothe of them to geather.
And when the man arose to departe with his concubine and his ladd, his father in law the damoselles father sayde vnto hym: beholde, the daye gothe fast awaye Ꟶ draweth towarde euen, tary all night: at the least waye tarye this daye here, that thyne hert maye be merye. And to morowe get you erlye vpon your waye, that thou mayest get the to thy tent.
Neuerthelater the man wolde not tary, but arose and departed, and came as ferre as Iebus, (which is Ierusalem) and his two asses laden, and his concubine and his ladd with him.
And when they were fast by Iebus the daye was sore spent, and the younge man sayd vnto his master: come I praye the and let vs turne in, into this cytie of the Iebusites and lodge all night there.
His master answered him: we will not turne into a straunge cytie that are not of the chyldren of Israel: we wyll go forth to Gibea.
And he sayd vnto hys ladd, go forwarde, and we shall come to one of these places to lodge all night ether in Gibea or in Rama.
And they went forwarde vpon theyr waye, and the sonne went downe vpon them, when they were fast by Gibea which belongeth to them of BenIamin.
And they turned thither warde to go in, and lodge all nyght in Gibea. And when he came, he sat him downe in a streat of the cytie, for there was no man that toke them to lodginge.
And behold, there came an olde man from his worke, out of the felde at euen, which was also of mount Ephraim, Ꟶ dwelt as a straunger in Gibea. But the men of the place were the children of Iemim.
And when he had lyfte vp his eyes, he sawe a wayefaring man in the streate of the cytie. And the olde man sayde: whether goest thou? And whence comest thou?
He answered him: we come from Bethlehem Iuda towarde the syde of mount Ephraim: from thence am I, and I went to Behlehem Iuda, and go now to the house of the Lord. And there is no man that receaueth me to house.
We haue strawe and prauender for oure Asses, and bread and wyne for me and thy handmayde, and for the ladd that is with thy seruaunt, and we lacke nothynge.
The olde man sayd: peace be with the, all that thou lackest shalt thou fynde with me: onelye abyde not in the streate all nyght,
and so he brought him into his house, and gaue fodder vnto his Asses. And they wasshed their fete, and dyd eate and drynck.
And as they were makynge their herttes merye, beholde, the men of the cytie which were wicked, set the house rounde aboute, and thrust at the dore, and spake to the man of the house, the olde man, sayinge: brynge forth the man that came into thyne house, that we maye knowe hym.
And the man of the house, the olde man went out, and sayde vnto them, Oh, naye my brethren, do not so wickedlye, seyng that this man is come into myne house: do not so vnmete a thing.
Beholde, here is my daughter a mayden, and this mannes concubine, them I wyll bringe out now vnto you, and humble them, and do with them what semeth you good: but vnto this man, do not so abhominable a thinge.
But the men wolde not herken to him. And the man toke his concubine, and brought her out vnto them, which knewe her, and abused her, all the nyght, euen vnto the mornynge. And when the daye beganne to sprynge, they let her go.
And then came the woman in the dawnyng of the daye, and fell downe at the doore of the mannes house, where her Lorde was, tyll it was daye.
And her Lorde arose vp in the mornyng, and opened the dores of the house, and went out to go hys waye. And beholde, the woman, euen his concubine laye a longe before the dore of the house, Ꟶ her handes stretched out vpon the thressholde. And he
sayde vnto her: vp and let vs be goynge. But she answered not. Then the man toke her vp vpon an Asse, and stode vp, and gat him vnto his awne home.
And when he was come vnto his house, he toke a knyfe, Ꟶ caught hys concubine, and deuided her with the bones into twelue peces, and sent her into all quarters of Israell.
And all that sawe it, sayde: there was no soche dede done or sene sence the children of Israel cam out of Egipt vnto this daye, consyder the matter, take aduisement, and saye youre myndes.
Then all the chyldren of Israel went out: and the congregacyon was gathered togeather as it had bene but one man, euen from Dan to Berseba and vnto the lande of Gilead, vnto the Lorde in Mizpa,
and there stode folke out of al quarters and of all the trybes of Israell, in the congregacyon of the people of God, foure hundred thousande fote men that drewe swerdes.
And whan the chyldren of BenIamin hearde that the chyldren of Israell were gone vp to Mizpa, and had sayde. O ye chyldren of Israell, tell vs how this wickednesse happened.
And the Leuite, the womans husbande that was slayne, answered and sayde, I came into Gybea that is in BenIamin with my concubyne to lodge all nyght.
And the men of Gibea rose agaynst me, and set the house rounde aboute vpon me by nyght, and thought to haue slayne me: and my concubyne haue they so forced, that she is deed.
And I toke my concubyne, and cutt her in peces, and sent her thorow out all the landes of the enherytaunce of Israell. For they haue commytted abhominacyon and folly in Israell.
Beholde, ye are all chyldren of Israell. Pondre thys matter, and geue youre aduyse in the case
And all the people arose, as it had ben one man, saying, there shall not a man of vs go to his tent, nether turne into his house.
But this shalbe it that we wyll do to Gibea: We will go vp by lottte agaynst it.
And we will take ten men of the hundred thorowe out all the trybes of Israell, and an hundred of the thousande, and a thousande out of ten thousande, to fett vitayle for the people to make that they maye go agaynst Gibea BenIamin, because of all the abhominacyon, that they haue wrought in Israell.
And so all the men of Israell gathered to geather agaynst the cytie, knyte to geather, as it had ben but one man.
And the trybes of Israell sent men thorow all the trybe of BenIamin sayinge what wyckednesse is this that is happened amonge you?
Now therfore delyuer vs the men, those chyldren of Belial which are in Gibea, that we maye sley them, and put awaye euell from Israell. Neuerthelater the chyldren of BenIamin wolde not herken vnto the voyce of their brethren the chyldren of Israell:
but geathered them selues to geather out of the cyties vnto Gibea, to come out and fight agaynst the chyldren of Israell.
And the chyldren of BenIamin were nombred at that tyme, out of the cyties .xxvj. thousand men that drewe swerdes, besyde the enhabiters of Gibea, which were nombred seuen hundred chosen men.
And amonge all these folke were seuen hundred left handed men, which euery one coulde slyng stones at an heare breadeth, and not mysse.
And the chyldren of Israell besyde BenIamin, were nombred foure hundred thousande men that drew swerdes, and were all men of warre.
And the chyldren of Israell arose, Ꟶ went vp to Bethel, Ꟶ asked councell of God, who shulde begynne the battell agaynst the chyldren of BenIamin? And the Lord sayd. Iuda shall begynne.
And the chyldren of Israel stode vp erlye and beseged Gibea.
And the men of Israell went out to battell agaynst BenIamin, and the men of Israel put them selues in araye to fyght agaynst them, besyde Gibea.
And the chyldren of BenIamin came out of Gibea, and destroyed of the Israelites that daye .xxij. thousande men, and brought them to the erth.
And the folke of the chyldren of Israell plucked vp their hertes and went to agayne, and made batell in the same place where they dyd the fyrst daye.
And the chyldren of Israel went vp, and wept before the Lord vnto euen, and asked of the Lord, saying, shall we go agayne to battell agaynst the chyldren of BenIamin oure brethren? And the Lord sayde: go vp agaynst them.
And the chyldren of Israel came out agaynst the children of BenIamin the seconde daye.
And the chyldren of BenIamin went agaynst them out of Gibea, the seconde daye, and destroyed to the erth of the chyldren of Israell once agayne .xviij. thousande men that drew swerdes euery man of them.
Then the chyldren of Israell and all the people went vp and cam vnto Bethell, and wepte and sat there before the Lord, and fasted the same daye vnto euen, Ꟶ offered burntofferynges and peaceofferynges before the Lorde.
And the chyldren of Israel asked the Lord: for there was the arcke of the apoyntment of God,
in those dayes. And Phinehes the sonne of Eleazar, the sonne of Aaron waytynge vpon it at that tyme sayde: shall I get me vp to go out any moare to batell agaynst the chyldren of BenIamin my brethren, or shall I cease? The Lorde sayde: go, for to morowe I will delyuer them into youre handes.
And Israell sett layers awayte rounde about Gibea.
And the chyldren of Israel went vp agaynst the chyldren of BenIamin the thyrde tyme, and put them selues in araye agaynst Gibea, as twyse before.
And the chyldren of BenIamin came out agaynst the people, and were drawen awaye from the cytie: And they beganne to smyte of the people deed (as twise before, by two hye wayes of which one gothe vp to Bethell and the other to Gibea thorowe the felde) vpon a thyrtye men of Israell.
And the chyldren of BenIamin sayde. They are fallen before vs, as at the fyrst. But the chyldren of Israel sayde: let vs flye and plucke them awaye from the cytie, vnto the hye wayes.
And all the men of Israell rose vp out of their place, and put them selues in araye at Baal Thamar. And lyke wyse the layers in wayte of Israel came forth out of their places, euen out of the medowes that were aboute Gibea,
Ꟶ came agaynst Gibea: ten thousande chosen men out of all Israel, and there was a sore battell. But the other wist not that so great euyll was so nye them.
And the Lorde plaged BenIamin before Israel, Ꟶ the chyldren of Israel destroyed of the Beniamites the same daye .xxv. thousande and a hundred men, that drue swerdes euerye one of them.
And whan the chyldren of BenIamin sawe that they were put to the worste, the men of Israel gaue rowme to the Beniamites, because they trusted vnto the layers in wayte which they had layde besyde Gibea.
And the layers in wayte hasted, and ranne vpon Gibea, and went and smote all the cytye with the edge of the swerde.
And an apoyntment had the men of Israell from the layers in wayte that they shulde make a greate smoke ryse vp out of the cytie.
And whan the men of Israel fledd in the battell BenIamin began to smyte deed of the chyldren of Israel, aboute a thyrtie parsonnes, and sayde: the other are put to the worsse before vs, as in the fyrst batell.
But whan there began to aryse out of the cytie a pyller of smoke, the Beniamites loked backe: and beholde, the wastynge of the hole cytie began to ascende vp to heauen.
When the men of Israell also turned agayne, the men of Ben Iamin were abasshed: for they saw that euel approched them.
And therfore they turned their backes before the men of Israel vnto the waye that leadeth to the wildernesse, but the men of warre ouertoke them. And besyde that, they which came out of the cytie, destroyed them in the myddle of them.
And thus they compassed the Beniamites aboute, and chased them to Menuha, and ouerranne them to Gibea on the east syde:
and there were slayne of BenIamin .xviij. thousande, which were all men of warre.
And they turned and fledd to the wyldernesse warde, and vnto the rocke of Rymmon. And the other slue by the waye of the rest of them, fyue thousande men, and stycked vnto them, vntyll they cam to Gideom and slue two thousande men of them.
So that all that were slayne that same daye of BenIamin were .xxv. thousande men that drue swerdes, which were all men of warre:
onelye .vj. hundred men turned and fledd to the wyldernesse, vnto the Rocke of Rymmon and abode there .iiij. monethes.
And the men of Israell turned backe agayne vnto the chyldren of BenIamin, Ꟶ smote them with the edge of the swerde in the cyties, bothe man and beast and all that came to hande, and sett on fyer all the cyties that they coulde come by.
And euery man of Israel sware in Mizpa, sayinge: there shall none of vs geue hys daughter vnto any of BenIamin to wyfe.
And the people came to Bethell Ꟶ abode there tyll euen before God, Ꟶ lyfte vp theyr voyces and wept sore,
and sayde. O Lorde God of Israel, why is thys chaunced in Israel, that there shulde be thys daye one trybe lackynge in Israell?
And on the morow the people rose vp by tyme, and made there an altare, and offered burntofferinges and peaceofferynges.
And the chyldren of Israell asked, who are they amonge all the tribes of Israel, that came not vp with the congregacyon vnto the Lorde? for they had made a greate othe concernynge him that came not vp to the Lord to Mizpa, sayinge: he shall suerlye dye.
And the chyldren of Israell had pytie on BenIamin theyr brethren, and sayde: there is one trybe cut of from Israell thys daye:
what shall we do vnto the remnaunt of them, that they maye haue wyues? we haue sworne by the Lorde, that we will not geue them of oure daughters to wyues.
And they sayde: Is there any of the trybes of Israel, that came not vp to Mizpa to the Lorde?
And beholde, ther came none of the enhabitoures of Iabes Gilead vnto the hoost and congregacyon. For the people were vewed: and beholde, there were none of the enhabiters of Iabes Gilead there.
And they sent thether a multitude, euen .xij. thousande men of the strongest of them, and commaunded them, sayinge: go and smyte the enhabiters of Iabes Gilead with the edge of the swerde, both wemen and chyldren.
And this is it that ye shall do: vtterlye destroye all the males and all the wemen that haue lyen by men.
And they founde amonge the in habiters of Iabes Gilead foure hundred damoselles, virgines, that had knowen no man, by lyeng with any male. And they brought them vnto the host to Silo, which is in the lande of Canaan.
And the hole congregacion sent and spake with the chyldren of BenIamin that were in the Rocke of Rymmon, and called peceablye vnto them:
and BenIamin came agayne at that tyme, and they gaue them wyues, which they had saued alyue of the wemen of Iabes Gilead. But they suffysed them not.
And the people had compassyon on BenIamin, because that God had made a gappe in the trybes of Israel.
And then the elders of the congregacyon, sayde: what shall we do to the remnaunt of them, to get them wyues, seinge all the wyues of BenIamin are destroyed?
And they sayde: there must be an enheritaunce for them that be escaped of BenIamin, that a trybe be not destroyed out of Israell:
howbeit, we maye not geue them wyues of oure daughters. For the chyldren of Israell had sworne, sayinge: curssed be he, that geueth a wyffe to BenIamin.
Then they sayde: beholde, there is a feast of the Lord yearly in Sylo, which is on the northsyde of Bethel, and on the east syde of the waye that goeth from Bethel to Sichen and south from Libanon.
Therfore they commaunded the chyldren of BenIamin, saying: go and lye in wayte in the vynyardes.
And when ye se that the daughters of Silo come out to daunce in a rowe, then come ye out of the vyneyardes, and catch you euerye man a wyfe of the daughters of BenIamin.
And whan theyr fathers or brethren come vnto vs to complayne, we wyll saye vnto them: haue pytie on vs for theyr sakes, because we reserued not to eche man his wyfe in tyme of warre, Neither haue ye geuen vnto them, that ye shulde synne at this tyme.
And the chyldren of BenIamin dy euen so: and toke them wyues accordynge to the nombre of them that daunced, whom they caught. And they went, and returned vnto theyr enheritaunce, and repayred the cyties, and dwelt in them.
And the chyldren of Israell departed thence at that tyme, and went euery man to hys trybe, and to hys kynred, and went out from thence euery man to hys enheritaunce.
In those dayes there, was no kynge in Israel: but euery man dyd that which semed ryght in his awne eyes.
It fortuned, that when the Iudges iudged, there fell a darth in the lande, and a certen man of Bethlehem Iuda went for to soiourne in the contreye of Moab: he and hys wyfe, and hys two sonnes.
The name of the man was Elimelec, and the name of hys wyfe, Naomi: and the names of hys two sonnes were, Mahlon and Chilion, and they were Ephraites, out of Bethlehem Iuda. And when they came into the land of Moab, they contynued there.
And Elimilec Naomies husband dyed, and she remayned with her two sonnes,
which toke them wyues of the nacions of the Moabites: the ones name was Orpha, and the others Ruth. And they dwelled there about a ten yere.
And Mahlon and Chilion dyed also euen both of them, and the woman was lefte desolate of her two sonnes and of her husbande.
Then stode she vp with her daughters in lawe, and returned from the countrey of Moab: for she had hearde saye in the countrey of Moab, how that the Lorde had vysyted hys people, and geuen them bred.
Wherfore she departed out of the place where she was, and her two daughters with her. And they went on theyr waye to returne vnto the lande of Iuda.
And Naomi sayde vnto her two daughters in lawe: go and returne eche of you vnto your mothers house: and the Lord deale as kyndlye with you, as ye haue dealt with the deed, and with me.
And the Lorde geue you, that you maye fynde rest, ether of you in the house of her husbande. And whan she kyssed them, they lyft vp theyr voyce, and wepte,
and sayde vnto her: we wyll go with the vnto thy folke.
And Naomi sayde: turne agayne my daughters: for what cause wyll you go with me? Are there any mo chyldren in my wombe, to be your husbandes?
Turne agayne my daughters, and go: for I am to olde to haue an husbande. And yf I sayde, I haue hope, yf I toke a man also this nyght: yee and though I had all readye borne sonnes,
wolde ye tarye after them, tyll they were of age? or wolde ye for them so long refrayne from takynge of husbandes? Not so my daughters: for it greueth me moch for youre sakes, that the hande of the Lorde is gone out agaynst me.
And they lyft vp their voyces, and wepte agayne, Ꟶ Orpha kyssed her mother in lawe, but Ruth aboade styll by her.
And Naomi sayde: se, thy syster in lawe is gone backe agayne vnto her people and vnto her goddes: returne thou after her:
And Ruth answered: entreate me not to leaue the, and to returne from after the: for whether thou goest, I will go also, Ꟶ where thou dwellest, there I wyll dwell: thy people shalbe my people, and thy God my God,
Where thou dyest, there wyll I dye, and there will I be buried. The Lord do so and so to me, yf ought but death onelye departe the and me asondre.
When she sawe that she was stedfastly mynded to go with her, she lefte speakynge vnto her.
And so they went both, vntyll they came to Bethlehem. And when they were come to Bethlehem, it was noysed of them thorow all the cytie, and the wemen sayd: is not this Naomi?
And she answered them: call me not Naomi but call me Mara, for the Allmyghtye hath made me verye bytter.
I went out full: and the Lorde hath brought me home agayne emptie. Why then call ye me Naomi: seynge the Lord hath humbled me, and the allmightie hath brought me vnto aduersyte?
And so Naomi with Ruth the Moabitesse her daughter in lawe returned out of the countreye of Moab, and came to Bethlehem, in the begynninge of barley harueste.
And Naomis husband had a kinsman of strength, and myght, (which was of the kynredd of Elimelec) named Booz.
And Ruth the Moabitesse sayd vnto Naomi: let me go to the felde, and geather eares of corne after any man in whose syght, I fynde grace. And she sayde vnto her: go my daughter.
And she went, and came to the felde, and geathered after the reapers, and her chaunce was, that the same felde pertayned vnto Booz, which was of the kynred of Elimelec.
And behold, Booz came from Bethlehem, and sayd vnto the reapers: the Lorde be with you. And they answered him: the Lorde blesse the.
Then sayd Booz vnto his younge man that stode by the reapers. Whose damosell is this?
And the younge man that stode by the reapers, answered, and sayde: it is the Moabityshe damosell, that came with Naomi out of the countrey of Moab,
and she sayde vnto vs: Oh, let me lease Ꟶ geather after the reapers, the eares that remayne: and so she came, and hath continued euen from the mornyng vnto now, saue that she taried a litle in the house.
Then sayde Booz vnto Ruth: hearest thou my daughter: go to no nother felde to geather, nether go from hence: but abyde here by my maydens.
Let thine eyes be on the felde that they reape, and go thou after the maydens. Haue I not charged the young men, that they shal do the no hurt? Moreouer when thou art a thyrst, go vnto the vessels, and drinck of that which the laddes haue drawen.
Then she fell on her face and bowed her selfe to the grounde, and sayd vnto him: how is it that I haue founde grace in thine eyes, and that thou shuldest knowe me, seing I am an aliaunt?
And Booz answered and sayde vnto her: all is tolde and shewed me, that thou hast done vnto thy mother in lawe, sence the death of thyne husbande, how thou hast lefte thy father and thy mother, and the lande where thou wast borne, and art come vnto a nacion which thou knewest not in tyme passed.
The Lord quyte thy worcke, and a full rewarde be geuen the of the Lorde God of Israell, vnder whose wynges thou art come to abyde.
Then she sayde: let me fynde fauoure in thy syghte my Lorde, thou that hast conforted me, and spoken hartely vnto thy mayde, which yet am not like vnto one of thy maydens.
Booz sayde vnto her agayne: in tyme of refeccyon come thou hither, and eate of the breed, and dypp thy soppe in the vinegre. And she sate downe by the reapers, Ꟶ he reached her parched corne: of the which she dyd eate, and was suffised, and lefte parte.
And when she was rysen vp to gather, Booz commaunded hys young men, saying: let her gather euen amonge the heapes, and forbydde her not.
And leaue her some of the sheues for the nonce, and let it lye, that she maye gather it vp, and rebuke her not.
And so she geathered in the felde, vntyll euen, and thresshed that she had geathered, and it was in measure vpon an Epha of barleye.
And she toke it vp, and went into the cytie: and whan her mother in lawe had sene what she had gathered, she plucked out also, Ꟶ gaue to her that she had reserued, when she had eaten ynough.
And her mother in lawe sayd vnto her: where hast thou gathered to daye? and where wroughtest thou? blessed be he, that knewe that. And she shewed her mother in lawe how she had wrought with him, and sayde: the mannes name with whom I wrought to daye is Booz.
And Naomi sayd vnto her daughter in lawe: blessed be he of the Lorde, for he ceasseth not to do good to the lyuing and to the deed. And Naomi sayde agayne vnto her: the man is nye vnto vs, and of oure next kynne.
And Ruth the Moabite sayde: he sayde vnto me also. Thou shalt be wt my young men, vntyll they haue ended all my haruest.
And Naomi answered vnto Ruth her daughter in lawe: it is best my daughter that thou go out with hys maydens, that they fall not vpon the in any other felde.
And so she kept her by the maydens of Booz, to gather, vnto the ende of barley haruest and of whete heruest also: and dwelt with her mother in lawe.
Then Naomi her mother in lawe sayde vnto her: my daughter, shal I not seke reast for the, that thou mayst prosper?
And is not Booz onre kynsman, with whose maydens thou wast? Beholde, he wenoweth barleye to nyght in the thresshynge floure:
washe thy selfe therfore, and anoynt the, and put thy rayment vpon the, and gett the downe to the barne. But let not a man knowe of the, vntyll he haue leaft eatynge and drynckyng.
And when he goeth to slepe, marcke the place where he layeth hym downe, and then go and lyfte vp the clothes, that are on his fete, and laye the downe there, and so shall he tell the what thou shalt do.
And she answered her: all that thou byddyst me, I wyll do.
And so she went downe vnto the barne, and dyd accordynge to all that her mother in lawe bade her.
And when Booz had eaten Ꟶ droncken, and made him merye, and was gone in, to lye downe besyde the heape of corne, she came softlye, and lifte vp the clothes of his fete, and layde her downe.
And at mydnight the man was afrayde and groped. And beholde: a woman laye at his fete.
And he sayde: what art thou? she answered: I am Ruth thine hand mayde, sprede thy wynge ouer thine hand mayde, for thou art the next of the kynne.
He sayd: blessed be thou in the Lorde my daughter, for thou hast shewed more goodnesse in the later ende, then at the beginnynge, in as moche as thou folowedest not younge men, whether they were poore or riche.
And now my daughter feare not, I will do to the all that thou requirest, for all the cytie of my people doth knowe, that thou art a woman of vertue.
And it is true that I am of thy next kynne: howbe it, there is one nyer then I.
Tary this night. And when mornyng is come, yf he will marye the, it is good, so let him do. But and yf he will not haue the, as sure as the Lorde lyueth I will haue the: lye styll vntil the morning.
And so she laye at his fete vntill the morninge. And she arose vp before one coulde knowe another. And he sayde: let no man knowe, that there came any woman into the barne.
And he sayde agayne: bringe thy mantell that thou hast vpon the, and holde it vp. And whan she helde it vp, he mette in sixe measures of Barleye, and layed it on her. And she gatt her into the cytie:
and whan she came into her mother in lawe, she sayde: how is it with the my daughter? And she tolde her all that the man had done to her.
And sayde also: these sixe measures of barlye gaue he me, and sayd: thou shalt not come emptie vnto thy mother in lawe.
Then sayd she, my daughter, syt still, vntill thou knowe how the matter will chaunce. For the man wyll not be in reast, vntill he haue fynysshed the thinge this same day.
Then went Booz vnto the gate and satt him downe there: and beholde, the kynsman of which Booz spake, cam by. Unto whom, he sayde: come and sytte downe here, and called him by his name. And he turned in, and sate downe.
And he toke ten men of the elders of the citie, and sayd: sytye downe here. And they sat downe.
And he sayde vnto the kynsman: Naomi that is come agayne out of the contreye of Moab will sell a parcell of lande, which was oure brother Elimelecs.
And I thought to do the to wete, and bid the bye it before the enhabitoures and elders of my people. Yf thou be disposed to redeme it, do: but and yf thou wilt not pourchase it, then tell me, that I maye knowe. For there is none to calenge it, saue thou, and I nexte the. And the other answered: I will pourchase it.
Then sayde Booz, what daye thou biest the felde of the hand of Naomi, thou must take also Ruth the Moabite the wyfe of the deed, to stere vp the name of the deed vpon his enheritaunce.
The kinsman answered: I cannot purchase it, for marringe of myne awne enheritaunce: take thou my right to the, for I cannot purchase it.
Now, this was the maner of olde tyme in Israell concerninge purches and chaunging, for to stablishe all thinge: that a man must plucke of his showe, and geue it his neyghboure, and this was a sure witnesse in Israell.
Therfore the kinsman saide to Booz: Bye it thou: and so drue of his showe.
And Booz sayde vnto the elders and vnto all the people: ye are witnesses this daye, that I haue bought all that was Elimelecs, and all that was Chilions and Mahlons, of the hand of Naomi.
And moreouer, Ruth the Moabite the wyfe of Mahlon, haue I purchased to be my wyfe, to stere vp the name of the deed vpon his enheritaunce, and that his name be not put out from amonge his brethren, and from the gate of his place: ye are witnesses this daye.
And all the people that were in the gate, and the elders sayde: we are wytnesses: the Lord make the woman that is come into thyne house, lyke Rahel and Lea, which twayne dyd builde the house of Israell: do thou also valeauntly in Ephrata, and be famouse in Bethlehem.
Thy house be like the house of Pharez whom Thamar bare vnto Iuda, euen of the sede which the Lorde shall geue the of this younge woman.
And so Booz toke Ruth, and she was his wyfe. And whan he went in vnto her, the Lorde gaue, that she conceaued, and bare a sonne.
And the wemen sayde vnto Naomi: blessed be the Lorde, the which hath not left the without a kinsman, to haue a name in Israell,
and that shall bring thy life agayne, and cherishe thine olde age. For thy daughter in lawe which loueth the, hath borne vnto him: and she is better to the then seuen sonnes.
And Naomi toke the childe, and layed it in her lappe, and became nourse vnto it.
And her neybours gaue it a name, saying: there is a childe borne to Naomi, and called it, Obed. The same is the father of Isai, the father of Dauid.
These are the generacions of Pharez: Pharez begat Hezron:
Hezron begat Ram, Ram begat Aminadab,
Aminadab begat Nahson, Nahson begat Salmon,
Salmon begat Booz. Booz begat Obed,
Obed begat Isai, Isai begat Dauid.
There was a man of one of the two Ramaths (of the kinred of zophim, of mount Ephraim) named Elkana the sonne of Ieroham the sonne of Elihu, the sonne of Thohu, the sonne of zuph, an Ephrathite:
whych had two wyues, the one called Hanna, Ꟶ the other Phenenna. And Phenenna had children, but Hanna had none.
And the sayd man went vp out of his citye euery feastfull daye, to praye Ꟶ to offer vnto the Lord of hostes in Silo, where were the two sonnes of Eli (Hophni Ꟶ Phinehes) the lordes prestes.
And it fell on a solempne daye, that Elkana offered, and gaue to Phenenna his wife Ꟶ to all her sonnes and daughters porcyons.
But vnto Hanna he gaue a porcion wt a heuye chere, for he loued Hanna, and the Lord had made her barren.
And her enemye (Phenenna) vexed her sore contynually, to moue her, because the lord had made her barren.
And so did she yere by yere as ofte as she went vp to the house of the lord. And so chafed her, which wepte, and did not eate.
Then sayde Elkana her husband to her: Hanna, why wepest thou? and why eatest thou not? and why is thyne herte troubled? am not I better to the, then ten sonnes?
So Hanna rose vp after that they had eaten Ꟶ droncke in Sylo. And Eli the Preaste sate vpon a stole by one of the syde postes of the temple of the Lorde.
And she was troubled in her mynde, and prayed vnto the Lord, Ꟶ wepte sore,
and vowed a vowe, and sayd: O Lord of hostes, yf thou wylt loke on the trouble of thine handmayde, Ꟶ remembre me, and not forget thine handmayde, but geue vnto thine handmayde a man chylde: I wyll geue him vnto the Lord all the dayes of his lyfe, Ꟶ there shall no raser come vpon his heed.
And as she continued praying before the lord, it fortuned, that Eli marked her mouth.
For Hanna spake in her herte, Ꟶ her lyppes did but moue onely, but her voyce was not heard: Ꟶ therfore Eli thought she had bene droncken,
and Eli sayd vnto her: How long wylt thou be droncken? put awaye from the, the wyne that thou hast.
Hanna answered and sayde: not so my Lord, I am a woman of a sorowfull herte: I haue droncke nether wyne nor stronge drynck, but haue powred out my soule before the Lord.
Count not thyne handmayde to be lyke a daughter of Belial, for out of the aboundance of my heuynes Ꟶ greafe: haue I spoken hitherto.
Eli answered her agayne: Ꟶ sayde go in peace: the God of Israell graunt the thy peticyon, that thou hast asked of hym.
She sayde: let thyne hand mayde fynde grace in thy sight And so the woman went her waye, Ꟶ dyd eat, Ꟶ loked no more so sadde.
And they rose vp earlye, Ꟶ worshipped before the lord, Ꟶ then returned, Ꟶ came to theyr house to Ramath. And whan Elkana knew Hanna his wyfe, the Lord remembred her:
for in processe of tyme it came to passe, that she conceaued, Ꟶ bare a sonne, Ꟶ called his name Samuel (sayeng:) because I haue asked him of the Lord.
And Elkana Ꟶ all his house went vp to offer vnto the Lord, the offerynge due for the feast, Ꟶ also his vowe:
Neuertheles, Hanna went not vp, but sayde vnto her husbande: I wyll tarye vntill the ladde be wened, Ꟶ then I wyll bring him that he maye apeare before the Lord, Ꟶ there abide for euer.
Elkana her husband answered her: do what semith the best: tarye at home, vntill thou hast wened him, Ꟶ I besech the Lord, to make good his sayeng. And so the woman abode, Ꟶ gaue her sonne sucke, vntill she wened him.
And when she had wened him she toke hym with her, with thre bullockes Ꟶ an Epha of floure, Ꟶ a bottel of wyne, and brought him vnto the house of the Lord in Silo, Ꟶ the child was yet but tender of age.
And they slue a bullocke, Ꟶ brought in the ladd to Eli,
and she sayd: Oh my Lord: as truly as thy soule lyueth my Lord, I am the woman that stode before the here, prayeng vnto the Lorde.
For this ladde I prayed, and the Lorde hath geuen me my desire, whych I asked of him:
and therfore I haue geuen hym vnto the Lord, as long as he is mete for the lorde. And they worshipped the Lorde there.
And Hanna prayed and sayde: myne herte reioyseth in the Lord, and myne horne is exalted in the Lorde. My mouth is wyde open ouer myne enemyes, for I reioyse in thy saluacyon.
There is none so holye as the Lord, for without the, is nothing. Nether is there any of strength as is oure God.
Talke not to moche proudlye let olde thynges depart out of your mouthes, for the lorde is a God of knowledge, and his purposes come to passe.
The bowe with the mightye men are broken: and they that were weake, haue girded them selues wt strength.
They that were full, haue hired out them selues for breed, Ꟶ they that were hongrye, ceasse so to be, tyll the baren hath borne seuen: Ꟶ she that had many chyldren, is waxed feble.
The Lord kylleth, and maketh alyue: bryngeth downe to the graue and fetcheth vp agayne.
The Lorde maketh poore, Ꟶ maketh ryche: bringeth lowe, and heueth vp on hye.
He reyseth vp the poore out of the dust, and lyfteth vp the begger from the dong hyll: to sett them amonge princes, and to enherett them with the seate of glorye. For the pillers of the erth are the lordes, and he hath sett the rounde worlde vpon them.
He wyll kepe the fete of hys sayntes, and the wycked shall kepe sylence in darcknesse, Ꟶ in his awne myght shall no man be stronge.
The lordes aduersaries shall be destroyed of hym: and out of heauen shall he thunder vpon euery one of them. The lorde shall iudge the endes of the worlde, Ꟶ shall gyue myght vnto his kynge, and exalte the horne of his anoynted.
And Elkana went to Ramath to his house, Ꟶ the ladd dyd mynistre vnto the lorde before Eli the preaste.
But the sonnes of Eli were chyldren of Belial, and knewe not the lord.
And the Preastes made a lawe for the people, that whensoeuer any man offered any offerynge, the Preastes ladd came, while the fleshe was in sething, Ꟶ a fleshoke wyth thre tethe in his hand,
and thrust it into the panne: ketle, caldren, or potte. And all that the fleshe hoke brought vp, that the Preaste toke awaye. And so they did vnto all the Israelites, that came thyther to Silo.
Yee Ꟶ therto, before they burnt the fatte, the Preastes ladd came and sayd to the man that offered: geue flesh that I maye dresse it for the Preaste, for he wyll not haue sodden fleshe of the, but rawe.
And yf any man sayde vnto hym: let them burne the fatt according to the daye, Ꟶ then take as moche as thine herte desyreth. The ladd wold answere him, yee, thou shalt geue it me now: and yf thou wylt not, I wyll take it with violence.
And the synne of the youngmen was very great before the Lorde. For men abhorred the offeryng of the Lorde.
But the child Samuel ministred before the Lorde, girded about wyth a lynen Ephod.
Moreouer, hys mother made him a lytle coate, Ꟶ brought it to him from yere to yere, when she came vp with her husbande to offer the offeringe in the solempne feastes:
and Eli blessed Elkana Ꟶ his wyfe, and sayde: the Lorde geue the seede of thys woman, for the peticyon that she asked of the lorde. And they went vnto their awne home.
And the lorde visited Hanna, so that she conceaued Ꟶ bare thre sonnes Ꟶ two daughters. And the chylde Samuel grewe before the lorde.
Eli was very olde, Ꟶ herde all that his sonnes dyd vnto all Israel, and how they laye with the wemen that wayted at the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse,
Ꟶ he sayde vnto them: why do ye soche thynges? For of all these people I heare euell reportes of you.
Oh, naye my sonnes: for it is no good reporte that I heare, how that ye make the lordes people to trespasse.
If one man synne agaynst another, daysemen maye be iudges: but yf a man synne agaynst the lorde who will be his dayseman? Notwythstandyng, they herkened not vnto the voyce of their father, because the lorde wolde slaye them.
The chylde Samuel profyted and grew, and was in fauoure both with the lorde, and also with men.
And there cam a man of God vnto Eli, Ꟶ sayd vnto him: thus sayeth the lorde: dyd not I apeare vnto the house of thy father, when they were in Egipte subiect vnto Pharaos house?
And I chose thy father out of all the trybes of Israel to be my Preaste, for to offer vpon myne aultare, Ꟶ to burne incense, and to weare an Ephod before me. And I gaue vnto the house of thy father all the burnt offrynges of the chyldren of Israell.
Wherfore treade ye downe my sacrifice and myne offeryng, which I commaunded to be made in the Tabernacle, Ꟶ honorest thy chyldren aboue me, to make youre selues fatt of the first frutes of all the offerynges of Israel my people?
Wherfore the lorde God of Israell sayeth: I sayde, that thy house and the house of thy father shuld walke before me for euer. But now the lorde sayeth: that be farre from me: for them that worshipe me, I will worshipe, Ꟶ they that despyse me, shall come to shame.
Beholde, the dayes come, that I will cut of thyne arme, Ꟶ the arme of thy fathers house, that there shal not be an elder in thine house.
And thou shalt se thyne enemye in the tabernacle of the lorde, Ꟶ in all that welthe which God shal giue Israell, Ꟶ there shall not be an elder in thyne house for euer.
Neuerthelesse, I wyll not destroye all the males that come of the fro myne aultare. But to make thyne eyes dase, Ꟶ to make thyne hert melte. And all they that be multiplyed in thyne house, shall dye, yf they be men.
And this shalbe a signe vnto the, that shall come vpon thy two sonnes Hophny Ꟶ Phinehes: euen in one daye they shall dye both.
And I wyll stere me vp a faythfull preste, that shall do accordynge to my herte and mynde: And I will buylde him a sure house. And he shall walke before myne anoynted for euer.
And they that are left in thyne house, shall come, and crouch to him for a lytle pece of syluer Ꟶ a cake of bread, Ꟶ shall saye: put me (I praye the) in one offyce or other amonge the prestes, that I maye eate a morsell of bread.
And the chylde Samuel mynistred vnto the Lorde before Eli: Ꟶ the worde of the Lorde was precious in those dayes, nether was there any open visyon.
And it chaunsed at that tyme, that Eli laye in his place, and hys eyes beganne to waxe dymme that he coulde not se.
And yer the lampe of God went out, Samuel layde hym downe to slepe in the temple of the Lord, where the arcke of God was.
And the Lorde called Samuel, Ꟶ he sayde, here am I,
and he ran vnto Eli, Ꟶ sayd: here am I, for thou calledst me. And he sayd: I called the not: go agayne, Ꟶ slepe. And he went, and layde him downe to slepe.
And the Lorde called once agayne: Samuel, Ꟶ Samuel arose Ꟶ went to Ely, Ꟶ sayd, I am here, for thou dyddest call me. And he answered: I called the not, my sonne. Go agayne, and take thy rest:
Samuell knewe not yet the Lord, nether was the worde of the Lord yet opened vnto hym.
And the Lorde went to, Ꟶ called Samuel the thyrd tyme. And he arose, Ꟶ went to Eli, Ꟶ sayde: I am here, for thou hast called me. And Eli perceaued that the Lorde had called the chylde.
Therfore, Eli sayde vnto Samuel: go, Ꟶ lye downe: Ꟶ yf he call the agayne, then saye, speake on Lorde, for thy seruaunt heareth. So Samuel went, Ꟶ layed hym downe in hys place.
And the Lord came, Ꟶ stode, Ꟶ called as before, Samuel Samuel. Samuel answered: speake on: for thy seruaunt heareth.
And the Lord sayde to Samuel: beholde, I will do a thinge in Israel, that both the eares of as many as heareth it, shall tyngle.
In that daye I wyll rayse vp agaynst Eli, all thynges whych I haue spoken concernynge his house: from the begynnyng to the endyng.
I haue tolde him, that I wyll iudge hys house for euer. For the wickednes which he knoweth. For when the people cursed hys sonnes for the same wickednes, he hath not corrected them.
And therfore, I haue sworne vnto the house of Eli, that the wyckednesse of Elies house, shall not be purged wt sacrifyce nor offering for euer.
Samuel laye tyll the mornynge, and opened the dores of the house of the Lorde. And Samuel feared to shewe Eli the visyon.
Then Eli called Samuel, Ꟶ sayde: Samuel my sonne. And he answered: here I am.
He sayde: what is that the Lorde hath sayde vnto the? I praye the, se thou hyde it not from me. God do so, Ꟶ so to the, yf thou hyde any thyng from me, of all that he sayde vnto the.
And Samuel tolde hym euery whytte, and hydd nothynge from hym. And he sayd: it is the Lorde, let him do what semeth hym best,
And Samuel grewe, Ꟶ the Lorde was wyth him, Ꟶ left none of hys wordes vnperformed.
And all Israel from Dan to Bersabe wyst that faythfull Samuel was made the Lordes prophete.
And the Lord appered agayne in Silo: for the Lorde opened hym selfe to Samuel in Silo, thorow the worde of the Lorde.
And Samuel spake vnto all Israel. And Israel went out against the Philistynes to battayle, and pytched besyde the helpe stone. And the Philistynes pytched in Aphek.
And put them selues in araye against Israel. And when they ioyned the battell, Israel was put to the worse before the Philistines. And the Philistynes slue in araye alonge by the feldes, about a foure thousande men.
And when the people were come into their tentes, the elders of Israel sayde: wherfore hath the Lorde cast vs downe this daye before the Philistines? let vs fetch the arcke of the appoyntment of the Lorde oute of Silo vnto vs, that when it commeth amonge vs, it maye saue vs, oute of the hande of oure enemy.
And so the people sent to Silo, Ꟶ fet from thens the arcke of the appoyntment of the Lord of Hoostes, which dwelleth betwene the cherubins. And there were the two sonnes of Eli, Hophni, Ꟶ Phinehes with the arcke of the appoyntment of God.
And it fortuned, that when the arcke of the appoyntment of the Lorde came into the hoost, all Israel showted a myghtie showte, so that the erthe rangge agayne.
And whan the Philistines herde the noyse of the showte, they sayd: what meaneth the sounde of this mighty showt in the host of the Ebrues? And they vnderstode, howe that the arcke of the Lorde was come into the hoost:
And the Philistines were afrayed, and sayde: God is come into the hoost. And they sayd agayne: Wo vnto vs, for it was neuer so before this:
Wo vnto vs, who shall delyuer vs out of the hande of these mighty Goddes? these are the Goddes that smote the Egypcians with so many plages in the wyldernes.
Be stronge and quite youre selues lyke men, O ye Philistynes, that ye be no seruauntes vnto the Ebrues, as they haue bene to you. Be of a manly corage therfore Ꟶ fyght.
And the Philistines fought, Ꟶ Israel was put to the worse Ꟶ fledd euery man into his tente. And ther was an exceading great slaughter, for there were ouerthrowen of Israel .xxx.M. fotemen.
And the arcke of God was taken, Ꟶ the two sonnes of Eli, Hophni, Ꟶ Phinehes were deed.
And there ran a man of BenIamin out of the araye, and came to Silo the same daye with his clothes rent Ꟶ earth vpon hys heed.
And when he came, Eli sate vpon a stole, and loked toward the waye: for his hert feared for the arcke of God. And when the man came into the cytie, and tolde it, all the cytie cryed.
And when Eli herde the noyse of the cryeng he sayd: What meaneth this noyse of the rumor? And the man came in hastely, Ꟶ tolde Eli.
Eli was .xcviij. yeare olde, and hys syght fayled him that he could not se.
And the man sayd vnto Eli: I am he that came out of the araye, Ꟶ fled this daye out of the hoost. And he sayde: what thing is fortuned my sonne?
The messenger answered Ꟶ sayd. Israel is fled before the Philistines, Ꟶ there is a greate slaughter chaunsed amonge the people, Ꟶ thy two sonnes, Hophni Ꟶ Phinehes are deed, Ꟶ the arcke of God is taken.
And it fortuned that whan he made mencion of the arcke of God, Eli fell from of hys stole backwarde vpon the thresholde of the gate, and hys necke brake, and he dyed: for he was an olde man and heuye, and iudged Israel fourtye yeares.
And his daughter in lawe Phinehes wife was wt childe Ꟶ nye the byrthe. And when she hearde the tydinges that the arcke of God was taken, Ꟶ that her father in lawe, Ꟶ her husbande were deed, she bowed her self, and traueled, for her paynes came vpon her.
And about the tyme of her deeth, the wemen that stode aboute her, sayd vnto her: feare not, for thou hast borne a sonne: but she answered not, nor regarded it.
And she named the childe Ichabod, sayinge: The glory is departed from Israel. Because the arcke of God was taken, Ꟶ because of her father in lawe and her husbande.
And she sayde agayne: The glory is gone from Israel, for the arcke of God is taken.
And the Philistynes toke the arcke of God, and caryed it from the helpe stone vnto Asdod,
agayne the Philystynes toke the arcke of God, Ꟶ brought it into the house of Dagon, and sett it by Dagon.
And when they of Asdod were vp in the nexte daye in the mornynge, beholde, Dagon laye vpon the erth before the arcke of the Lorde. And they toke Dagon, Ꟶ set him in hys place agayne.
And when they were vp erly in the nexte mornyng, beholde, Dagon laye vpon the grounde before the arcke of the Lorde, and his heed, Ꟶ his two handes cut of vpon the thresholde, that only the shape of a fyrst was left on hym.
And therfore is it, that the prestes of Dagon (nether any man that commeth into Dagons house) treade not on the thresholde of Dagon in Asdod, vnto thys daye.
But the hande of the Lorde was heuy vpon them of Asdod, Ꟶ he destroyed them, Ꟶ smote them wt emerodes, bothe Asdod Ꟶ in all the coastes therof.
And when the men of Asdod sawe that it was so, they sayde: the arcke of the God of Israel shall not abyde here with vs, for hys hande is sore vpon vs Ꟶ vpon Dagon oure God.
They sent therfore Ꟶ gathered all the lordes of the Philistines vnto them Ꟶ sayde: what shall we do wt the arcke of the God of Israel? They answered: let the arcke of the God of Israel be caryed aboute vnto Gath.
And they caryed the arcke of the God of Israel about. And it fortuned, that when they had caryed it about, there was by the hande of the Lorde a myghtye greate noyse in the cytie, Ꟶ he smote the men of the cytie both small and greate: Ꟶ they had secrete diseases,
Therfore they sent the arcke of God to Akaron. And assone as the arcke of God, came to Akaron, the Akaronites cryed out saying: they haue brought the arcke of the God of Israel to vs, to slee vs and oure people:
And so they sent, and gathered together all the lordes of the Philistines Ꟶ sayde: send awaye the arcke of the God of Israel, to go agayne to his awne place, that it slee vs not and oure people. For there was greate lamentacyon ouer the deade thorowout all the cytie, Ꟶ the hande of God was exceadynge sore there.
And the men that dyed not, were smytten wyth the Emerodes: and the crye of the cytie went vp to heauen.
The arcke of the Lord was in the countrey of the Philistines seuen monethes:
and the Philistynes called for the prestes Ꟶ the soth sayers, sayinge: what shall we do wyth the arcke of the Lorde? tell vs, where with we shall sende it home agayne?
They sayde: Yf you sende the arcke of the God of Israel home agayne, sende it not emptye. But rewarde it wt a trespasse offerynge: and then ye shalbe whole, and it shalbe knowen to you, why hys hande departeth not from you.
Then sayde they: And what shalbe the trespasse offeringe, whych we shall rewarde hym wt? They answered: fyue golden arsses and .v. golden myce, according to the nombre of the lordes of the Philistines. For it is one maner of plage on you all, Ꟶ on your lordes.
Wherfore ye shal make ymages like to your arsses, and ymages lyke to your myce that corrupt the lande, and ye shall geue glory vnto the God of Israel: that he maye take his hand from of you, and from of your goddes, and from of youre lande.
Wherfore do ye harden your hertes as the Egipcians and Pharao hardened their hertes? which when he toke on agaynst them, dyd they not let the people go, Ꟶ they departed?
Now therfore, make a newe carte, and take two melche kyne: on whose necke there hath come no yock. And tye the kyne to the carte, and bring the calues home from them.
And take the arck of the Lord, and laye it vpon the carte, and put the iewels of golde (which ye rewarde him with for a synoffering) in a cofre by the side therof: and send it awaye, that it maye go.
And yf ye se that he go vp by the waye of his awne coaste to Bethsames: then it is he that dyd vs this great euyll. Yf no, we shall knowe then, that it is not his hande that smote vs: but it was a chaunce that happened vs.
And the men dyd euen so: and toke two kyne that gaue mylke, and tyed them to the carte, and kept the calues at home,
and they layde the arck of the Lorde vpon the carte and the cofer wt the myce of gold, and wt the ymages of their arsses.
And the kyne toke the streyght waye to Bethsames, Ꟶ went on the streyght waye: Ꟶ as they went, lowed, Ꟶ turned nether to the right hande ner to the left. And the lordes of the Philistines went after them, vntyll the borders of Bethsames.
And they of Bethsames were reapynge their wheate heruest in the valey. And they lift vp their eyes, and spied the arck. And reioysed when they sawe it.
And the carte came into the felde of one Iehosua a Bethsamite, and stode still there. There was also a great stone. And they claue the wod of the carte Ꟶ offred the kyne a burntoffring vnto the Lord.
And the Leuites toke downe the arck of the Lorde Ꟶ the coffer that was with it, wherin the iewels of golde were: and put them on the great stone. And the men of Bethsames sacrificed burntsacrifice, and offered offeringes that same daye vnto the Lorde.
And when the fyue lordes of the Philistines had sene it, they returned to Akaron the same daye.
And these are the golden arsses which the Philistines gaue to amendes for a trespace offring, to the Lorde: for Asdod one: for Gaza one: for Askalon one: for Gath one: and for Akaron one.
And golden myce, accordyng to the nombre of all the cityes of the Philistines, euen accordynge to the fyue lordes, both of walled townes and of townes vnwalled: euen vnto the greate stone of lamentacyon, wheron they set downe the arcke of the Lord: which stone remaineth vnto this daye in the felde of Iehosua the Bethsamite.
And he plaged the men of Bethsames, because they had sene the arcke of the Lorde. And he slue amonge the people fiftye thousande and thre score and ten men. And the other people lamented, because the Lorde had slayne the people with so great a slaughter.
Wherfore the men of Bethsames sayde: who is able to stande before the Lord so holy a God: and to whom shall he go from vs?
And they sent messengers to the enhabiters of Kariath Iarim, saying: The Philistines haue brought agayne the arke of the Lorde: come ye downe therfore, and fet it vp to you.
And so the men of Kariathiarim came, and fet vp the arck of the Lord: and brought it into the house of Aminadab in Gibea, Ꟶ sanctifyed Eleazar his sonne, to kepe the arck of the Lorde:
and whyle the arcke abode in Kariathiarim, the dayes multiyplied, and ther passed ouer .xx. yeres, and the house of Israel lamented after the Lorde.
And Samuel spake vnto all the house of Israel, saying: yf ye be come agayne vnto the Lorde with all your hertes, then put awaye the straunge goddes and Astharoth from amonge you: and prepare your hertes vnto the Lorde, and serue hym only: for he shall ryd you out of the hande of the Philistines.
Then the chyldren of Israel dyd put awaye Baalim and Astaroth, and serued the Lorde onely.
And Samuel sayde: gather all Israel to Mizpa, and I wyll praye for you vnto the Lorde.
And they gathred together to Mizpa, and drewe water: and powred it out before the Lorde, Ꟶ fasted the same daye and sayde there: we haue synned against the Lorde. And Samuel iudged the chyldren of Israel in Mizpa.
When the Philistines heard that the chyldren of Israel were gathered together to Mizpa, the lordes of the Philistines went vp against Israel. And when the children of Israel heard that they were afrayed of the Philistines,
Ꟶ the children of Israel saide to Samuel: ceasse not to crye vnto the Lorde oure God for vs, that he maye saue vs out of the hand of the Philistines.
And Samuel toke a suckyng lambe, and offered it all together for a burntoffrynge vnto the Lorde: Ꟶ cryed vnto the Lorde for Israel, Ꟶ the Lord heard him.
And as Samuel offred the burntoffring, the Philistines came to fyght agenst Israel. But the Lorde thondered a great thonder that same daye amonge the Philistines, and scatered them, that they fell before Israel.
And the men of Israel went out of Mizpa, and pursued the Philistines, Ꟶ folowed vpon them, vntyll the place that is vnder Bethcar.
And then Samuel toke a stone, and pitched it betwene Mizpa and the mark of the rock, and called the name therof, the stone of helpe, saying: Hitherto hath the Lord helped vs.
And so the Philistines were brought vnder, Ꟶ they came nomore into the coastes of Israel: Ꟶ the hand of the Lord was agaynst the Philistines all the dayes of Samuel.
Therto, the cities which the the Philistines had taken from Israel, were restored agayne to Israel, euen from Acaron to Gath, wt the coastes of the same, Ꟶ Israel plucked them out of the handes of the Philistines. And there was peace betwene Israel Ꟶ the Amorites.
Samuel iudged Israel all the dayes of his lyfe,
and went about yere by yere to Bethel, Gilgal, and Mizpa, Ꟶ iudged Israel in all those places,
Ꟶ came agayne to Rama: for there was his house, Ꟶ ther he iudged Israel also, Ꟶ there he buylt an aulter vnto the Lorde.
When Samuel was olde, he made his sonnes iudges ouer Israel.
The name of his eldest sonne was Ioel, and the name of the second Abia: Ꟶ they were iudges in Beerseba.
And his sonnes walked not in his wayes: but turned asyde after lucre, and toke rewarde, and peruerted the ryght.
Then all the elders of Israel gathered them together, and came to Samuel vnto Rama,
Ꟶ sayd vnto him: behold, thou art olde, and thy sonnes walke not in thy wayes. Now therfore make vs a kinge to iudge vs, as all other nacions haue.
But the thyng displeased Samuel, when they sayde: geue vs a king to iudge vs. And Samuel prayed vnto the Lorde.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Samuel: heare the voyce of the people in all that they saye vnto the. For they haue not cast the awaye, but me: that I shulde not raygne ouer them.
And as they haue euer done (sence I brought them out of Egypte vnto thys daye, and haue forsaken me, and serued other goddes) euen so do they vnto the.
Nowe therfore herken vnto their voyce: howbeit, yet testifye vnto them and shewe them the aucthorite of the king that shall raygne ouer them.
And Samuel told all the wordes of the Lorde vnto the people, that asked a kyng of him, and he sayde:
thys shalbe the aucthorite of the kyng that shal raygne ouer you: he wyll take your sonnes and put them to hys charettes, and make hys horsemen of them, to runne before his charet:
and will make him of them, captaynes ouer thousandes and ouer fiftyes, and wyll set them to eare his grounde, and to gather in his heruest, and to make instrumentes of warre, and apparell for his charettes.
And he wyll take your daughters, Ꟶ make them apoticaries, cookes and bakers.
And he shall take the best of youre feldes, and of youre vyneyardes, and of your olyue trees, and geue them to hys seruauntes.
And he shall take the tenth of your seed, and of your vyneyardes, and geue it to hys chamberlaynes, and to hys seruauntes.
And he shall take the best of your menseruauntes and maydseruauntes and yong men, and of your asses, and put them to his worke.
And he shall take the tenth of youre shepe, and ye shalbe his seruauntes.
And ye shall crie out at that tyme vpon your kynge, which ye shall haue chosen you, Ꟶ the Lorde will not heare you at that daye.
Neuertheles, the people wolde not heare the voyce of Samuel, but dyd say: naye, not so. But there shalbe a king ouer vs,
that we maye be lyke other nacyons, and that oure kyng maye iudge vs, and go out before vs, and fyght our battaylles.
Therfore, when Samuel hearde all the wordes of the people, he rehearsed them in the eares of the Lorde.
And the Lord sayde to Samuel: herken vnto theyr voyce, and make them a king: And Samuel sayde vnto the men of Israel: go euery man vnto his citye.
Ther was a man of BenIamin named Cis the sonne of Abiel, the sonne of zeror, the sonne of Bechorath, the sonne of Aphiah, the sonne of a man that was a Ieminite, a man of strength and might:
and the same had a sonne called Saul, a goodly yong man and a fayre: so that amonge the chyldren of Israel there was none goodlyer then he. For from the shoulders vpwarde, he was hyer then all the other people.
And the asses of thys Cis Sauls father were lost: and Cis sayde to Saul his sonne: take one of the laddes wt the and go vp Ꟶ seke the asses.
And he went thorow mount Ephraim, Ꟶ thorowe the lande of Salisa: but they founde them not. Then they went thorowe the lande of Salim, and there they were not. When they went also thorowe the lande of Iemini, they founde them not.
At the last, when they were come to the land of zuph, Saul saide to his lad that was wt him: come, let vs returne, lest my father leaue caring for the asses, Ꟶ take thought for vs.
He sayd vnto him: behold, there is in this citye a man of God, Ꟶ he is a worshipfull man: all that he sayth, cometh suerly to passe. Nowe then let vs go thyther: peraduenture he shal shewe vs what waye we maye go.
Then sayd Saul to his lad: yf we will go, what shall we bring the man? For our bread is all spent out of oure vessels, Ꟶ there is no nother present to bring the man of God: what haue we?
And the lad answered Saul agayne, and sayde: I haue founde about me the fourth parte of a sycle, that will I geue the man of God, to tell vs oure waye.
Before tyme in Israel when a man went to seke an answere of God, thus wise he spake, come, and let vs go to the sear. For he that is now called a prophet, was in the olde tyme called a sear.
Then sayde Saul to hys lad: well sayde of the: come, let vs go. And so they went vnto the cytie where the man of God was.
And as they were goinge vp into the cytie, they mett wyth damoselles that came out to drawe water, and sayd vnto them: is there here a sear?
And the maydens answered them, yee, beholde, he is before you. Make hast nowe, for he cam thys daye to the cyte for there is an offerynge of the people this daye in the hill.
When ye be come into the cytie, ye shall fynde hym strayght waye, yer he go vp to the hyll to eate: for the people wyll not eate vntyll he come, because he doth blesse the offering. And then eate they that be bydden to the feast. Nowe therfore get you vp, for this daye shall ye fynde hym.
And they went vp into the cytie. And when they were come into the myddes of the citie: beholde, Samuel came out agaynst them, for to go vp to the hill.
But the Lorde had tolde Samuel in his eare (a daye before Saul came) sayenge:
to morowe thys tyme I wyll sende the a man out of the lande of Ben Iamin, hym shalt thou anoynte to be captayne ouer my people Israel, that he maye saue my people out of the hande of the Philistines: for I haue loked vpon my people, and theyr crye is come vnto me.
When Samuel therfore saw Saul, the Lord answered hym: se, this is the man, whom I spake to the of. Thys same shall raygne ouer my people.
Then went Saul to Samuel in the myddle of the gate, Ꟶ sayde: tell me I praye the, where the sears house is.
Samuel answered Saul, and sayde: I am the sear, go vp before me vnto the hill, for ye shall eate wyth me to daye. And to morowe I wyll let the go, and wyll tell the all that is in thyne hert.
And as for thyne asses that were lost thre dayes agoo, care not for them, for they are founde. And moreouer, whose shall the bewtifull thinges of Israel be? belonge they not to the, and vnto all thy fathers house?
But Saul answered and sayde: am not I the sonne of a Ieminite of the smallest trybe of Israel? and my kynred is the least of all the kynredes of the trybe of BenIamin. Wherfore then speakest thou so to me?
And Samuel toke Saul and his lad, and brought them into the parler, and made them sytt in the chefest place amonge them that were bydden: which were vpon a thirtye persones:
And Samuel sayde vnto the cooke: brynge forth the porcyon whych I gaue the, and of which I sayd vnto the: kepe it with the.
And the cooke toke vp the shoulder, Ꟶ that whych was vpon it, Ꟶ set it before Saul. And Samuel sayd: beholde, that which is left: put it before the Ꟶ eate, for hitherto hath it bene kept for the, of purpose, when I called the people. And so Saul dyd eat with Samuel that daye.
And when they were come downe from the hyll into the cytie, Samuel comuned wyth Saul vpon the toppe of the house
and whan they arose erlye about the sprynge of the daye, Samuel called Saul vpon the toppe of the house, sayenge: vp, that I maye sende the awaye. And Saul arose. And they went out at the dores both, he Ꟶ Samuel.
And when they were come almost out of the towne, Samuel sayd to Saul: byd the lad go before vs (and he went before) but stande thou styll a whyle, that I maye shewe the what God sayeth.
And then Samuel toke a vessell of oyle, Ꟶ powred it vpon hys heed, Ꟶ kyssed him, Ꟶ sayde: hath not the Lord anoynted the, to be captayne ouer hys enheritaunce?
When thou art departed from me this daye, thou shalt fynde two men by Rahels sepulcre in the border of BenIamin, euen at zalezah. And they will saye vnto the: the asses which thou wentest to seke, are founde. And lo, thy father hath left the care of the asses, Ꟶ soroweth for you, sayenge: what shall I do for my sonne?
Then shalt thou go forth from thence, Ꟶ shalt come to the playne of Thabor. And there shall mete the thre men goinge vp, to God to Bethel: one caryeng thre kiddes: Ꟶ another caryeng thre loues of breed: Ꟶ another caryeng a botell of wyne.
And they wyll salute the, Ꟶ geue the two loues of breed: which thou shalt receaue of theyr handes.
After that shalt thou come to the hyll of God, where the Philistines kepe their watche. And when thou art come thyther to the cytie, thou shalt mete a companye of prophetes comminge downe from the hill, wt a psalter, a tymbrell, a pype, Ꟶ a harpe before them, Ꟶ they shall prophesye.
And the sprete of the Lorde wyll come vpon the also, Ꟶ thou shalt prophesye, with them, and shalt be turned into another man.
Therfore when these signes are chaunced the, do what thou hast to do, for God is wyth the.
And thou shalt go before me to Gilgal. And I also wyll come downe vnto the, to sacrifye burntsacrifyces, and to offre peace offerynges Tary for me seuen dayes, tyll I come to the, and shew the, what thou shalt do.
And assone as he had turned hys shoulder to go from Samuel, God gaue hym another maner of herte, Ꟶ all those tokens came to passe that same daye.
And when they came to the hill: beholde, the companye of prophetes met hym, and the sprete of God cam vpon hym also, Ꟶ he prophesyed among them.
And all that knewe hym before, when they sawe that he prophesyed amonge the prophetes, they sayd eche to other: what is this that is happened vnto the sonne of Cis? Is Saul also amonge the prophetes?
And one of the same place answered Ꟶ sayde: who is their father? And therof came the prouerbe: what, is Saul also amonge the prophetes?
And when he had made an ende of prophesyeng, he cam to the hill.
And Saules fathers brother sayde vnto hym and to hys lad: whether went ye? He sayde: to seke the asses: Ꟶ when we saw that they were no where, we came to Samuel.
And Sauls vncle sayde: tell me what Samuel sayde vnto you?
Saul answered his vncle: he tolde vs planely, that the asses were founde. But of the kyngdome wherof Samuel spake, tolde he hym not.
And Samuel called the people together vnto the Lorde to Mizpa,
and sayde vnto the chyldren of Israel: thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel: I brought Israel out of Egypt, and delyuered you out of the hande of the Egypcyans, Ꟶ out of the handes of all kyngdomes that troubled you.
And ye haue this daye cast awaye youre God that helped you out of all youre aduersyties Ꟶ tribulacyons. And ye haue sayd vnto hym: make a kynge ouer vs. Nowe therfore stande ye before the Lorde by youre trybes Ꟶ youre thousandes.
And whan Samuel had brought all the tribes of Israel, the tribe of BenIamin was caught.
When he had brought the tribe of BenIamin by their kynredes, the kynred of Matri was caught: and at the last Saul the sonne of Cis was caught. And whan they sought hym, he coulde not be founde.
Therfore they asked the Lorde further, yf the man shulde come thither. And the Lorde answered: beholde, he hath hydd hym selfe amonge the stuffe.
And they ranne Ꟶ fet him thence. And when he stode amonge the people, he was hyer then any of the people, from the shoulders vpwarde.
And Samuel sayde to all the people: Se ye not him, whom the Lorde hath chosen, Ꟶ howe there is none lyke hym amonge all the people? And all the people showted Ꟶ sayde: God lend the kynge lyfe.
Then Samuel tolde the people the dutye of the kyngdome, Ꟶ wrote it in a boke, and layde it vp before the Lorde, and sent all the people awaye, euery man to hys house.
And Saul also went home to Gibea. And there folowed him strong men, whose hertes God had touched.
But the chyldren of Belial sayde: howe shall he saue vs? and they despised him, and brought him no presentes. And he helde is tonge.
Nahas the Ammonite came, and beseged Iabes in Gilead. And all the men of Iabes sayde vnto Nahas: make a couenaunt wyth vs, and we wylbe thy seruauntes:
And Nahas the Ammonite answered them: In thys will I make a couenaunt wyth you, yf I maye thrust out all youre ryght eyes, and brynge that shame vpon all Israel.
To whom the elders of Iabes sayd: geue vs seuen dayes respite: that we maye sende messengers vnto all the coastes of Israel. And then yf there be no man to helpe vs, we wyll come out to the.
Then came the messengers to Gibea vnto Saul, and tolde thys tydynges in the eares of the people. And all the people lyfte vp theyr voyces and wept.
And beholde, Saul came folowynge the catell out of the felde, Ꟶ Saul sayde: what ayleth thys people, that they wepe? And they tolde hym the tydynges of the men of Iabes.
And the sprete of God came vpon Saul, when he heard those tydinges, and he was excedyng angrye,
and toke a yocke of oxen, and hewed them in peces, Ꟶ sent them thorowe out all the coastes of Israel by the handes of messengers, sayeng: whosoeuer commeth not forth after Saul and after Samuel, so shall hys oxen be serued. And the feare of the Lorde fell on the people, and they cam out as it had bene but one man.
And when he nombred them in Bezek, the chyldren of Israel were thre hundred thousande men, and the men of Iuda thirtye thousande.
And they sayde vnto the messengers that cam: so saye vnto the men of Iabes in Gilead: to morow by that tyme the sonne be hote, ye shal haue helpe. And the messengers cam Ꟶ shewed the men of Iabes, which were glad.
Therfore the men of Iabes sayde: tomorowe we wyll come out vnto you, and ye shall do wyth vs all that pleaseth you.
And on the morowe it fortuned, that Saul put the people in .iij. partes. And they cam in vpon the host in the mornyng watche, Ꟶ slue the Ammonites, vntyll the heat of the daye. And they that remayned, were skattered: so that two of them were not left together.
And the people sayde vnto Samuel: what is he that darre saye: shall Saul raygne ouer vs? brynge those men, that we maye slaye them.
And Saul sayde: there shall no man dye thys daye, for to daye the Lord hathe saued Israel.
Then sayde Samuel vnto the people: come, that we maye go to Gilgal, and renewe the kyngdome there.
And all the people went to Gilgal, Ꟶ made Saul kyng there, before the Lorde in Gilgal. And there they offered peaceofferynges before the Lorde. And there Saul and all the men of Israel reioysed excedyngly.
Samuel sayd vnto all Israel: beholde, I haue herkened vnto your voyce in all that ye sayde vnto me, Ꟶ haue made you a kynge.
Nowe therfore, youre kynge walketh before you. And I am olde and graye headed: and behold, my sonnes are with you, and I haue walked before you from my childehode vnto thys daye.
Beholde, here I am: beare recorde of me before the Lorde and before hys anoynted: Whose oxe haue I taken? or whose Asse haue I taken? whom haue I done wrong to? Whom haue I hurt? Or of whose hande haue I receaued any brybe, to blynde myne eyes therwyth? Ꟶ I wyll restore it you agayne.
They sayde: thou hast done vs no wronge, nor hurt vs, nether hast thou taken ought of any mannes hande.
He sayde vnto them agayne: the Lord is witnesse agaynst you, Ꟶ hys anoynted is wytnesse thys daye, that ye haue founde naught in my handes. And they answered: he is wytnesse.
And Samuel sayd vnto the people: it is the Lorde, that made Moses Ꟶ Aaron, Ꟶ that brought youre fathers out of the lande of Egypte.
Nowe therfore stande still, that I maye reason wt you before the Lorde, accordyng to all the ryghtousnesses of the Lord, which he shewed both you and youre fathers.
After that Iacob was come into Egypte, and youre fathers cryed vnto the Lorde the Lorde sent Moses Ꟶ Aaron, which brought your fathers out of Egipt, Ꟶ made them dwell in this place.
And whan they forgat the lord their God, he delyuered them into the hand of Sisara captaine of the hoost of Hazor and into the hande of the Philistynes, and into the hande of the kynge of Moab, and they fought agaynst them.
And they cryed vnto the Lorde, Ꟶ sayde: we haue synned, because we haue forsaken the Lorde, and haue serued Baalim and Astharoth. Nowe therfore delyuer vs out of the handes of oure enemyes and we wyll serue the.
And the Lorde sent Ierobaal Badan Iephthah, Ꟶ Samuel, and delyuered you out of the handes of youre enemyes on euery syde, and ye dwelled safe.
And for all that, when you sawe that Nahas the kyng of the chyldren of Ammon cam agaynst you, ye sayde vnto me: not so but a kyng shall raigne ouer vs, when yet the Lorde youre God was youre kynge.
Nowe therfore, beholde, the kinge whom ye haue chosen, and whom ye haue desyred: lo, the Lord hath set a kynge ouer you.
Yf ye wyll feare the Lorde Ꟶ serue hym, and heare hys voyce, Ꟶ not disobeye the worde of the Lorde: both ye Ꟶ the kynge that raygneth ouer you, shall folowe the Lorde youre God:
Yf ye wyll not herken vnto the voyce of the Lord, but disobeye the Lordes mouth: then shall the hande of the Lorde be vpon you and on youre fathers.
Nowe also stande, and se thys great thynge, whych the Lord will do before your eyes:
is it not now wheatheruest? I will call vnto the Lorde, and he shall sende thunder and rayne: that ye maye perceaue and se, howe that youre wickednes is great, which ye haue done in the syght of the Lorde, in askynge you a kynge.
And so, Samuel called vnto the Lorde, and the Lorde sent thunder and rayne the same daye. And all the people feared the Lorde and Samuel exceadyngly.
And all the people sayde vnto Samuel: praye for thy seruauntes vnto the Lord thy God, that we dye not: for we haue synned in askynge vs a kynge, besyde all the synnes that euer we dyd.
And Samuel sayde vnto the people: feare not. Ye haue in dede done all thys wyckednesse, yet departe not from folowynge of the Lorde. But serue hym euen wyth all youre hertes.
Nether turne ye after vayne thinges whych are not able to profyt you, for they are but vanitye.
For the Lorde wyll not forsake hys people, because of hys great names sake: because it hath pleased the Lord, to make you his people.
Moreouer God forbydde, that I shulde synne agaynst the Lorde, and ceasse prayeng for you, but to shewe you the good Ꟶ ryght waye.
Therfore feare you the Lorde, and serue hym in the trueth, and wyth all youre hertes Ꟶ consydre howe great thinges he hath done for you.
But and yf ye do wyckedlye, then shall ye peryshe, both ye and youre kynge.
Saul had bene kynge one yere (whan these thynges came to passe) and he raygned two yeares ouer Israel.
And Saul chose him thre thousand men of Israel. Two thousande were wyth Saul in Michmas and in mount Bethel, Ꟶ a thousande wyth Ionathas in Gibea BenIamin. And the rest of the people he sent, euery man to hys awne house agayne.
And Ionathas smote the holde of the Philystines, that was in the hyll, and it came to the Philistines eares. And Saul blewe the trompet thorowe out all the lande, sayenge: let the Ebrues heare.
And all Israel hearde saye, howe that Saul had destroyed an holde of the Philystines, wherfore Israel stancke before the Philystines. And the people gathered together after Saul to Gilgal.
The Philistines also geathered them selues togeather to fyght wyth Israel, thirtye thousand charettes and syxe thousand horse men, with other people lyke the sand by the sees syde in multitude, and came vp, and pitched in Michmas eastwarde from Bethauen.
And when the men of Israel sawe it, they were in a strayte, Ꟶ feare came vpon the people, and they hydd them selues in caues, and in preuy holes, and in rockes, and in hye places, Ꟶ in pittes.
And some of the Ebrues went ouer Iordan to go vnto the lande of Gad Ꟶ Gilead. And Saul was yet in Gilgal, Ꟶ all the people that folowed him were astonyed.
And he taryed seuen dayes, euen vnto the tyme that Samuel had appoynted. But Samuel came not to Gilgal, Ꟶ the people were therfore skatered from him.
And Saul sayd: bring a burntsacrifyce to me Ꟶ peace offringes. And he offered burnt sacrifyce.
And as sone as he had made an ende of offerynge the burntsacrifyce, beholde, Samuel cam. And Saul went agaynst him, to blesse him.
And Samuel sayde. what hast thou done? Saul sayde: because I saw that the people skatered from me, and that thou camest not wtin the dayes apoynted, and that the Philistines geathered them selues togeather to Michmas:
therfore sayd I: the Philistines shall come downe nowe vpon me to Gilgal, Ꟶ I haue not made supplicacion vnto the Lord. And whan I had ouercome my selfe, at the last I offered a burntofferynge.
And Samuel sayde to Saul thou art become a fole, thou hast not kept the commaundment of the Lord thy God, which he commaunded the. For at this tyme wold the Lord haue stablysshed thy kingdome vpon Israel for euer,
But nowe, thy kyngdome shall not continewe. The Lorde hath sought him a man after his awne hart, Ꟶ the Lord hath commaunded him to be captayne ouer his people: because thou hast not kept that whych the Lorde commaunded the.
And Samuel arose Ꟶ gat hym vp from Gilgal to Gibea BenIamin. And Saul nombred the people that were founde wt him, Ꟶ they were about a syxe hundred men.
And Saul and Ionathas his sonne and the people that were founde wyth them, had theyr abydynge in the hyll of BenIamin. But the Philistines pitched in Michmas.
And there came out of the host of the Philistines thre companies, to destroye: one companye turned vnto the waye that leadeth to Ophra vnto the lande of Saul.
And a nother companye turned the waye to Bethoron. And the thryde company turned to the waye of the cost that is sene aboue the valeye of zeboim towarde the wyldernesse.
There was no smyth founde thorowe out all the lande of Israel. For the Philistines sayde: Lest happly the Ebrues make them swerdes or speres.
But all the Israelites went downe to the Philistynes, to mende euerye man his share, his mattock, his axe Ꟶ his necessary toles:
And then the edges of the shares, mattockes, donge forkes, and axes were blunt, and also the forkes were to be set in.
And so in tyme of battell there was nether swerde nor spere founde in the handes of any of the people that were wyth Saul and Ionathas. But with Saul and Ionathas hys sonne was there somwhat founde.
And the watch of the Philistines came out, to go ouer vnto Michmas.
And it fortuned the same tyme, that Ionathas the sonne of Saul sayd vnto hys younge man that bare hys harnes: come, and let vs go ouer to the Philistines watche that are younder on the other syde, and he tolde not his father.
And Saul taryed in the vttmost parte of Gibea vnder Rimmon, whych is in Migron, Ꟶ the people that were wyth him were vpon a syxe hundred men.
And Ahia the sonne of Ahitob Iehabods brother, the sonne of Phinehes, the sonne of Eli, was the Lordes preaste in Silo, Ꟶ ware an Ephod. And the people wyst not that Ionathas was gone.
And in the myddes of the passage (by which Ionathas sought to go ouer vnto the Philistines watch) were there two sharpe rockes euen one on the one syde, Ꟶ the other on the other syde: the one called Bozez, Ꟶ the other Senne.
The forefront of the one, leaned northwarde towarde Michmas, Ꟶ the other was southwarde, towarde Gibea:
And Ionathas sayd to the younge man that bare his harnesse: come and let vs go ouer vnto the watch of these vncircumcised, paraduenture the Lorde will worke wt vs: for it is no hardnesse wt the Lord to saue ether in manye or in fewe.
And his harnesberar sayde vnto him: do all that is in thyne hert: Go where it pleaseth the: Behold, I am wt the, as thine hert lusteth.
Then sayde Ionathas: beholde, we go ouer vnto these men, Ꟶ shall shew oure selues vnto them:
yf they saye on this wise to vs: tarye, vntill we come to you, then we will stande stil in or place, Ꟶ not go vp vnto them.
But Ꟶ yf they saye: come vp vnto vs, then we will go vp, for the Lorde hath delyuered them into oure handes And thys shalbe a sygne vnto vs.
And they bothe shewed them selues vnto the watch of the Philistines. And the Philistines sayde: se, the Hebrues come out of the holes where they had hydd them selues in.
And the men of the watche answered Ionathas and his harnesbearer, Ꟶ sayde, come vp to vs, and we will shew you a thinge. And Ionathas sayde vnto his harnesbearer, come vp after me, for the Lord hath delyuered them into the hande of Israel.
And Ionathas clame vp vpon handes Ꟶ fete, Ꟶ his harnesberer after him. And they fell before Ionathas: Ꟶ his harnesberer slue them after hym.
And that first slaughter which Ionathas and his harnesberer made, was vpon a twentie men, within the compasse as it were about an halfe aker of lande.
And ther was a feare in the host, in the felde, Ꟶ amonge all people: in so moche that they that were gone out of the watche to robbe, were afrayde also: and the erth trymbled, for the feare that was sent of God.
And the watche men of Saul in Gibea Ben Iamin, sawe. And beholde, the people (of the Philistines) were skatered Ꟶ were smytten as they went.
Then sayde Saul vnto the people that was with him. Searche and se, who is gone awaye from vs. And when they had nombred, beholde, Ionathas Ꟶ hys harnesbearer were not there.
And Saul sayde vnto Ahia: bringe hither the arcke of God. For the arcke of God was at that tyme wyth the chyldren of Israel.
And it fortuned that while Saul talked vnto the preaste, the noyse that was in the hoste of the Philistines spred farther abrode, Ꟶ increased. And Saul sayde vnto the preaste: wt drawe thyne handes.
And Saul ioyned hymselfe vnto all the people that were with him, Ꟶ they came to the battell. And beholde euery mannes swerde was agaynst his felowe, and there was a very greate rumore.
Moreouer, the Ebrues that were wyth the Philistines before that tyme, and were come with them in all partes of the hoste, turned, to be with the Israelites that were wyth Saul Ꟶ Ionathas.
And all the men of Israel also, which had hidd them selues in mount Ephraim, as sone as they hearde howe that the Philistines were fledd, they folowed after them in the battell.
And so God holpe Israel that daye. And the battell continued vnto Bethauen.
And whyle the men of Israel were kepte downe wyth honger that daye, Saul charged the people with an ooth sayinge: Cursed be the man that eateth any foode vntyll nyght, tyll I be aduenged of myne enemyes: And so, none of the people tasted any sustinaunce.
And all the inhabiters of the lande came to a wood where honye laye vpon the grounde.
And the people came into the wood: And beholde, the honye dropped, and no man moued hys hande to his mouth, for the people feared the ooth.
But Ionathas hearde not when hys father charged the people with the ooth, wherfore he put forth the ende of the rodd that was in his hande, and dipt it in an honye combe, Ꟶ put his hande to his mouth, and his eyes receaued syght.
Then answered one of the people and sayde: thy father adiured the people, sayinge: Cursed be the man that eateth any sustinaunce this daye, Ꟶ the people were fayntye.
Then sayde Ionathas: my father hath troubled the lande: se howe myne eyes hath receaued syght, because I tasted a lytle of this honye:
howe much more then to daye yf the people had eaten of the spoyle of their enemyes whych they founde. And had there not bene then a moche greater slaughter amonge the Philistines?
And they layed on the Philistines that daye, from Michmas to Atalon. And the people were excedinge fayntie.
And the people gat them to the spoyle, Ꟶ toke shepe, oxen, Ꟶ calues, Ꟶ slue them on the grounde, Ꟶ the people dyd eate them wt the bloude.
Then men tolde Saul, sayinge: Beholde, the people synne agaynst the Lord, in that they eate with the bloude. And he sayde: ye haue trespaced. Rowle a great stone vnto me this daye,
and Saul sayde agayne: Go abroade amonge the people Ꟶ bydd them brynge me euery man his oxe Ꟶ euery man his shepe, and slaye them here, and synne not agaynst the Lorde in eatynge wt the bloude. And the people brought euery man hys oxe in his hande, by nyght, Ꟶ slue them there.
And Saul made an altare vnto the Lorde. And that was the fyrst altare that he made vnto the Lorde.
And Saul sayde: lett vs go downe after the Philistines by nyght and spoyle them, vntyll it be daye in the mornynge, Ꟶ lett vs not leaue one man of them. And they sayd: do whatsoeuer thou thinkest best. Then sayde the preast: lett vs come hither vnto God.
And Saul asked of God: shall I go downe after the Philistines? Wilt thou delyuer them into the handes of Israel? But he answered him not at that tyme.
And Saul sayde: let the people come hyther out of all quarters, and knowe Ꟶ se by whom thys synne is chaunced this daye:
for as truly as the Lorde lyueth which saueth Israel, though it be in Ionathas my sonne, he shall dye the death. But there was no man amonge all the people that answered him.
Then he sayde vnto all Israel: be ye on one syde, and I Ꟶ Ionathas my sonne wilbe on the other syde. And the people sayde vnto Saul: what thou thynkest best, that do.
Therfore Saul sayde vnto the Lorde God of Israel: geue a perfect lott. And Saul Ꟶ Ionathas were caught, but the people skaped free.
And Saul sayde, cast lottes betwene me Ꟶ Ionathas my sonne. And Ionathas was caught.
Then Saul sayde to Ionathas: tell me what thou hast done. And Ionathas tolde him, Ꟶ sayde. I tasted a lytle honye with the ende of the rodd that was in myne hande: and lo, I must dye.
Saul answered: God do so and so to me, thou shalt dye the death Ionathas.
And the people sayde vnto Saul: shall Ionathas dye, which hath so myghtelye helped Israel? God forbyd. As truly as the Lorde lyueth there shall not one heere of hys heed fall to the grounde: for he hath wrought with God thys daye. And so the people delyuered Ionathas, that he dyed not.
And then Saul departed vp from folowinge the Philistines. And the Philistines went to their awne place.
And so Saul helde the kyngdome ouer Israel, Ꟶ fought agaynst all his enemyes on euery syde: agaynst Moab: agaynst the chyldren of Ammon: agaynst Edom: agaynst the kynges of zoba, and agaynst the Philistines. And whether so euer he turned him selfe, there he wanne:
and he gathered his host together, and smote the Amaleckites, Ꟶ rydd Israel out of the handes of them that spoyled them.
The sonnes of Saul were: Ionathas, Iesui, and Melchisua. And hys two daughters were thus named: the elder was called Merob, and the younger Michol.
And the name of Saules wife, was Ahinoa the daughter of Ahimaaz. And the name of hys chefe captayne was Abner the sonne of Ner, Saules vncle.
And Cis was Sauls father. And Ner the father of Abner was the sonne of Abiel.
And there was sore warre agaynst the Philistines, all the dayes of Saul. And whomsoeuer Saul sawe to be a stronge man, and mete for the warre he toke him vnto him.
Samuel sayde vnto Saul: the Lord sent me to anoynt the, to be kynge ouer his people Israel. Nowe therfore herken thou vnto the voyce of the wordes of the Lorde.
Thus sayth the Lorde of hostes: I remembre that whych Amaleck dyd to Israel howe they layed wayte for them in the waye, as they came out of Egypte.
Nowe therfore go, Ꟶ smyte Amaleck, and destroye ye all that pertayneth vnto them, Ꟶ se thou haue no compassyon on them slaye both man Ꟶ woman, infant Ꟶ sucklynge. oxe, and shepe, camell and Asse.
And Saul gathered the people together, Ꟶ nombred them in Telaim, two hundred thousande foote men, and ten thousande men of Iuda.
And Saul came vnto a cytie of Amaleck, Ꟶ set watche in the valeye.
And Saul sayde vnto the kenites: go, Ꟶ departe, Ꟶ gett you downe from amonge the Amaleckites, lest I destroye you with them: for ye shewed mercy to all the children of Israell, when they came out of Egypt. And so the kenites departed from amonge the Amaleckites.
And Saul smote the Amaleckites from Heuila, as thou commest to Sur, that lyeth before Egypt,
and toke Agag the kinge of the Amaleckites alyue, Ꟶ vtterlye destroyed all the people with the edge of the swerde.
But Saul and the people spared Agag, and the better shepe, Ꟶ the fatter oxen, Ꟶ the lambes, and all that was good, Ꟶ wolde not destroye them. But all that was foule Ꟶ naught worth, that they destroyed vtterlye.
Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto Samuel, sayinge:
it repenteth me, that I haue made Saul kynge. For he is turned from me, and hath not parfourmed my commaundementes. And Samuel was euell apayed, and cried vnto the Lorde all nyght.
And whan Samuel rose erlye, to mete Saul in the mornynge, it was tolde Samuel, that Saul was come to Carmel, Ꟶ beholde, he hath made him there a place, Ꟶ is turned, and departed, and gone downe to Gilgall.
And Samuel came to Saul, Ꟶ Saul sayde vnto him: Blessed be thou in the Lorde. I haue fulfylled the commaundement of the Lord.
Samuel sayde: what meaneth then the bleatyng of the shepe in myne eares, and the noyse of the oxen which I heare?
Saul answered: they haue brought them from the Amaleckites. For the people spared the best of the shepe and of the oxen, to sacrifyce them vnto the Lorde thy God. And the remnaunt haue we destroyed vtterly.
Samuel sayde to Saul: lett me tell the what the Lorde hath sayde to me this nyght. And he sayde vnto hym: saye on.
Samuel sayde when thou wast lytle in thyne awne syght, wast thou not made the heed of the trybes of Israel? And the Lorde anoynted the kyng ouer Israel.
And the Lorde sent the on a iourneye, Ꟶ sayde: Go, Ꟶ vtterlye destroye those synners the Amaleckites, and fyght agaynst them, vntill thou vtterlye destroye them.
And wherfore hast thou not herkened vnto the voyce of the Lorde, but hast turned to the praye, and hast done that whych is wycked in the syght of the Lorde?
And Saul sayde vnto Samuel: yee, I haue harkened vnto the voyce of the Lorde, Ꟶ haue gone the waye which the Lorde sent me vnto, and haue brought Agag the kyng of Amaleck, and haue vtterlye destroyed the Amaleckites,
But the people toke of the spoyle shepe, oxen, and the chefest of the thynges whych shulde haue bene destroyed, to offer vnto the Lorde thy God in Gilgall.
And Samuel sayde: hath the Lorde as great pleasure in burnt sacrifyces Ꟶ offeringes, as whan the voyce of the Lord is obeyed? Behold, to obeye is better then sacrifyce, Ꟶ to herken, is better then the fatt of rammes.
For rebellyon is as the synne of witchcrafte, and stoburnesse is as the wickednesse of Idolatrie. Because thou hast cast awaye the worde of the Lorde, therfore hath the Lorde cast awaye the also, from beynge kynge.
And Saul sayde vnto Samuel: I haue synned, for I haue gone farther then the sayinge of the Lorde and thy wordes, because I feared the people, Ꟶ obeyed their voyce.
Nowe therfore take awaye my synne, and turne agayne with me, that I maye worshyp the Lord
And Samuel sayde vnto Saul: I wyll not returne with the: for thou hast cast awaye the worde of the Lorde, and the Lorde hath cast awaye the, that thou shalt not be kynge ouer Israel.
And as Samuel turned hym selfe to go awaye, he caught the lappe of hys coate, Ꟶ it rent.
And Samuel sayde vnto hym: the Lorde hath rent the kyngdome of Israel from the this daye, Ꟶ hath geuen it to a neyghboure of thyne, that is better then thou.
The strength of Israel wyll not begyle nor repent: for he is not a man, that can repent.
He sayde: I haue synned. But nowe honoure me before the elders of my people, and before Israel, Ꟶ turne agayne with me, that I maye worshippe the Lorde thy God.
And so Samuel turned agayne, and folowed Saul. And Saul worshipped the Lorde.
Then sayde Samuel: Brynge ye hither to me, Agag the kynge of the Amaleckites. And Agag came vnto hym delycately. And Agag sayde: truly the bytter deeth cometh on.
And Samuel sayde: As thy swerde hath made wemen chyldelesse, so shall thy mother be chyldelesse aboue other wemen. And Samuel hewed Agag in peces before the Lorde in Gilgal.
And then Samuel departed to Rama. And Saul went home to his house to Gibea Saul.
And Samuel came nomore to se Saul vntill the daye of his deeth. Neuerthelesse Samuel mourned for Saul, Ꟶ the Lord repented, that he had made Saul kynge ouer Israel.
The Lorde sayde vnto Samuel: Howe longe wylt thou mourne for Saul, seynge I haue cast hym awaye from raygnynge ouer Israel? Fyll thyne horne with oyntment, and come, that I maye sende the to Isai the Bethlehemite, for I haue prouided me a kynge amonge hys sonnes.
And Samuel sayd: howe can I goo? For yf Saul heare it, he will kyll me. The Lorde answered: Take an heifer wt the, and saye: I am come to offer to the Lorde.
And call Isai to the offerynge, and I wyll shewe the, what thou shalt do: And thou shalt anoynt hym whom I name vnto the.
And so Samuel dyd as the Lorde bad him, and came to Bethlehem, and the elders of the towne were astonnied at his commyng, and sayde: Commest thou peaceably?
He answered: Yee, I am come to offer vnto the Lorde. Sanctifye youre selues, Ꟶ come with me to the offerynge. And he sanctifyed Isai Ꟶ his sonnes, Ꟶ bad them to the offerynge.
And when they were come, he loked on Eliab, Ꟶ sayde: Surely the Lordes anoynted is before hym.
But the Lorde sayde vnto Samuel: loke not on his fashyon, or on the heyght of hys stature, because I haue refused hym: for God seyth not as man seyth. For man loketh on the outwarde apperaunce but God beholdeth the harte.
Then Isai called Abinadab, and made him come before Samuel. And he sayde: nether hath the Lorde chosen thys.
Then Isai made Samma come, and he sayde: nether yet hath the Lorde chosen him.
Agayne, Isai made seuen of his sonnes to come before Samuel. And Samuel sayde vnto Isai: the Lorde hath chosen none of these.
And Samuel sayde vnto Isai: are here all thy chyldren? He sayde: there is yet a lytle one behynde, that kepeth the shepe. And Samuel sayd vnto Isai: sende and fette him, for we will not sytte downe, tyll he be come hyther.
And he sent, Ꟶ brought hym in. And he was browne, and of an excellent bewtye, Ꟶ well fauored in syght. And the Lorde sayde: Aryse, and anoynt him, for this is he.
Therfore Samuel toke the horne wyth the oyntment, Ꟶ anoynted him in the myddes of hys brethren. And the sprete of the Lorde came vpon Dauid, from that daye forwarde. And Samuel rose vp, and went to Rama.
But the sprete of the Lorde departed from Saul, and an euell sprete sent of the Lorde vexed him.
And Sauls seruauntes sayde vnto him: Beholde, an euell sprete sent of God vexed the,
lett oure Lord therfore commaunde his seruauntes (that are before the) to seke a man, that is a connynge player wyth an harpe: that when the euell sprete sent of God commeth vpon the, he maye playe with hys hande and thou shalt be eased.
Saul sayde vnto his seruauntes: prouide me a man then that can playe well, and bringe him to me.
Then answered one of his seruauntes and sayde: Beholde, I haue sene a sonne of Isai the Bethlehemite, that can playe vpon instrumentes, and is an actiue felowe, and a man of warre and prudent in doynge of feates, Ꟶ well made and the Lorde is with hym.
Wherfore Saul sent messengers vnto Isai, and sayde: sende me Dauid thy sonne, which is wyth the shepe.
And Isai toke an asse laden with breed, and a flacket of wyne, and a kyd, and sent them by Dauid his sonne vnto Saul.
And Dauid came to Saul, Ꟶ stode before him, Ꟶ he loued him very well, and he was made his harnesbearer.
And Saul sent to Isai, sayinge: lett Dauid remayne with me, for he hath founde fauour in my syght.
And so it fortuned, that when the euell sprete sent of God came vpon Saul, Dauid toke an harpe, Ꟶ played wyth his hande, Ꟶ so Saul was refreshed, Ꟶ dyd amende, and the euell sprete departed from him.
The Philistines geathered their hoste to battel, and came together to Socoth which is in Iuda, and pitched betwene Sococh Ꟶ Azekah, in the coast of Dammin.
And Saul and the men of Israel came together, and pitched in the Oke valley, and put them selues in araye, to fyght agaynst the Philistines.
And the Philistines stode on an hyll on the one syde, and Israel stode on an hyll on the other syde; and there was a valeye betwene them:
And there came a man betwene them both, out of the tentes of the Philistines, named Goliath of Gath syxe cubytes and an handbredth longe,
and had an helmet of brasse vpon hys heed, and a coate of mayle about hym. And the weyght of hys coate of mayle was fyue thousande sykles of brasse.
And he had bootes of brasse vpon his legges, and a shylde of brasse vpon his shoulders.
And the shafte of his spere was like a weuers beame. And his speare heed weyed .vj. hundred sikles of yron. And one bearynge a shylde went before hym.
And he stode and cryed agaynst the hoste of Israel, Ꟶ sayde vnto them: Why are ye come out in araye to battell? am not I a Philistine and you seruauntes to Saul? chose you a man from amonge you, Ꟶ lett him come downe to me.
And yf he be able to fyght with me, Ꟶ to beate me, then will we be youre seruauntes. But yf I can ouercome him and beate him, then shall ye be oure seruauntes, Ꟶ serue vs.
And the Philistine sayde: I defye the host of Israel this daye, geue me a man, that we maye fight together:
When Saul and all Israel hearde those wordes of the Philistine, they were discouraged, Ꟶ greatly afrayed.
Dauid was the sonne of an Ephrathite of Bethlehem Iuda, named Isai, whych had eight sonnes. And was an olde man in the dayes of Saul, and came to age amonge men.
And the thre eldest sonnes of Isai went, and folowed Saul to the battell. And the names of hys thre sonnes that went to battell, were: Eliab the eldest, Ꟶ the next, Abinadab, and the thyrde Samma,
and Dauid was the least. And the thre eldest went after Saul.
Dauid also went and departed from Saul, to fede his fathers shepe at Bethlehem.
And the Philistine came forth in the mornynge and euenynge, and continued fourtye dayes.
And Isai sayde vnto Dauid his sonne take for thy brethren an Epha of this parched corne and these ten loaues, and brynge it vnto the hoste to thy brethren.
And carye these ten freshe cheses vnto the captayne, Ꟶ loke howe thy brethren fare, and fett out their pledge.
And Saul and they, and all the men of Israel were in the oke valey, fightinge with the Philistines.
And Dauid rose vp erlye in the mornynge, and lefte the shepe with a keper, Ꟶ toke and went as Isai had commaunded him, and came with in the compasse of the host. And the hoste went out in araye, and showted in the battell:
for Israel Ꟶ the Philistines had put them selues in araye, the one agaynst the other.
And Dauid toke downe the gear from him, and put them vnder the handes of the keper of the vessels, Ꟶ ranne into the hoste, and came, and saluted his brethren.
And as he talked wt them, Beholde: there stode a man in the myddes (Goliath the Philistine by name) of Gath out of the araye of the Philistines, Ꟶ spake of the maner aboue rehersed, that Dauid hearde it.
And all the men of Israel, when they sawe the man, ranne awaye from hym, and were sore afrayed.
And euery man of Israel sayde: Sawe ye thys man come forth? euen to reuyle Israel is he come. And to hym that beateth hym, wyll the kynge geue great ryches, and will geue him his daughter therto: yee Ꟶ make his fathers house fre in Israel.
And Dauid spake to the men that stode by, and sayde: What shalbe done to the man that beateth this Philistine, Ꟶ taketh awaye the shame from Israel? And what is thys vncircumcised Philistine, that he shulde reuyle the hoste of the lyuinge God?
And the people answered him (after this maner,) sayinge: so shall it be done to the man, that beateth hym.
And Eliab his eldest brother hearde when he spake vnto the men, and Eliab was angrye wt Dauid, and sayde: Why camest thou downe hither? and with whom hast thou lefte those few shepe in the wildernesse? I know thy pryde, and the malyce of thyne herte, that thou art come downe to se the battell.
And Dauid sayd: And what haue I nowe done? is there not a worde?
And he departed from hym into the presence of another, and spake of the same maner, and the people answered hym agayne, as before.
And they that hearde the wordes whych Dauid spake, rehearsed them before Saul, which caused him to be fett.
And Dauid sayd to Saul: Let no mannes hert fayle hym because of him. Thy seruaunt wyll go, Ꟶ fyght with yonder Philistine.
And Saul sayde to Dauid agayne: thou art not able to go agaynst yonder Philistine, to fyght wt him. For thou art but a chylde, but he is a man of warre euen from his youth.
Dauid answered vnto Saul. Thy seruaunt kept his fathers shepe, Ꟶ there came a Lyon and lykewise a Beare, Ꟶ toke a shepe out of the flocke.
And I went out after him, and smote hym, and toke it out of his mouth. And when he arose agaynst me, I caught him by the bearde, and smote hym, Ꟶ slue hym.
And so thy seruaunt slue the Lyon Ꟶ the beare (also) hath thy seruaunt slayne. And truly thys vncircumcised Philistine shalbe as one of them seynge he hath rayled on the hoste of the lyuing God.
And Dauid spake moreouer: the Lorde that deliuered me out of the hande of the Lyon Ꟶ out of the hande of the beare, he shall delyuer me also out of the hande of this Philistine: And Saul sayde vnto Dauid: go, and the Lorde shall be with the.
And Saul put hys rayment vpon Dauid, and put an helmet of brasse vpon hys heed, Ꟶ put a coate of mayle vpon him,
and gyrded Dauid with hys awne swerde vpon his rayment And he assayed to go. And because he neuer proued it, Dauid sayde vnto Saul: I cannot go with these, for I haue not vsed myselfe therto: and Dauid put them of hym,
and toke hys staffe in hys hande, and chose him fyue smoth stones oute of a broke, and put them in a sheperdes bagge which he had, Ꟶ in a slynge poke: Ꟶ his slynge was in his hande, Ꟶ he went to the Philistine.
And the Philistine came and drue nere agaynst Dauid, and the man that bare the shilde went before hym.
And when the Philistine loked aboute, and sawe Dauid, he disdayned him, for he was but yonge, and well coloured, and goodlye to loke vpon.
And the Philistine said vnto Dauid: am I a dogge, that thou comest to me with a staffe? and the Philistine cursed Dauid in the name of his goddes.
And the Philistine sayde to Dauid: come to me, Ꟶ I wyll geue thy fleshe vnto the foules of the ayre, Ꟶ to the beastes of the felde.
Then sayde Dauid to the Philistine: thou comest to me wyth a swerde, a speare and a shylde: But I come to the in the name of the Lord of hostes, the God of the hoste of Israel, whom thou hast rayled vpon.
This daye shall the Lorde delyuer the into my hande, and I shall smyte the, Ꟶ take thine heed from the, and wyll geue the karcases of the hoste of the Philistines thys daye vnto the foules of the ayre, and to the beastes of the erth, that all they whych be in the worlde, maye knowe, that there is a God in Israel.
And all thys congregacyon shall knowe, that the Lord saueth not with swerd and speare. For the battell is the Lordes, and he shall geue you into oure handes.
And when the Philistine arose to come and drawe nie vnto Dauid, Dauid hasted, Ꟶ ranne into the battayll euen agaynst the Philistine.
And Dauid put his hande in hys bagge, and toke out a stone, and slange it, Ꟶ smote the Philistine in his forheed, that the stone souncke into his forheed and he felle grouelynge to the erth.
And so Dauid ouercame the Philistine with a slyng and a stone, and smote the Philistine, and slue hym, euen whan Dauid had no swerde in hys hande.
But Dauid ranne, and stode vpon the Philistine, Ꟶ toke hys swerde, and drue it out of hys sheth, and slue hym, Ꟶ cutte of hys heed therwith. And when the Philistines sawe, that theyr champyon was deed they fled.
And the men of Israel and of Iuda arose, and showted, Ꟶ folowed after the Philistines, vntyll they came to the valeye, and vnto the gates of Akaron. And the Philistines fell downe wounded by the waye to Saaraiim, euen vnto Gath Ꟶ Akaron.
And the chyldren of Israel returned from chasynge after the Philistines, and spoyled theyr tentes.
And Dauid toke the heed of the Philistine, and brought it to Ierusalem: But he put his armoure in hys tente.
When Saul sawe Dauid go forth agaynst the Philistine, he sayde vnto Abner the captayne of his hoste: Abner, whose sonne is this yong man? Abner answered: as truly as thy soule lyueth (O kynge) I cannot tell.
And the kynge sayde: Enquere thou whose sonne the youngelynge is.
And when Dauid was returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, Abner toke hym, and brought hym before Saul, wyth the heed of the Philistine in hys hande.
And Saul sayde to hym: whose sonne art thou, thou yonge man? Dauid answered: I am the sonne of thy seruaunt Isai the Bethlehemite.
And when he had made an ende of speakynge vnto Saul, the soule of Ionathas was knyt wyth the soule of Dauid, and Ionathas loued hym as hys awne soule.
And Saul toke him that daye, and wolde let him go nomore home to hys fathers house.
And Ionathas made a couenaunt wyth Dauid, because be loued him as his awne soule.
And Ionathas put of his awne coate that was vpon him, Ꟶ gaue it Dauid, Ꟶ therto his cloke, his swerd, his bowe and hys gyrdle.
And Dauid went oute whether soeuer Saul sent hym, and behaued him selfe wysely. And Saul sett hym ouer hys men of warre, and he was accepted in the syght of all the people, and in the syght of Sauls seruauntes.
And it happened as they went, when Dauid was returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, that wemen came out of all cyties of Israel syngynge Ꟶ daunsyng, agaynst kynge Saul, and wyth tymbrelles, wyth ioye, and with instrumentes of musick.
And the wemen answered one another in theyr playe, Ꟶ sayde Saul hath slayne his thousande, and Dauid hys ten thousande.
And Saul was excedyng wroth, and the sayinge displeased him, and he sayde: they haue ascribed vnto Dauid ten thousande, and to me but a thousande, Ꟶ what can he more haue, saue the kyngdome?
Wherfore Saul loked on syde of Dauid from that daye forwarde.
And it happened on the morowe, that the euell sprete sent of God came vpon Saul, and he prophesyed in the myddes of the house. And Dauid played with hys hande lyke as at other tymes,
and there was a iauelyng in Sauls hande. And Saul toke the iauelyng, Ꟶ sayde: I wyll nayle Dauid to the wall with it. And Dauid auoyded oute of hys presence two tymes.
And Saul was afearde of Dauid, because the Lord was with hym, Ꟶ was departed from Saul.
Therfore Saul put him from hym, and made him a captayne ouer a thousand, and he went out Ꟶ in before the people.
And Dauid behaued him selfe wysely in all his wayes, Ꟶ the Lord was with him.
Wherfore when Saul saw that he was so excedynge wyse, he was afrayd of him.
But all Israel and Iuda loued Dauid, because he went out and in before them.
And Saul sayde to Dauid. Beholde, my eldest daughter Merob, her I wyll geue the to wyfe Only playe the man with me, and fyght the Lordes batelles. For Saul thought: myne hande shall not be vpon hym, but the hand of the Philistines.
And Dauid answered Saul: what am I? and what is my lyfe or the kynred of my father in Israel, that I shulde be sonne in lawe to the kynge?
Howbeit when the tyme was come that Merob Sauls daughter shulde haue bene geuen to Dauid, she was geuen vnto Adriel a Meholothite, to wyfe.
Howbeit, Michol Sauls daughter loued Dauid. And they shewed Saul: Ꟶ the thynge displeased him not.
And Saul sayde: I wyll geue hym her that she maye be a snare to hym, Ꟶ that the hande of the Philistines maye be agaynst him. Wherfore Saul sayde to Dauid: thou shalt this daye be my sonne in lawe in the other daughter.
And Saul commaunded hys seruauntes, to comen wyth Dauid secretlye Ꟶ to saye: Beholde the kyng hath a fauoure to the, and all his seruauntes loue the, be nowe therfore the kynges sonne in lawe.
And Sauls seruauntes spake those wordes in the eares of Dauid. And Dauid sayde: semeth it to you a lyght thynge to be a kynges sonne in lawe: I am a poore man and of smalle reputacion.
And the seruauntes brought Saul worde agayne, sayinge: of this maner spake Dauid.
And Saul sayd: this wise shal ye saye to Dauid: the kynge careth for no nother dowrye, but for an hundred foreskynnes of the Philistines, to be aduenged of the kynges enemyes. But Saul thought to make Dauid fall into the handes of the Philistines.
And when hys seruauntes tolde Dauid these wordes, it pleased Dauid well to be the kynges sonne in lawe.
And or the dayes were expyred, Dauid arose with his men, and went Ꟶ slue of the Philistines, two hundred men, and Dauid brought theyr foreskynnes, and satisfyed the kynge therof, to be hys sonne in lawe. Wherfore Saul gaue hym Michol hys daughter to wyfe.
And Saul sawe and vnderstode, howe that the Lorde was with Dauid, and that Michol his daughter loued hym,
and he was the moare afrayed of Dauid, and Saul became alwaye Dauids enemie.
The lordes of the Philistines vsed to go furth. And it fortuned that whan they went furth, Dauid behaued hym selfe wyselier then all the seruauntes of Saul: so that his name was moche set by.
Saul spake to Ionathas hys sonne, and to all hys seruauntes, that they shulde kyll Dauid.
But Ionathas Sauls sonne had a greate fauoure to Dauid, and Ionathas tolde Dauid sayinge: Saul my father goeth aboute to slaye the. Nowe therfore take hede to thy selfe vntyll the mornynge, and abyde in some secret place, and hyde thy selfe.
And I wyll go oute, and stande by my father in the felde where thou art, and wyll comen wyth my father of the, and whatsoeuer I se, I wyll tell the.
And Ionathas spake good of Dauid vnto Saul hys father, and sayde vnto hym: let not the kynge synne agaynst hys seruaunt Dauid, for he hath not synned agaynst the, and hys workes haue bene to the ward very good.
For he dyd put hys lyfe in hys hande, and slue the Philistine, and the Lorde brought to passe a greate health for all Israel. Thou sawest it, and thou reioysedest, wherfore then wilt thou synne against innocent bloude, and slaye Dauid without a cause?
And Saul harkened vnto the voyce of Ionathas, and sware: as truly as the Lorde lyueth, he shall not dye.
And Ionathas called Dauid, and shewed hym all those wordes, Ꟶ brought Dauid to Saul. And he was in his presens as in tymes past.
And the warre began agayne, and Dauid went out and fought wyth the Philistines, and slue them with a great slaughter, Ꟶ they fledde from him.
And the euell sprete sent of the Lorde was vpon Saul, as he sat in hys house hauinge a Iauelinge in his hande, and Dauid played with his hande.
And Saul entended to nayle Dauid to the walle with the Iauelynge. But he ryd hym selfe out of Sauls presens, as he smote the speare into the walle. And Dauid fledde Ꟶ was saued the same nyght.
Saul also sent messengers vnto Dauids house, to watch him, and to sleye him in the mornynge. And Michol Dauids wyfe tolde it him, sayinge: If thou saue not thy selfe this night, to morowe thou wilt be slayne.
And so Michol lett Dauid downe thorowe a wyndowe, and he went, Ꟶ fled, and was saued.
And then she toke an Image and layed it in the bed, and put a pyllowe stuffed with goates hearre vnder the heed of it, and couered it with a clothe.
And when Saul sent messengers to fetche Dauid, she sayde, he is sycke.
And Saul sent the messengers agayne to se Dauid, sayinge: bringe him to me, bed Ꟶ all, that I maye slaye him.
And when the messengers were come in: Beholde, there laye an ymage in the bed, with a pyllowe of goates heare vnder the heed of it.
And Saul sayde vnto Michol: why hast thou mocked me so, and sent awaye myne enemy that he is escaped? Michol answered Saul. For he sayde vnto me, let me go, or elles I wyll kyll the.
And so Dauid fledde, and escaped, Ꟶ came to Samuel to Rama, tolde hym all that Saul had done to him. And he and Samuel went, and dwelt in Naioth.
And one tolde Saul, sayinge: Beholde, Dauid is at Naioth in Rama.
And Saul sent messengers to fett Dauid. And when they sawe a companye of prophetes prophesyenge, Ꟶ Samuel standynge fast by them, the sprete of God fell vpon the messengers of Saul, and they prophesyed to.
And when it was tolde Saul, he sent other messengers, Ꟶ they prophesyed lykewyse. And Saul sent messengers yet agayne the thyrde tyme, and they prophesyed also.
Then went he hym selfe to Rama, Ꟶ came to a great well that is in Sechu, Ꟶ he asked and sayde: where are Samuel and Dauid? And one sayde: Beholde, they be at Naioth in Rama,
Ꟶ he went thyther, euen to Naioth in Rama, and the sprete of God came vpon him also, Ꟶ he went prophesyinge, vntyll he came to Naioth in Rama.
And he stripte of his clothes, Ꟶ prophesyed before Samuel in lyke maner, and fell naked all that daye Ꟶ all that nyght. And therof it is, that they saye: is Saul also amonge the prophetes?
And Dauid fled from Naioth which is in Rama, came, Ꟶ sayde before Ionathas. What haue I done? wherin am I faultie? what is the synne that I haue committed before thy father, that he seketh my lyfe?
He sayde vnto him: God forbyd, thou shalt not dye. Beholde, my father will do nothynge ether great or small, but that he will shewe it me. And howe shulde my father hyde thys thynge from me? He wyll not do it.
And Dauid sware againe, and sayde, thy father knoweth that I haue founde grace in thyne eyes, and therfore he sayeth: Ionathas shall not knowe it, leste he be sorye. And in very dede, euen as truly as the Lorde lyueth, and as truly as thy soule lyueth, there is but a steppe betwene me and deeth.
Then sayde Ionathas vnto Dauid: whatsoeuer thy soule desyreth that I wyll do vnto the.
And Dauid sayde vnto Ionathas: Beholde to morowe is the begynnynge of the moneth, and I shulde sytt wt the kynge at meate. But let me go, that I maye hyde my selfe in the feldes vnto the thyrde daye at euen.
If thy father speake of me, then saye, Dauid asked leaue of me, that he myght go to Bethlehem to his awne cytie, for there is holden a yerely feast for all the kynred.
And yf he saye: it is well done, then thy seruaunt shall haue peace. But and yf he be angrye, then be sure that wyckednesse is vtterlye concluded of hym.
And then thou shalt shewe mercye vnto thy seruaunt for thou hast made wyth me thy seruaunt a bonde in the Lorde. Notwithstandynge, yf there be in me any trespace, then sleye me thy selfe, and brynge me not to thy father.
And Ionathas answered, God kepe that from the. For yf I knowe, that wyckednesse were concluded of my father, to come vpon the, thynkest thou that I shulde not tell it the?
Then sayde Dauid, who shall tell me, yf thy father answere cruelly?
And Ionathas sayd vnto Dauid, come and lett vs go out into the felde. And they went out both of them into the felde.
And Ionathas sayde vnto Dauid? The Lorde God of Israel loke on it, when I haue groped my fathers mynde, one tyme or other within this thre dayes, that it stande well with Dauid. If I then sende not vnto the Ꟶ shewe it the,
the Lord do so and so vnto Ionathas. But yf my father haue any pleasure to do the euell, I wyll shewe the also, and sende the awaye that thou mayst go in peace. And the Lorde be wyth the, as he hath bene with my father.
And thou shalt performe vnto me the mercy of the Lorde, not onely whyle I lyue but euen when I am deed,
and plucke not thy mercy awaye from my house for euer: No not when the Lorde hath destroyed the enemyes of Dauid, euery one from the face of the erth.
And so Ionathas made a bonde with the house of Dauid, desyringe that the Lord shulde seke it out by the handes of Dauids enemyes (yf it were broken.)
And wt other wordes dyd Ionathas sweare vnto Dauid, because he loued him. For he loued him, as his awne soule.
Then sayde Ionathas to Dauid: to morowe is the first daye of the mone. And thou shalt be missed, because the place where thou wast wont to sytt, shall be emptye.
Therfore this daye thre dayes come downe in any wyse vnto the place where thou dyddest hyde thy selfe, whan the busynes was in hande: euen by the stone Esell.
And I wyll shote thre arowes by the one syde therof, as though I shott them at a marke,
Ꟶ will sende a lad, and byd hym go seke the arowes. And yf I saye vnto the lad: se, the arowes are on thys syde the brynge them: then come thou: for it is peace, Ꟶ no hurte, as sure as the Lorde lyueth.
But and yf I saye vnto the lad, beholde, the arowes are be yonde the, then go for the Lord hath sent the awaye.
And as touchynge this which thou and I haue spoken: beholde the Lorde be betwene the Ꟶ me for euer.
And so Dauid hyd him selfe in the felde. And when the newe mone was come, the kynge sat him downe to eate meate.
And the kynge sat him downe after the olde maner, in hys seate by the wall. And Ionathas arose and Abner sate by Sauls syde, Ꟶ Dauids place was emptye.
Neuerthelesse, Saul sayde nothinge at all that daye. For he thought: some thynge hath chaunced him that he is not cleane.
But on the morowe which was the seconde daye of the newe mone, it happened that Dauids place was emptye agayne. And Saul sayde vnto Ionathas his sonne. Wherfore commeth not the sonne of Isai to meate, nether yesterdaye nor to daye?
And Ionathas answered vnto Saul. Dauid asked lycence of me, to go to Bethlehem,
for he sayde: let me go I praye the for oure kynred dothe holde an offerynge in the cytie, and my brother hath sent for me. And therfore yf I haue founde fauoure in thyne eyes, lett me go, and se my brethren. This is the cause, that he commeth not vnto the kynges table.
Then was Saul angrye with Ionathas, Ꟶ sayde vnto him: Thou wycked rebell, do not I knowe, that thou hast chosen the sonne of Isai vnto thyne awne rebuke, Ꟶ vnto the rebuke Ꟶ shame of thy mother?
For as longe as the sonne of Isai lyueth vpon the erth, thou shalt not be stablished, nor yet thy kingdome, wherfore now sende and sett him vnto me, for he is the chylde of deeth.
And Ionathas answered vnto Saul his father, and sayde to him. Wherfore shulde he dye? what hath he done?
And Saul lyfte vp a speare to hyt him, wherby Ionathas wyst well, that it was vtterlye determined of his father; to sleye Dauid.
And so Ionathas arose from the table in a greate anger, Ꟶ dyd eate no meat the seconde daye of the moneth, for he was sory for Dauid, because hys father had done him shame.
On the nexte morning, Ionathas went out into the felde, at the tyme apoynted with Dauid, Ꟶ a lytle ladd with him.
And he sayde vnto his boye: runne Ꟶ seke out myne arowes whych I shote. And as the boye ran he shot an arowe beyonde him.
And when the lad was come to the place whether Ionathas had shot the arowe, Ionathas cryed after the lad, and sayde: Is not the arowe beyonde the?
And Ionathas cried after the lad agayne: make spede, and stande not styll. And Ionathas lad geathered vp the arowes, Ꟶ came to his master.
But the lad wist nothinge of the matter. Onely Ionathas and Dauid wist it.
And Ionathas gaue his weapons vnto the lad that was wyth him, Ꟶ sayde vnto him: go Ꟶ carye them to the towne.
And as sone as the lad was gone, Dauid arose out of a place that was towarde the south, and fell on hys face to the grounde, and worshypped thre tymes. And they kissed ether other, Ꟶ wept together so longe, tyll Dauid exceaded in weping.
And Ionathas sayde to Dauid: go in peace. And the thynges which we haue sworne both of vs in the name of the Lorde, sayinge: the Lorde be betwene the Ꟶ me, Ꟶ betwene thy sede Ꟶ myne, let them stonde for euer. And he arose, Ꟶ departed. And Ionathas went into the towne.
Then came Dauid to Nob to Ahimelech the preast: And Ahimelech was astonyed at the sodayne commynge of Dauid, Ꟶ sayd vnto him: Why art thou alone, Ꟶ no man wt the?
And Dauid sayde to Ahimelech the preaste: the kynge hath commaunded me to do a certeyn thynge, and hath sayde vnto me, let no man knowe where aboute I sende the, and what I haue commannded the to do. And I haue appoynted my seruauntes, to soche and soche places.
Nowe therfore yf thou hast ought vnder thyne hande geue me fyue loues of breade, or what cometh to hande.
And the preast answered Dauid, and sayde: there is no comen bread vnder myne hande, but here is halowed bread, yf the younge men haue kepte them selues from vncleane thynges especiallye wemen.
Dauid answered the Preaste, and sayde vnto hym: of a truth wemen hath bene locked vp from vs about a thre dayes. When I came out, Ꟶ the vesselles of the young men were holy. How be it this waye is vnpure, and how much more shal there be holynes in the vessell.
And so the preast gaue him halowed bred, for there was no nother bred there, saue the shewebreds, that were taken from before the Lorde, to put freshe bred there, the daye that it was taken awaye.
And ther was there the same daye a certen man of the seruauntes of Saul abydyng before the Lorde, named Doeg an Edomite, the chefest of Sauls hearde men.
And Dauid sayd vnto Ahimelech: is not here vnder thyne hande other speare or swerde? for I haue nether brought my swerde nor my harnesse with me, because the kynge busines required haste.
And the preast sayd: the swerde of Goliath the Philistine whome thou sluest in the Ocke valley, beholde, it is here wrapt in a cloth behynd the Ephod. If thou wilt take that, take it, for there is no nother saue that here. And Dauid sayd: there is none to that, geue it me.
And Dauid arose and fled the same daye from the presence of Saul, Ꟶ went to Achis the kyng of Geth.
And the seruauntes of Achis sayd of him: is not this Dauid the kyng of the lande? dyd they not syng vnto him, in daunses saying Saul hath slayne his thousand, Ꟶ Dauid his ten thousand?
And Dauid put those wordes into his heart, Ꟶ was sore afrayed of Achis the kyng of Geth.
And he chaunged his speche before them, Ꟶ fayned him self madd in theyr handes, Ꟶ scrabled on the dores of the gate, and let his spittel fall downe vpon his bearde.
Then sayde Achis vnto his seruaunte: Loo, ye se that this man is besyde hym selfe, wherfore then haue ye brought hym to me?
Haue I nede of madd men that ye haue brought this felow to playe the mad man in my presence? Shall he come into my howse.
Dauid therfore departed thence, and escaped, and came vnto the caue Odollam. When his brethren also and all his fathers house heard it, they went downe thither to hym.
And there geathered vnto him all men that were in combraunce, and in dett, and troubled in their mindes, Ꟶ he became a captayne ouer them And there were with hym vpon a foure hundred men.
And Dauid went thence to Mizpa in the lande of Moab, and sayde vnto the kyng of Moab: Let my father Ꟶ my mother (I praye the) come forth vnto you, tyll I knowe what God will do for me.
And he brought them before the king of Moab. And they dwelt wt him all the while that Dauid kepte him selfe in hold.
And the prophet Gad sayde vnto Dauid: abide not in holde, but departe and go into the land of Iuda. Then Dauid departed and came into the forest Hareth.
And Saul heard that Dauid was come abrode, and also the men that were wyth hym. And Saul satt in Gibea vnder a tree in Rama, hauyng hys speare in his hand, Ꟶ all his men stode about hym
And Saul sayde vnto his seruauntes that stode about him. Heare I praye you you sonnes of Iemini: will the sonne of Isai geue euery one of you feldes and vineardes, Ꟶ make you all captaynes ouer thousandes Ꟶ ouer hundredes?
that ye haue also conspired agaynst me, and there is none that telleth it me in myne eare. And where as my sonne hath made a bonde wt the sonne of Isai, ther is none of you that mourneth for me, or sheweth it in myne eare: beholde, my sonne hath stered vp my seruaunt to lye awayte agaynst me thys same daye.
Then answered Doeg the Edomite which also stode by the seruauntes of Saul, and sayde: I saw the sonne of Isai, when he cam to Nob, to Ahimelech the sonne of Ahitob,
which asked councell of the Lorde for hym Ꟶ gaue hym vitayles, Ꟶ the swerde of Goliath the Philistine also.
Then the Kynge sent Ꟶ called for Ahimelech the preast the sonne of Ahitob, Ꟶ all his fathers house: that is to saye, the preastes that were in Nob. And they cam all to the kyng.
And Saul sayde: heare now thou sonne of Ahitob. He answered: here I am, my Lorde.
And Saul sayde vnto hym: why haue ye conspired agaynst me, thou Ꟶ the sonne of Isai, in that thou hast geuen him vitaile, Ꟶ a swerde, and hast asked councell of God for him, that he shuld aryse agaynst me, Ꟶ lye awayte for me this daye?
Ahimelech answered the king Ꟶ sayd who is so faithfull among all thy seruauntes as Dauid, Ꟶ therto the kinges sonne in law, Ꟶ goeth at thy bydding, Ꟶ is had in honoure in thyne house?
haue I this daye begonne first to aske councell of God for him. That be farre from me: yf I had knowen it, lett not the kyng put soch a thyng vnto his seruaunt, in all the house of my father. For thy seruaunt knew nothing of all this, ether lesse or moare.
The king sayde: thou shalt surelye dye Ahimelech, thou and all thy fathers house
And the king sayde vnto the fote men that stode about him: turne, Ꟶ sley the preastes of the Lord, both because their hand is with Dauid, Ꟶ because they knewe when Dauid fleed, Ꟶ shewed it not to me. But the seruauntes of the kyng wolde not moue their handes, to fall vpon the preastes of the Lorde.
And the kyng sayde to Doeg: turne thou, and fall vpon the preastes. And Doeg the Edomite turned, and ranne vpon the preastes, and slue that same daye foure skore Ꟶ fyue persones, that dyd weare a lynnen Ephod.
And Nob the cytie of the preastes smote he wyth the edge of the swerde, both men Ꟶ wemen, children and sucklynges, oxen and asses and shepe.
And one of the sonnes of Ahimelech the sonne of Ahitob (named Abiathar) escaped Ꟶ fled to Dauid.
And Abiathar shewed Dauid, how that Saul had slayne the lordes preastes.
And Dauid sayde vnto Abiathar: I wilt it the same daye, whan Doeg the Edomite was there, that he wolde tell Saul. And I am cause of the deeth of all the soules of thy fathers house.
Abide thou wt me, and feare not: For yf anye man seke my soule, he shall seke thyne also, wt me thou shalt be in sauegard.
Then they told Dauid saying: Behold the Philistines fight agaynst keilah, and spoyle the barnes.
Therfore Dauid asked the Lords aduyse, saying: shall I goo and smyte these Philistines? And the Lorde answered vnto Dauid: go and smyte the Philistines, and saue keilah.
And Dauids men that were with him, sayd vnto him: se, we be afrayed here in Iuda: how much more then yf we come to keila agaynst the host of the Philistynes?
Then Dauid asked the Lorde agayne. And the Lord answered him and sayde: Aryse, Ꟶ go downe to keila, for I will delyuer the Philistines in to thyne hande.
And so Dauid and his men went to keila, and fought with the Philistynes, Ꟶ droue awaye their catell, and smote them with a great slaughter. And so Dauid saued the enhabiters of keila.
And it chaunced, when Abiathar the sonne of Ahimelech fled to Dauid to keila, that he brought an Ephod with him in his hande.
And it was tolde Saul, that Dauid was come to keila. And Saul sayde: God hath delyuered him into myne hand. For he is shut in now that he is come into a towne that hath gates Ꟶ barres.
And Saul called all the people together to warre, for to go downe to keila, and to besege Dauid Ꟶ his men.
And Dauid hauing knowlege that Saul imagened myschef against him, sayd, to Abiathar the preast: Bryng the Ephod.
Then sayde Dauid: O Lord God of Israel, thi seruaunt hath heard, that Saul is about to come against keila to destroye the cytie for my sake:
Wyll the men of keyla delyuer me into hys hande? And will Saul come downe, as thy seruaunt hath heard saye? O Lord God of Israel, tell they seruaunt. And the Lorde sayde: he will come downe.
Then sayd Dauid: will the men of keila delyuer me and the men that are with me into the hand of Saul? Ꟶ the Lord sayde: they will betraye you.
Then dauid Ꟶ his men which were vpon a syxe hundred, arose Ꟶ departed out of keila Ꟶ went whether they could. And it was told Saul, that Dauid was fled from keila, Ꟶ he let the iourney a lone.
Dauid abode in the wildernesse in strong holdes, Ꟶ remayned in a mountayne in the wildernesse of ziph. And Saul sought him euery daye, but God delyuered him not into his hand.
And Dauid saw that Saul was come out, to seke his life. And Dauid was in the wyldernesse of ziph in a thickett.
And Ionathas Sauls sonne arose, Ꟶ went to Dauid in to the thicket, Ꟶ comforted his hand in God,
Ꟶ sayde vnto hym: feare not, for the hand of Saul my father shall not fynd the, Ꟶ thou shalt be king ouer Israel, Ꟶ I must be next vnto the. And that doth Saul my father know.
And they made abonde both of them togeather before the Lorde. And Dauid taryed styll in the thickett, and Ionathas went to his house.
Then came the ziphites to Saul, to Gibea, saying: Doth not Dauid hyde him selfe fast by vs in strong holdes, in a thyckett that is by the hyll of Hachila, on the ryght syde of the wildernesse?
Now therfore kyng, thou mayest come downe according to all the lust of thy soule: come downe, Ꟶ oure parte shalbe to delyuer hym into the kynges hande.
And Saul sayde: Blessed are ye in the Lord: for ye haue compassion on me.
Go I praye you, Ꟶ ordre the matter well, know Ꟶ se his haunte, where hys fote hath bene, and who hath sene him there: for it is tolde me, that he is very sottel, Ꟶ worketh craftely.
Se therfore, Ꟶ know all the lourkyng places, where he hideth him self, and come ye agayne to me with the certentye, Ꟶ I will go wyth you. And yf he be in the land, I will serche him out thorow out all the thousandes of Iuda.
And they arose, and went to ziph before Saul, But Dauid and his men were in the wildernesse of Maon, in the playne that is, on the ryght hand of Iesimon.
Saul also and his men wente to seke: and they tolde Dauid. Wherfore he went vnto a Rocke, and abode in the wildernesse of Maon.
And when Saul hearde that, he folowed after Dauid in the wildernesse of Maon. And Saul Ꟶ his men went on the one syde of the mountayne, Ꟶ Dauid Ꟶ his men on the other syde. And Dauid toke thought, how to get from Saul. For Saul Ꟶ his men compased Dauid Ꟶ his men, rounde about, to take them.
But there cam a messenger to Saul, saying Hast the, Ꟶ come, for the Philistines are come into the land.
Wherfore, Saul returned from persecuting Dauid, Ꟶ went agaynst the Philistines. And therfore is it, that they called the place: The rock of separacion.
And Dauid went thence, Ꟶ dwelt in strong holdes at Engadi.
When Saul was come agayne from folowing after the Philistines, it fortuned, that there were, which told him saying: beholde, Dauid is in the wildernesse of Engadi.
Then Saul toke thre thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and went to seke Dauid and his men in the height of the Rockes, where wilde gootes remayne.
And he cam to the flockes of shepe in the waye. And Saul went in to a caue to couer his fete. And Dauid and hys men remayned in the inward partes of the caue.
And the men of Dauid sayd vnto him: se, the daye is come, of which the Lorde sayde vnto the: Beholde: I will delyuer thyne enemyes into thyne hand, Ꟶ thou shalt do to him as it shall seme good in thy syght. Then Dauid arose and cutt of a lappe of Sauls garment priuelye.
And immediatly Dauids hert smote hym because he had cutt of a lapp of Sauls garment.
And he sayde vnto his men: the Lorde kepe me from doing that thing vnto my master the Lords anoynted, to laye mine hande vpon hym, seyng he is the anoynted of the Lorde.
And so Dauid kept of hys seruauntes with these wordes, and soffred them not to ryse agaynst Saul. But Saul rose vp out of the caue Ꟶ went awaye,
Dauid also arose and went out of of the caue, and cryed after Saul, saying: My Lorde kyng. And when Saul loked behynde hym. Dauid stowped to the erth, and bowed him self,
Ꟶ sayd to Saul: wherfore geuest thou an eare to mennes wordes that saye, Dauid seketh euell agaynst the?
Beholde, this daye thyne eyes haue sene. how that the Lord had delyuered the thys daye into myne hand in the caue. And some bad me kyll the, but I had compassion on the, and sayde: I will not laye my handes on my master, for he is the Lordes anointed.
And moreouer, my father, behold, Ꟶ se yet the lapp of thy garment in my hand: in as moch as I kylled the not, when I cutt of the lapp of thy garment. Understande therfore Ꟶ se, that there is nether euell nor wickednesse in me, and that I haue not synned agaynst the. And yet thou huntest after my soule to take it.
The Lord be iudge betwene the and me, and the Lorde aduenge me of the. But myne hand be not vpon the.
Accordyng as the olde prouerbe sayeth: wyckednesse proceadeth from the wycked: But myne hande be not vpon the.
After whom is the kyng of Israel come out? After whom dost thou moue persecucion? after a deed dogg, and after a flee.
The Lorde be iudge, and iudge betwene the and me, Ꟶ se Ꟶ pleate my cause, and avenge me of thyne hande.
When Dauid had made an ende of speaking these wordes to Saul, Saul sayde is this thy voyce my sonne Dauid? and Saul lyfte vp his voyce, and wepte,
and sayde to Dauid: thou art ryghteouser then I, for thou hast rewarded me with good, where as I haue rewarded the wyth euell.
And thou hast shewed thys daye, how that thou hast dealt louynglye wyth me, for as moche as when the Lorde had locked me in thyne handes, thou kylledst me not.
For who shall finde his enemye, Ꟶ lett him depart in to a good waye? Wherfore the Lord reward the with good, for that thou hast done vnto me this daye.
And now beholde, I wote well that thou shalt be kyng, and that the kingdom of Israel shalbe stablyshed in thyne hande.
Swere now therfore vnto me by the Lord that thou shalt not destroye my seade after me, Ꟶ that thou shalt not put my name out of my fathers house.
And Dauid sware vnto Saul, and Saul went home. But Dauid and his men gatt them vp vnto an hold.
And Samuel dyed, and all the Israelites geathered togeather and lamented hym, and buryed hym in his owne house at Rama. And Dauid arose, and gat hym to the wildernesse of Pharan.
And there was a man in Maon whose possession was in Carmel, and the man was excedyng myghtie, and had thre thousand shepe Ꟶ a thousand gootes. And he was sheryng his shepe in Carmell.
The name of the man was Nabal, and the name of his wyfe was Abigail, and she was a woman of a singuler wisdome and bewtifull. But the man was churlyshe, and of shrewde condicions, and was of the kynred of Caleb.
And Dauid heard in the wildernesse, that Nabal dyd shere hys shepe.
And Dauid sent out ten young men, and sayde vnto them: get you vp to Carmel, and go to Nabal, and grete hym in my name.
And thus shal ye saye: peace be to the, peace be to thyne house, Ꟶ peace be vnto all that thou hast.
Beholde, I haue heard saye, that thou hast sherers. Now, thy sheperdes were with vs and we dyd them no spyte, nether was there ought myssing vnto them, all the whyle they were in Carmel:
aske thy laddes, Ꟶ they will shew the. Wherfore let these young men fynde fauore in thine eyes (for we come in a good ceason) and geue I praye the whatsoeuer commeth to thyne hande, vnto thy seruauntes, and to thy sonne Dauid.
And whan Dauids youngmen came, they tolde Nabal all those wordes in the name of Dauid, Ꟶ then helde theyr peace.
And Nabal answered Dauids seruauntes, Ꟶ sayde: what is Dauid? Ꟶ what is the sonne of Isai? there is plentye of seruauntes now a dayes, that breake awaye euery man from his master.
Shal I then take my breed, my water Ꟶ my flesshe, that I haue kylled for my sherers, Ꟶ geue it vnto men whom I wote not whence they be?
And so Dauids seruauntes turned their waye, and went agayne, and came and told him all those sayinges.
And Dauid sayd vnto hys men: gyrde euery man hys swerde aboute him. And they gyrded euery man his swerde aboute him, Ꟶ Dauid was gyrded with his swerde. And there folowed Dauid vpon a foure hundred men, and two hundred abode by the stuffe.
But one of the laddes tolde Abigail Nabals wyfe, saying: Beholde, Dauid sent messengers vnto oure master out of the wildernesse to salute him Ꟶ he rayled on them.
And yet the men are very good vnto vs, Ꟶ dyd vs no displeasure, nether missed we any thing, as long as we were conuersant with them, when we were in the feldes.
They were a wall of defence vnto vs both by nyght Ꟶ daye, all the whyle we were with them keping shepe.
Now therfore, take hede, and se what thou hast to do, for there is an occasion of euell geuen agaynst oure master and all his housholde, seyng: he is as a sonne of beliall vngracious to speake to.
Then Abigail made hast, Ꟶ toke two hundred loues, Ꟶ two bottelles of wine, and fyue shepe readye dressed, and fyue measures of parched corne, and an hundred frayles of reasyngs, and two hundred topnettes of fygges, and laded them on asses,
Ꟶ sayde vnto her young men: go ye before me. Beholde, I come after you. But she tolde her husband Naball nothing therof.
And as she rode on her asse she came preuely downe the syde of the hyll, Ꟶ beholde, Dauid and hys men came downe agaynst her, Ꟶ she met them.
And Dauid sayde: in vayne haue I kept all that this felow hath in the wildernesse: so that nought was myssed of all that pertayned vnto hym. And he hath quite me euell for good.
So and so do God vnto the enemyes of dauid, yf I leaue of all that pertayne to him, by the dawnyng of the daye, any thing that pisseth agaynst the walle.
And when Abigail saw Dauid, she hasted Ꟶ lyghted of her asse, and fell before Dauid on her face, and bowed her self to the ground
and fell at his fete, and sayde: Let this vnhappie deade be counted myne, my Lorde, Ꟶ let thine handmayde speake in thine audience, and heare the wordes of thy handemayde.
Let not my Lorde regard this vnthriftye man Naball: for as his name is, so is he Nabal is his name, Ꟶ follie is wt him. But I thine handmayd saw not the young men of my Lorde whom thou sendedst.
Now therfore my Lorde, as sure as the lord lyueth, Ꟶ as thy soule lyueth, the Lorde hath withholden the from comming to shede bloud, Ꟶ withdraw thou thine hand from bloude sheade Now, I praye God, that thine enemyes Ꟶ they that entende to do my Lorde euel, may be as Nabal.
And now this is the blessyng which thyne hand mayde hath brought vnto my Lord: Ꟶ lett it be geuen vnto the young men, that folow my Lorde.
Forgeue the trespace of thine handmayde, for the Lord will make my Lorde a sure house, because my Lord fyghteth the batayles of the Lorde, and there coulde none euel be founde in the in all thy dayes.
And yf any man ryse to persecute the, Ꟶ to seke thy soule, the soule of my Lorde shall be bound as in the bondell of the lyuing wt the Lord thy God. And the soules of thy enemyes shal God cast out, euen as out of the mydle of a slyng.
And when the Lord shall haue done to my Lord all the good that he hath promised the, Ꟶ shall haue made the ruler ouer Israel:
then shall it be no decaye vnto the, ner discourage of herte vnto my Lorde, that thou hast not shedde bloud causelesse, ner aduenged thy selfe. But when the Lord shall haue dealt well with my Lorde, then thynck on thyne handmayde.
And Dauid sayd to Abigail: blessed be the Lorde God of Israel, which sent the this daye to mete me.
Blessed is thy sayeng, Ꟶ blessed art thou, which hast kept me thys daye from coming to shede bloud, and from aduengyng my self with myne awne hand.
For in very deade, as sure as the Lord God of Israel lyueth, which hath kept me backe from hurtyng the, excepte thou haddest hasted and met me, thinkest thou, there had bene left vnto Nabal by the dawnyng of the daye, a pisser agaynst the wall?
And so Dauid receaued of her hand, that which she had brought him Ꟶ sayd to her: go vp in peace to thyne house. Beholde, I haue herde thy voyce, and haue accepted thy persone.
And Abigail came to Nabal: and behold, he held a feast in his house, lyke the feest of a kyng, Ꟶ Nabals herte was mery within him, for he was very droncke. Wherfore she tolde him nothing, nether lytle nor moare, vntill the morow daye.
But in the mornyng, when the wine was gone out of Naball, hys wife tolde him these wordes, and his herte dyed within him, and he became as a stone
Ꟶ vpon a ten dayes after, the Lorde smote Nabal, that he dyed.
And when Dauid heard that Nabal was deed, he sayde: Blessed be the Lorde that hath iudged the cause of my rebuke of the hand of Nabal, and hath kept his seruaunt from euell, and hath recompensed the wickednesse of Nabal vpon his awne heed. And Dauid sent to comen wt Abigail: to thyn tent to take her to his wife.
And when the seruauntes of Dauid were come to Abigail to Carmel, they spake vnto her saying: Dauid sent vs vnto the, to take the to his wife.
And she arose, Ꟶ bowed her self on her face to the erth, and sayde: Beholde let thy handmayde be a seruaunt, to washe the fete of the seruauntes of my Lord.
And Abigail hasted, and arose, and gat her vp vpon an Asse, wt fyue damoselles of hers that went at her fete, and she went after the messengers of Dauid, and became hys wife.
Dauid also toke Ahinoam of Iezrahel, Ꟶ they were both his wiues.
But Saul gaue Michol hys daughter Dauids wyfe to phalti the sonne of Lais which was of Gallim.
The ziphites came vnto Saul to Gibea, saying: Doth not Dauid hyde hym self in the hill of Hachila which is before Iesimon?
Saul arose, and went dwne to the wyldernesse of ziph, hauyng thre thousande chosen men of Israel with hym, for to seke Dauid in the wildernesse of ziph.
And Saul pitched in the hyll of Hachila which lyeth before Iesimon, by the waye side. But Dauid dwelt in the wildernesse. And he saw that Saul cam after hym into he wildernesse.
Dauid therfore sent out spyes, Ꟶ vnderstode, that Saul was come in very dede.
And Dauid arose and came to the placewhere Saul had pitched, Ꟶ Dauid beheld the place, where Saul laye, and Abner the sonne of Ner which was his chefe captayne Saul laye within, Ꟶ the people Ꟶ the hooste rounde about him.
Then answered Dauid and spake to Ahimelech the Hethite, Ꟶ to Abisai the sonne of zaruia and brother to Ioab, saying: who will go downe with me to Saul to the hoste? And Abisai saide: I will go downe with the.
And so Dauid and Abisai came downe to the people by nyght. And beholde, Saul laye sleping within the hoost, Ꟶ his speare stacke in the ground at his heed. But Abner Ꟶ the people laye round about hym.
Then sayde Abisai to Dauid: God hath deliuered thyne enemye into thyne hande this daye. Now therfore, lett me smyte hym once with my speare to the erth, Ꟶ I wyll not smyte hym the seconde tyme.
And Dauid sayde to Abisai: destroye him not. For who can laye his hande on the Lordes anoynted, Ꟶ be gyltlesse?
And Dauid sayde furthermore: as sure as the Lorde lyueth, the Lorde shall smyte him or his daye shall come to dye, or he shall descende into battell, Ꟶ there perishe.
The Lord kepe me from laying myne hande vpon the Lordes anoynted: But take thou now the speare that is at his heed, Ꟶ the crewse of water, Ꟶ let vs go.
And so Dauid toke the speare Ꟶ the crewse of water from Sauls heed, and they gatt them awaye, and no man saw it or marked yt or awaked. For they were all a slepe, because the Lorde had sent a deade sleape vpon them.
Then Dauid went ouer to the other syde, and stode on the toppe of an hyll a farre of (a great space beyng betwene them)
and Dauid cryed to the people, and to Abner the sonne of Ner, saying: Hearest thou not Abner? Abner answered, and sayde: What art thou that cryest to the king?
and Dauid sayd to Abner: art not thou a man: and who his lyke the in Israel? Wherfore then hast thou not kept thy Lord the kyng? For there came one of the folke in, to destroy the kyng thy lord.
It is not good that thou hast done. As truly as the Lorde lyueth, ye are worthy to dye, because ye haue not kepte youre master, the Lordes anoynted. And nowe se where the kynges speare is and the crewse of water, that was at his heed.
And Saul knew Dauids voyce, Ꟶ sayde is this thy voyce my sonne Dauid? Ꟶ Dauid sayd: it is my voyce, my Lord, O kyng
And he sayde: wherfore doth my lord thus persecute his seruaunt? for what haue I done? or what euell is in myne hand?
Now therfore let my Lord the kyng heare the wordes of his seruaunt. If the Lorde haue stered the vp agaynst me, let him smell the sauoure of a sacrifice. But Ꟶ yf they be the children of men, cursed are they before the lord For they haue cast me out this daye from abidyng in the enheritaunce of the Lord, saying: hence, Ꟶ go serue other gods.
Now therfore let not my bloud fall to the erth before the face of the lorde. For the king of Israell is come out to hunt a flee, as whan one doth hunt a partrege in the mountaynes.
Then sayde Saul: I haue synned, come agayn my sonne Dauid, for I will do the no moare harme, because my soule was preciouse in thyne eyes thys daye. Beholde, I haue played the fole, Ꟶ haue erred excedyngly.
And Dauid answered and sayd: Behold, the kyngs speare, lett one of the young men come ouer, Ꟶ fett it.
The Lorde reward euery man accordyng to his ryghtwesnesse Ꟶ fayth: for the Lordde delyuered the into my hand thys daye, but I wolde not laye myne hand vpon the Lordes anoynted.
And beholde, lyke as thy lyfe was moche set bye this daye in myne eyes: so be my lyfe set by in the eyes of the Lorde, that he delyuer me out of all tribulacion.
Then Saul sayd to Dauid: Blessed art thou my sonne Dauid, for thou shalt be a doer and preuayle. And so Dauid went his waye, and Saul turned to his place agayne.
And Dauid sayde in his hert: I shall perishe one daye or other by the hand of Saul. Therfore is there nothing better for me, then to flee and saue my selfe in the land of the Philistines, and Saul shall cease Ꟶ seke me nomore in all the coastes of Israel, Ꟶ so shall I escape out of his hand.
And Dauid arose, Ꟶ he Ꟶ the syxe hundred men that were wt him went vnto Achis, the sonne of Maoch, king of Geth.
And Dauid dwelt wt Achis at Geth, both he Ꟶ his men, euery man wt his housholde, Ꟶ Dauid wt hys two wiues: Ahinoam the Iezrahelite, Ꟶ Abigail Nabals wife of Carmell.
And it was tolde Saul, that Dauid was fleed to Geth, and he sought no moare for him.
And Dauid sayd vnto Achis: If I haue now found grace in thine eyes, lett them geue me a place in some towne in the feldes, that I maye dwell there. For why shulde thy seruaunt dwell in the heed cytie of the kingdome wt the?
Then Achis gaue hym zikleg the same daye, for which cause zikleg pertaineth vnto the kynges of Iuda vnto thys daye.
And the tyme that Dauid dwelt in the contreye of the Philistines, was foure monethes, and certayne dayes.
And Dauid Ꟶ his men went vp, and ranne vpon the Gesurites, the Gerzites Ꟶ the Amalekites: For those nacions were from the begynnyng the enhabiters of the lande, as men go to Sur, vnto the lande of Egypte.
And Dauid smote the land, and left nether man ner woman alyue, and droue awaye the shepe, the oxen, the asses, camelles, and clothes, and retourned, and came to Achis.
And Achis sayde: where haue ye bene a rouing this daye? And Dauid answered: Toward the south of Iuda, Ꟶ towarde the south of the Iezrahelites, Ꟶ towarde the south of the kenites.
And Dauid saued nether man nor woman alyue ner suffred them to come to Geth, for feare (sayeth he) leste they shuld telle on vs saing so dyd Dauid Ꟶ so wylbe his maner all the while he dwelleth in the contreye of the Philistines.
And Achis beleued Dauid saying He abhorreth his people of Israel, Ꟶ therfore he shalbe my seruaunt for euer.
And it chaunced in those dayes, that the Philistines geathered their hoost together to warre, to fyght with Israel. And Achis sayde to Dauid: Be sure, thou shalt goo out with me to the battell, thou Ꟶ the men that are with the.
And Dauid sayde to Achis: then thou shalt know, what thy seruaunt can do. And Achis sayde agayne to Dauid: Then I will make the keper of my heed for euer
Samuel was then deed, Ꟶ all Israel had lamented hym, Ꟶ buryed him in Rama his awne cytie. And Saul hat put the wemen that had spretes of prophesye, Ꟶ the Sothsayers out of the land.
And the Philistines geathered together, Ꟶ came, Ꟶ pitched in Sunem. And Saul gathered all Israel togeather, Ꟶ they pitched in Giboa:
And when Saul saw the hoste of the Philistines, he was afrayed, Ꟶ his hert was sore astonyed.
And whan Saul asked councell of the Lorde, the Lorde answered him not, nether hy dreames, nor by Urim nor yet by prophetes.
Then sayd Saul vnto his seruauntes seke me a woman that hath a sprete of prophesye, that I maye go to her Ꟶ aske of her. And hys seruauntes sayde to him: Beholde, there is a woman that hath a sprete of prophesye at Endor.
And Saul chaunged him self, and put on other rayment, Ꟶ then went he Ꟶ two men with hym, and they came to the woman by nyght. And he sayde: prophesye vnto me by the sprete, Ꟶ bring me him vp whom I shall name vnto the.
And the woman sayde vnto hym: Beholde thou knowest what Saul hath done, how he hath destroyed the wemen that had prophesying spretes, Ꟶ the Sorcerars out of the lande. Wherfore then sekest thou an occasion agaynst my soule, that he maye kyll me?
And Saul sware to her by the Lorde saying: As suerly as the Lorde lyueth, there shall no harme chaunce the for this thyng.
Then sayd the woman: whom shall I fetche vp vnto the? He answered: Bring me vp Samuel.
When the woman saw Samuel, she cryed wt a lowde voyce, and spake to Saul saying: why hast thou disceaued me? for thou art Saul.
And the kyng sayde vnto her, be not afrayde: What seest thou? The woman sayd vnto Saul. I se goddes ascending vp out of the erth.
He sayde vnto her agayne: what fassion is he of? She answered: there cometh vp an olde man wt a mantell vpon hym. And Saul perceaued that it was Samuel Ꟶ he stouped wt his face to the grounde, Ꟶ bowed hym selfe.
And Samuel sayd to Saul: why hast thou vnquieted me, to make me be brought vp? Saul answered: I am sore encombred. For the Philystynes make warre agaynst me, Ꟶ God is departed from me and answereth me no more, nether by prophetes, nether by dreames. And therfore I haue called the, that thou mayest tell me, what I shall do.
Then sayd Samuel: wherfore doest thou aske of me, whyle the Lorde is gone from the, Ꟶ is become thyne enemye?
Truly the Lord hath done for hym selfe, euen as he spake by my hand. For the Lorde hath rent the kingdome out of thyne hande, Ꟶ geuen it thy neyboure Dauid.
Because thou obeyedst not the voyce of the Lord, nor executedst hys fearce wrath vpon the Amaleckites, therfore hath the Lord done this vnto the this daye.
And moreouer, the Lorde wyll delyuer Israel wt the, into the handes of the Philistines. To morowe shalt thou and thy sonnes be with me, and the Lorde shall geue the hoste of Israel into the handes of the Philistines.
Then Saul fell streyght waye flatte on the erth a longe as he was, and was sore adread because of the wordes of Samuel. And there was no strength in hym, for he had eaten no bread all the daye and the nyght before.
And the woman cam vnto Saul, and sawe that he was sore troubled, and sayde vnto hym: Se, thyne handmayd hath obeyed thy voyce, Ꟶ haue put my soule in my hande, and haue harkened vnto thy wordes, which thou saydest vnto me.
Nowe therfore harken thou also vnto the voyce of thyne handmayd, and let me sett a morsell of bread before the, that thou mayest eate and gett the strength, Ꟶ then go on thy iourneye.
He refused, and sayde: I wyll not eate. But hys seruauntes Ꟶ the woman togeather compelled him, and he hearkened vnto theyr voyce. And so he arose from the erth, and sat him on a bedd.
The woman had a fat calfe in the house, and she hasted Ꟶ kylled it, and toke flowre Ꟶ kneded it, and dyd bake swete cakes therof,
and brought them before Saul and before his seruauntes. And when they had eaten, they stode vp, and went awaye the same nyght.
The Philistines were geathered togeather wt all their armyes vnto Aphec: And the Israelites pitched in Aiin, which is in Iesrahel.
And the Lordes of the Philistines went forth wt the hundreds. Ꟶ thousandes. But Dauid Ꟶ his men came behinde wt Achis.
Then sayde the Lords of the Philistines, what are younder Ebrues? Achis sayd vnto the Lordes of the Philistines: Is not thys Dauid the seruaunt of Saul the kynge of Israel, whych hath bene wyth me these dayes or yeres? I haue founde no fault in hym, sence he fledd vnto me vnto thys daye.
And the Lordes of the Philistines were wroth wyth hym and sayde vnto hym: Make this felowe returne, that he maye go agayne to hys place whych thou hast appoynted hym: and let hym not go downe wyth vs to battell, lest in the battell he be an aduersarye to vs. For wherwyth coulde he better obtayne the fauoure of hys master, then wyth the heedes of these men?
Is not thys Dauid, to whom they sange in daunses: Saul slue hys thousande, and Dauid hys ten thousande?
Then Achis called Dauid, and sayde vnto hym: As sure as the Lorde lyueth, thou hast bene honest, and good in my syght, whan thou wentest out Ꟶ in wyth me in the hoost: neyther haue I founde euell with the, sence thou camest to me vnto thys daye: Neuerthelesse the Lordes of the Philistines fauoure the not:
Wherfore now returne, Ꟶ go in peace, that thou displease not the Lordes of the Philistynes.
And Dauid sayde vnto Achis: And what haue I done? what hast thou founde in thy seruaunt, as long as I haue bene wyth the vnto thys daye, that I maye not go fyght against the enemyes of my Lorde the kynge?
Achis answered Ꟶ sayd to Dauid: I know that thou art good, Ꟶ art in my syght, as an Angell of God. Not wythstandinge the Lordes of the Philistynes haue sayde: Let hym not go vp wt vs to battell.
Wherfore nowe ryse vp earlye in the mornyng wt thy masters seruauntes that are come to the: and when ye be vp early (as sone as ye haue lyght) departe.
And so Dauid and his men rose vp earlye to departe in the mornynge, Ꟶ to returne into the land of the Philistines. And the Philistines went vp to Iezraell.
But whan Dauid Ꟶ hys men were come to zikleg the thirde daye, the Amaleckites had russhed in vpon the south, and vpon zikleg, Ꟶ had smytten zikleg, Ꟶ burnt it wt fyre,
Ꟶ had taken the wemen (that were therin) presoners, both small Ꟶ great: but slew not a man, saue caryed them wt them, Ꟶ went theyr wayes.
So Dauid and hys men came to the cytie: Ꟶ beholde, it was burnt with fyre, Ꟶ their wyues, theyr sonnes and their daughters were caryed awaye.
Then Dauid and the people that was wyth hym, lyfte vp their voyces Ꟶ wept, vntyll they could wepe no more.
And Dauids two wiues were taken presoners also: Ahinoam the Iezrahelite, and abigail the wyfe of Nabal the Carmelite.
And Dauid was in a shrewde combraunce: for the people entended to stone hym, because the hertes of all the people were vexed for theyr sonnes Ꟶ theyr daughters. But Dauid toke a good courage to hym in the Lorde hys God
Ꟶ sayde to Abiathar the preste Ahimelechs sonne: I pray the, bring me the Ephod. And Abiathar brought the Ephod to Dauid.
And Dauid asked councell at the Lorde, sayinge: shall I folowe after thys companie? and shall I ouertake them? And he answered him: folow, for thou shalt ouertake them, and recouer the praye.
So Dauid and the syxe hundred men that were with hym, went Ꟶ cam to the riuer Besor, where a part of them abode.
But Dauid and foure hundred men folowed: For two hundred abode behinde, beynge to werye to go ouer the ryuer Besor.
And they founde an Egypcian in the felde, and brought hym to Dauid and gaue hym bread to eate, Ꟶ water to dryncke,
Ꟶ gaue hym a fewe fygges Ꟶ two clousters of reasings. And when he had eaten, hys sprete cam agayne to hym: for he had eaten, no bread nor droncke no water in thre dayes Ꟶ thre nyghtes.
And Dauid sayd vnto him: to whom belongest thou? Ꟶ whence art thou? he sayd: I am a yonge man of Egypt and seruaunt to an Amaleckite: and my master left me behynde, because it is thre dayes agone, that I fell sycke:
we came a rouyng vpon the south of Chretus, and against Iuda, and towarde the south of Caleb. And we burnt zikleg wyth fyre.
And Dauid sayde to hym: canst thou brynge me to this company? And he sayde: swere vnto me by God, that thou wylt nether kyll me, nor delyuer me into the handes of my master, and I will brynge the to the companye.
And when he had brought hym thyther, beholde, they laye skatered abroade vpon the erth, eatynge Ꟶ drinckynge, Ꟶ daunsynge, because of the plenteous Ꟶ great pray, that they had caried awaye out of the land of the Philistines, Ꟶ out of the lande of Iuda.
And Dauid layd vpon them from the euen, vntill the twilyght on the morow: so that there escaped not a man of them, saue foure hundred young men which rode awaye vpon cameles, and fledd.
And Dauid recouered all that the Amaleckites had caried awaye, Ꟶ Dauid rescued hys two wyues:
so that ther was no person of them lacking, small or great, sonne or daughter, or of the spoyle of all that they had take awaye, Dauid recouered them all agayne.
And Dauid toke all the shepe, Ꟶ the oxen. And they draue them before his catell, Ꟶ sayd: this is Dauids pray.
And Dauid came to the two hundred men, that were to werye for to folowe Dauid, whom they had made also to abyde at the ryuer Besor. And they cam to mete Dauid, Ꟶ the people that were wyth him. And when Dauid cam to the people, he saluted them.
Then answered all the wycked Ꟶ the vnthriftes (of the men that went with Dauid) Ꟶ sayde: because they went not with vs, therfore will we geue them none of the praye, that we haue recouered, But let euery man take hys wyfe and hys chyldren: Those lett them cary awaye, and be walkynge.
Then sayde Dauid: ye shall not do so (my brethren) wt that which the Lord hath geuen vs, Ꟶ hath preserued vs, Ꟶ delyuered the companye that came agaynst vs, into oure handes.
For who shuld herken vnto you in thys matter? But as hys parte is that goeth downe Ꟶ fyghteth, so shall his parte be, that taryeth by the stuffe, that it maye be parted alyke.
And so from that daye forwarde: was that made a statute Ꟶ lawe in Israel, vntyll thys daye.
When Dauid therfore cam to zikleg he sent of the praye vnto the elders of Iuda and to hys frendes saying: se, there is a blessyng for you, of the spoyle of the enemyes of the Lorde.
He sent to them of Bethel: to them of south Ramoth: to them of Iathir:
to them of Aroer: to them of Sephamoth: to them of Esthemoa:
to them of Rachel: to them of the cyties of Ierahmeel: to them of the cyties of the kenites:
to them of Horma: to them of Borasan: to them of Athach:
to them that are in Hebron, and in all places, wher Dauid and hys men were wont to haunt.
The Philistines fought agaynst Israel and the men of Israel fledd awaye from the Philistines, Ꟶ fell downe wounded in mount Gilboa.
And the Philistynes preased sore vpon Saul Ꟶ his sonnes, Ꟶ slewe Ionathas, Ꟶ Abinadab Ꟶ Melchisua Sauls sonnes.
And whan the battell went sore agaynst Saul, the archers with bowes founde hym, Ꟶ he was sore afrayed of the archers.
Then sayd Saul vnto his harnesberer draw out thy swerde, Ꟶ thrust me thorowe therwyth, lest these vncircumcised come, Ꟶ thrust me thorowe and make a mockynge stocke of me. But hys harnesberer wolde not, for he was sore afrayed. And Saul toke a swerde, and fell vpon it.
And when his harnesberer sawe that Saul was deed, he fell lykewyse vpon his swerde, Ꟶ dyed wyth hym.
And so Saul dyed, Ꟶ his thre sonnes, and his harnesberer, and all hys men that same daye togeather.
And when the men of Israel that were on the other syde of the valeye, Ꟶ they of the other syde Iordan, heard, that the men of Israel were put to flight, and that Saul and hys sonnes were deed, they left the cyties, Ꟶ ranne awaye and the Philistines cam, and dwelt in them.
On the morowe when the Philistines were come to spoyle them that were slayne, they founde Saul and hys thre sonnes lyenge in mount Gilboa.
And they cut of his heed, and stripped him out of his harnesse: Ꟶ sent into the lande of the Philistines on euery syde, that they shulde publysshe it in the temple of their Idolles, and amonge the people.
And they layed vp hys harnesse in the house of Astharoth, but they hanged vp hys body on the wall of Bethsan.
When the enhabiters of Iabes in Gilead hearde therof, what the Philistines had done to Saul,
they arose (as manye as were stronge men) and went all nyght and toke the body of Saul, and the bodyes of hys sonnes from the wall of Bethsan, and came to Iabes, and burnt them there
and toke their bones and buryed them vnder a tree at Iabes, and fasted seuen dayes.
After the deeth of Saul when Dauid was returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites, and had bene two dayes in zikleg:
Beholde, there came a man the thyrde daye out of the hoste from Saul, with his clothes rent and erth vpon hys heed. And when he came to Dauid, he fell to the erth and dyd obeysaunce.
Dauid sayde vnto him: whence comest thou? He sayde vnto him: Out of the hoste of Israel am I escaped.
And Dauid sayde vnto him. And what is chaunced? tell me. He sayde: the people is fled from the battell: and many of the people are ouerthrowen, and deed: and Saul Ꟶ Ionathas his sonne are deed also.
And Dauid sayde vnto the younge man that tolde him these thynges: How knowest thou that Saul and Ionathas hys sonne be deed?
The younge man that tolde him, answered: I came by chaunce to mount Gilboa: And beholde, Saul leaned vpon his speare. For the charettes and companyes of horsemen folowed harde after him.
And whan he loked backe he sawe me, and called me. And I answered: here am I.
And he sayde vnto me: what art thou? I answered hym: I am an Amalekite.
He sayde vnto me agayne: Stonde vpon me, and slee me: For anguysshe is come vpon me, though my lyfe be yet all in me.
And so I stode vpon hym, and slue him: for I was sure that he coulde not lyue, after that he had fallen. And I toke the crowne that was vpon hys heed, and the Braselet that was on hys arme, and haue brought them hyther vnto my Lorde.
Then Dauid toke holde on hys clothes, and rent them, and so dyd all the men that were wt him
And they mourned, and wepte, and fasted vntyll euen, for Saul and Ionathas his sonne, Ꟶ for the people of the Lorde, and for the house of Israel, because they were ouerthrowen with the swerde.
And Dauid sayde vnto the younge man that brought him these tydinges. Whence art thou? And he answered. I am the sonne of an alyaunt an Amalekite.
And Dauid sayde vnto him: Howe is it that thou wast not afrayed, to laye thyne hande on the Lordes anoynted, to destroye hym?
And Dauid called one of his younge men and sayde: Go to, and runne vpon him. And he smote hym: that he dyed:
then sayde Dauid vnto him: thy bloude be vpon thyne awne heed. For thyne awne mouth hath testyfied agaynst the sayinge: I haue slayne the Lordes anoynted.
And Dauid mourned with thys lamentacyon ouer Saul and ouer Ionathas hys sonne,
and bad teache the chyldren of Israel the vse of the bowe. And Beholde, it is wrytten in the boke of the ryghtwes.
O noble Israell, the wounded are slayne vpon thy hilles: Oh howe are the myghtie ouerthrowen.
Tell yt not in Gath, nor publishe it in the streats of Ashalon: lest the daughters of the Philistines reioyse, and lest the daughters of the vncircumcysed triumphe.
Ye mountaynes of Gilboa, vpon you be nether dewe nor rayne, not vpon these feldes of offerynges. For there the shilde of the myghtie is cast downe: the shylde of Saul, as though he had not bene anoynted with oyle.
The bowe of Ionathas Ꟶ the swerde of Saul turned neuer backe agayne emptie, from the bloude of the slayne, Ꟶ from the fatte of the myghtye warryoures.
Saul and Ionathas were louely Ꟶ pleasaunt in their lyues, and in their deathes they were not deuided: They were swifter then Egles, and stronger then Lyons.
Ye daughters of Israel, wepe ouer Saul, which clothed you in purple with pleasures, and hanged ornamentes of golde vpon your apparell.
Howe were the myghtye slayne in battell? Ionathas is deed on the hye hylles.
Woo is me for the (my brother Ionathas) verye kynde hast thou bene vnto me. Thy loue to me was wonderfull, passynge the loue of wemen.
O howe are the myghtie ouerthrowen, and the wepons of warre destroyed?
After thys it fortuned, that Dauid asked councell at the Lorde, sayinge: shall I go vp into any of the cyties of Iuda? And the Lorde sayde vnto hym: go. And Dauid sayde agayne: Whither shall I go? He answered: Unto Hebron.
And so Dauid went thither with his two wyues, Ahinoam the Iesrahelite, Ꟶ Abigail Nabals wyfe the Carmelite.
And the men that were wyth him, dyd Dauid carye vp also, euery man with his housholde. And they dwelt in the townes of Hebron.
And the men of Iuda came, and there they anoynted Dauid kynge, ouer the house of Iuda. And they tolde Dauid sayinge: It is the men of Iabes in Gilead that buryed Saul.
And Dauid sent messengers vnto the men of Iabes in Gilead, and sayde vnto them: blessed are ye vnto the Lorde, that ye haue shewed soche kyndnesse vnto youre Lorde Saul, and haue buryed him.
And nowe the Lorde shewe mercye Ꟶ truthe vnto you. And I wyll do you also soche kyndnesse as ye haue done in thys thynge.
Therfore nowe let youre handes be stronge, and playe ye the men: For your master Saul is deed. And they that are of the house of Iuda, haue anoynted me kynge ouer them.
But Abner the sonne of Ner that was captayne of Sauls host,
toke Isboseth the sonne of Saul, and brought him to Mahanaim, and made hym kynge ouer Gilead, and ouer the Assurites, Ꟶ ouer Iesrahel, Ephraim, BenIamin, and ouer all Israel.
And Isboseth Sauls sonne was fourtye yere olde, when he began to raygne ouer Israel, and raygned two yere. But the house of Iuda folowed Dauid.
And the tyme which Dauid raygned in Hebron ouer the house of Iuda, was .vij. yere and syxe monethes.
And Abner the sonne of Ner and the seruauntes of Isboseth the sonne of Saul went out of Mahanaim, to Gibeon.
And Ioab the sonne of zaruia and the seruauntes of Dauid went out, and mette them by the Pole of Gibeon. And they satt downe the one, on the one syde of the Pole, and the other on the other syde.
And Abner sayde to Ioab: let the younge men aryse, and playe before vs. And Ioab sayde: Let them aryse.
Then there arose and went ouer. twelue of Ben Iamin by nombre, which pertayned to Isboseth the sonne of Saul, and twelue of the seruauntes of Dauid.
And euery one caught hys felowe (that came agaynst hym) by the heed, and thrust hys swerde in hys syde, and so they felle downe together. Wherfore the place was called: The felde of the myghtye. And it is in Gibeon.
And there beganne an exceadinge cruell battell that same daye. For Abner and the men of Israel fell before the seruauntes of Dauid.
And there were thre sonnes of zaruiah there: Ioab, Abisai and Asahel. And Asahel was as lyght of fote as a wylde Roo,
and Asahel folowed after Abner, and turned nether to the ryght hand nor to the lefte, from Abner.
Then Abner loked behynde hym, and sayde: art thou Asahel? He answered: yee that I am.
Abner sayde: turne the ether to the ryghthand or to the lefte and catche one of the younge men, and take the his weapons. But Asahel wolde not depart from hym.
And Abner sayde agayne to Asahel departe fro me. Wherfore shulde I smyte the to the grounde, and not be able to holde vp my face to Ioab, thy brother?
Howbeit, whan he wolde in no wyse departe, Abner with the hynder ende of the speare smote hym vnder the short rybbes, that the speare cam out behynde hym: that he fell downe in the same place, and dyed there. And as many as cam to the place where Asahel fell downe and dyed, stode still.
Ioab also Ꟶ Abisai folowed Abner. And the sonne went downe, when they were come to the hyll Ama that lyeth before Giah by the waye that goeth thorowe the wyldernesse of Gibeon.
And the chyldren of Ben Iamin geathered them selues together on a heape, to Abner, Ꟶ stode on the toppe of an hyll.
Then Abner called to Ioab, and sayde: shall the swerde deuoure styll for euer? knowest thou not, that it wylbe bitternesse in the latter ende? howe longe shall it be, yer thou bydde the people returne from folowynge their brethren?
And Ioab sayde: as truely as God lyueth yf thou haddest not spoken in the mornynge, the people had bene departed, euery one from persecutynge hys brother.
And so Ioab blewe a trompet, and all the people stode styll, and pursued after Israel no more nether fought they any more.
And Abner and his men walked all that nyght thorowe the playne, Ꟶ went ouer Iordan, Ꟶ past thorowe all Bethhoron tyll they cam to Mahanaim.
And Ioab returned from persecuting Abner. And whan he had geathered all the people together, there lacked of Dauids seruauntes nyntene men, Ꟶ Asahel.
But the seruauntes of Dauid had slayne of Beniamin, and of Abners men, thre hundred Ꟶ thre skore men.
And they toke vp Asahel, and buryed hym in the sepulchre of his father in Bethlehem. And Ioab and his men went all nyght, vntyll the dawnyng of the daye, and came to Hebron.
There was longe warre betwene the howse of Saul, and the howse of Dauid. But Dauid waxed stronger and stronger, Ꟶ the house of Saul waxed weaker and weaker.
And vnto Dauid were chyldren borne in Hebron: his eldest sonne also was Ammon, of Ahinoam the Iezrahelite:
the seconde Cheleab, of Abigail the wyfe of Nabal the Carmelite: the thyrde Absalom, the sonne of Maachah the daughter of Thalmai, the kynge of Gessur:
the fourth, Adonia, the sonne of Hagith: the fyfte, Sephatia the sonne of Abital:
the sixte Iethream by Egla Dauids wyfe. These were borne to Dauid in Hebron.
And it fortuned, that whyle there was warre betwene the house of Saul and the house of Dauid, Abner helde vp the house of Saul.
And Saul had a concubyne named Rizpa, the daughter of Aia. And Isboseth sayde to Abner: Wherfore hast thou gone into my fathers concubyne?
Then was Abner very wroth for the wordes of Isboseth, Ꟶ sayde: Am I not a dogges heed, which agaynst Iuda do shewe mercye thys daye vnto the house of Saul thy father, Ꟶ to his brethren and frendes, and haue not delyuered the into the hande of Dauid: and thou fyndest a fault in me this daye for this woman?
So and so do God to Abner. For as the Lorde hath sworne to Dauid, so wyll I be on hys syde,
to bryng the kyngdom from the house of Saul, that the throne of Dauid maye be stablysshed ouer Israel, and ouer Iuda euen from Dan to Bersabe.
And he coulde geue Abner neuer a woorde to answer, because he feared hym.
And Abner sent messengers to Dauid secretely, saying: Whose is the lande? Make a bonde with me, and beholde, my hande is wyth the, to bryng all Israel vnto the.
He sayde: It is good, that I make a bonde with the. But one thyng I requyre of the, that thou se not my face, except thou fyrst bring Michol Sauls daughter, when thou comest to se me.
And Dauid sent messengers to Isboseth Sauls sonne, saying, delyuer me my wife Michol, which I maryed with an hundred forskynnes of the Philistines.
And Isboseth sent, and toke her from her husbande Paltiel the sonne of Lais.
And her husband went with her, and cam wepyng behynde her, tyll they cam to Bahurim. Then sayde Abner vnto hym, go and returne. And he returned
And Abner had communicacyon with the elders of Israel, sayeng: ye sought for Dauid in tymes past, that he might be your kyng.
Now then do it: for the Lorde hath sayd of Dauid: By the hand of my seruaunt Dauid, I will saue my people Israel, out of the handes of the Philistines, and out of the hande of all their enemyes.
And Abner spake in the eares of Beniamin, and went to tell in the eares of Dauid in Hebron, all that Israell was content wyth, and the whole house of Beniamin.
And so Abner came to Dauid to Hebron, hauyng twentye men wt hym, Ꟶ Dauid made him Ꟶ the men that were with him a feast.
And Abner sayde vnto Dauid: I wyll vp, and go geather all Israell vnto my Lorde the kyng, that they maye make an appoyntment wyth the, and that thou mayst commaunde all, as thyne hart desyreth. And whan Dauid had lett Abner departe, he went in peace.
And beholde, the seruauntes of Dauid, Ꟶ Ioab came from chasyng the robbers, and brought a great praye with them. But Abner was not with Dauid in Hebron: for he had sent him awaye to depart in peace.
When Ioab and all the host that was with hym, were come, men tolde Ioab saying: Abner the sonne of Ner came to the kyng, and he hath sent hym awaye, that he is gone in peace.
Then Ioab came to the kynge, and sayde: what hast thou done? Beholde, Abner cam vnto the: Ꟶ why hast thou sent hym awaye, that he shulde skape quyte?
Thou knowest Abner the sonne of Ner, for he came to disceaue the, Ꟶ to know thy outgoing Ꟶ ingoing, and to know all that thou doest.
And when Ioab was come out from Dauid, he sent messengers after Abner, which brought him agayne from the well of Sira, vnknowyng to Dauid.
And when Abner was come agayne to Hebron, Ioab toke hym a syde in the gate to speake with him secretly, Ꟶ smote him vnder the short rybbes that he dyed, for the bloud of Asahel his brother.
And when after warde it cam to Dauids eare, he sayd. I and my kyngdom are giltlesse before the Lorde for euer concernyng the bloude of Abner the sonne of Ner.
Let the bloude remayne on the heed of Ioab Ꟶ on all his fathers house that the house of Ioab be neuer wythout one or other that hath runnyng issues or leper, and that leaneth on a staff, and that doth fal on the swerde, Ꟶ lacketh breed.
And the cause why Ioab and Abisai slue Abner was, that Abner had slayne their brother Asahel at Gibeon in battell.
And Dauid sayd to Ioab, and to all the people that were with hym. Rent youre clothes, and put on sacke cloth, and mourne before Abner. And king Dauid him self folowed the corse.
And when they buried Abner in Hebron, the kyng lifte vp his voyce, Ꟶ vepte besyde the sepulchre of Abner, and so dyd all the people.
And the kyng lamented ouer Abner, and sayde: died Abner as a foole dieth?
thy handes were not bounde, ner thy fete brought into cheynes: but as a man falleth before wicked children, so fellest thou. And all they that were of the people, wept yet moare ouer hym.
And when all the people cam to eate meate with Dauid, while it was yet daye, Dauid sware saying: So Ꟶ so do God to me, yf I tast breed or ought elles, tyll the sonne be downe.
And the people wist it, and it pleased them. And whatsoeuer the kyng dyd, it pleased all the people.
For all the people Ꟶ all Israel vnderstode that day, how that it was not the kynges dede, that Abner the sonne of Ner was slayne.
And the kyng sayde vnto his seruauntes: know ye not, how that there is a lorde and a great man fallen this daye in Israel?
And I am this daye tender, and anoynted king. And these men the sonnes of zaruia be to hard for me. The Lorde rewarde the doer of euel, accordynge to his wykednesse.
When Sauls sonne heard that Abner was deed in Hebron, his handes were feble, Ꟶ all the Israelites were afrayed:
Ꟶ Sauls sonne had two men that were captaynes ouer the soudiars, the one called Baanah, and the other Rechab, the sonnes of Rimmon a Berothite, of the chyldren of Beniamin: for Beroth was rekened to Beniamin.
And these Berothites fled to Gitthaim, and soiourned there vntill the same tyme.
And Ionathas Sauls sonne had a sonne that was lame on hys feete. And he was fyue yere olde, when the tydinges cam of Saul Ꟶ Ionathas out of Iesrahel. And his nourse toke him vp, Ꟶ fled awaye. And as she made hast to flee, the childe fell, Ꟶ beganne to halt, and hys name was Miphiboseth.
And the sonnes of Rimmon the Berothite, Rechab an Baanah went, and cam in the heat of the daye to the house of Isboseth, which slept on a bed at none.
And they cam into the myddes of the house as though they wold haue fetched whete, and Rechab and Baana hys brother smote him vnder the short rybbes and fled.
For whan they cam into the house, he slept on his bed in hys resting chamber, and they smote hym and slue him, and behedded hym, and toke hys heed, Ꟶ gat them awaye thorow the plaine all the night.
And they brought the heed of Isboseth vnto Dauid, to Hebron, and sayde to the kyng: beholde, there is the heed of Isboseth Sauls sonne, thine enemye which sought after thy lyfe. And the Lorde hath aduenged my lord the kyng this daye of Saul and of his seede.
And Dauid answered Rechab and Baana his brother, the sonnes of Rimmon the Berothite, and sayde vnto them: as surely as the lord lyueth, which hath delyuered my soule out of all aduersites:
Whan one tolde me Ꟶ sayd that Saul was deed, thinkyng to haue brought good tydynges, I caught hym, and slue hym in zikleg: whych thought that I wolde haue geuen hym a rewarde for hys tydynges brynging.
How moch more whan wycked men haue slayne a ryghtuouse person, in his awne house and vpon his bed? Shall I not require his bloud of youre hande, and take you from the erth?
And Dauid commaunded his young men, Ꟶ they slue them, and cut of their handes and fete, Ꟶ hanged them vp ouer the pole in Hebron. But they toke the heed of Isboseth, and buryed it in the sepulchre of Abner in Hebron.
Then cam all the trybes of Israel to Dauid, vnto Hebron and sayd, Beholde, we are of thy bone, and of thy fleshe.
And in tyme past when Saul was oure kynge, thou leddest Israel in and oute. And the Lorde hath sayd to the: thou shalt fede my people Israell, and thou shalt be a captayne ouer Israel.
And so all the elders of Israel came to the kynge to Hebron. And kyng Dauid made a couenaunt wyth them in Hebron before the Lord. And they annoynted Dauid kyng ouer Israell.
Dauid was thirtye yere olde, when he began to raygne, and he raygned fourtye yere.
In Hebron he raygned ouer Iuda seuen yere, and syxe monethes: And in Ierusalem he raygned thirtye and thre yeres ouer all Israel and Iuda.
The kyng also and his men went to Ierusalem, vnto the Iebusites, the enhabiters of the land. Which spake vnto Dauid sayeng: except thou take awaye the blynde and the lame, thou shalt not come in hither. For they sayd: Thou art not able to come in hither.
Neuerthelesse Dauid toke the strong holde of Sion. The same is the citie of Dauid.
And Dauid sayd the same daye: Whosoeuer smyteth the Iebusites, Ꟶ getteth vp to the gutters of the houses, Ꟶ smyteth the lame Ꟶ the blynd that hate Dauids soule? Wherfore: they sayd, the blynd and the lame shall not come into the house.
And so Dauid dwelt in the towre, Ꟶ called it in the citye of Dauid, Ꟶ buylt round about it from Millo inwarde.
And Dauid prospered Ꟶ grew, and the Lord God of hostes was with him
And Hiram kyng of Tire sent messengers to Dauid, and Cedar trees, and carpenters Ꟶ Masons for walles: and they builte Dauid an house.
And Dauid perceaued, that the Lord had stablissshed hym kynge ouer Israel, Ꟶ that he had exalted his kingdom for his people Israels sake.
And Dauid toke him mo concubyues and wyues out of Ierusalem, after he was come from Hebron, Ꟶ mo sonnes, Ꟶ daughters were yet borne to Dauid.
And these be the names of the sonnes that were borne vnto hym in Ierusalem: Sammua, Sobab, Nathan, Ꟶ Salomon,
Iibhar also and Elisua, Nepheg, Ꟶ Iaphia,
Elisama Eliada, and Eliaphelet.
But when the Philistines heard, that they had anoynted Dauid king ouer Israel, they cam all vp to seke Dauid. And as sone as Dauid heard of it, he gat hym to an holde.
And whan the Philistines cam, they layde them a long in the valeye of Raphaim.
And Dauid asked councell of the Lorde sayeng: shall I go vp to the Philistines? wilt thou deliuer them into my handes? And the lord answered vnto Dauid: go vp, for I will doutlesse delyuer the Philistines into thy handes.
And Dauid cam to the playne of Perazim, and smote them there, and sayd: the Lorde hath deuided myne enemyes asondre before me, as waters be deuyded asondre. And therfore, the name of the place was called: the playne of Perazim:
And there they left their Images, Ꟶ Dauid Ꟶ his men toke them vp.
And the Philistines cam yet agayne, and layd them selues in the valeye of Rephaim.
And whan Dauid asked at the Lord: He answered: Thou shalt not go vp: but compasse them on the backsyde, Ꟶ come vpon them ouer agaynst the Peretrees.
And when thou hearest the noyse of a thing going in the toppe of the Peretrees, then remoue. For then shall the Lord go out before the, to smyte the hoste of the Philistines.
And Dauid did as the Lord had commaunded hym, Ꟶ smote the Philistines from Geba, vntyll thou come to Gazer.
Againe: Dauid gathered together all the chosen men of Israel, euen thirtye thousand,
Ꟶ arose, Ꟶ went withall the folke that were with hym of the men of Iuda, to fett awaye from thence, the Arck of God: whose name is called the name of the Lorde of hostes that dwellyth vpon it, betwene the cherubyns.
And they put the Arck of God vpon a new cart, and brought it out of the house of Abinadab that was at Gibea. And Uza and Ahio the sonnes of Abinadab draue the new carte.
And when they brought it out of the house of Abinadab that was at Gibea, with the Arck of God, Ahio went before the Arck.
And Dauid and all the house of Israel playde before the Lorde in sondrye instrumentes made of Cedre wodd, with harpes, psalteries, timberelles, fedylles, and symbals.
And when they cam to Nachons thresshyng floure, Uza put his hand to the arck of God, and held it, for the oxen stombled.
And the Lorde was wroth wyth Uza, and God smote him in the same place for his fault, and there he dyed before the Arcke of God.
And Dauid was displeased, because the Lord had smytten Uza. And the name of the place was called Perez. The renting of Uza, vntyll thys daye.
And Dauid was then afrayed of the Lorde, and sayde: how shall the Arcke of the Lorde come to me?
And so Dauid wolde not bryng the Arcke of the Lorde vnto him into the citye of Dauid. But Dauid caried it into the house of Obeth Edom a Gethite.
And the Arcke of the Lord continued in the house of Obeth Edom the Gethite, thre monethes, and the Lorde blessed Obeth Edom, and all hys housholde.
And one tolde kynge Dauid, how that the Lorde had blessed the house of Obeth Edom, and all that pertayned vnto hym, because of the Arcke of God. And Dauid went and brought the Arck of God from the house of Obeth Edom, into the citye of Dauid wyth gladnes.
And when they that bare the Arcke of the Lorde, had gone syxe spaces, he offered an oxe and a fat shepe.
And Dauid daunsed before the Lorde withall his myght, and was gyrded with a lynnen Ephod.
So Dauid and all the house of Israel brought the arck of the Lorde, wyth showtyng and trompet blowyng.
And it fortuned, that as the arcke of the Lorde cam into the citye of Dauid, Michol Sauls daughter loked thorow a window, and saw kynge Dauid spryng, and daunce before the Lorde, and she dyspysed hym in her hert.
And when they brought in the Arck of the Lorde, they set it in his place, euen in the myddes of the tabernacle that Dauid had pitched for it. And Dauid offered burnt offeringes Ꟶ peace offeringes before the lord.
And as sone as Dauid had made an ende of offeryng burnt offerynges Ꟶ peace offerynges, he blessed the people in the name of the Lord of Hostes,
Ꟶ gaue among all the folke, euen amonge the hole multitude of Israel, as well to the wemen as men, to euerye one a Cake of breed, Ꟶ a pece of fleshe, Ꟶ a flasket of drincke. And so all the people departed euery one to his house.
Then Dauid returned to blesse hys housholde: and Michol the daughter of Saul came out to mete Dauid, Ꟶ sayd: O how glorious was the king of Israel this daye, which was vncouered to daye, in the eyes of the maydens of his seruauntes, as yf it had bene a lyght brayned felow vncouered?
And Dauid sayd vnto Michol. I thought to daunce before the Lord, which chose me rather then thy father, Ꟶ all his kynne, and commaundyd me to be ruler ouer all the people of the Lord euen ouer Israel.
And therfore will I playe before the Lorde. And wilbe yet more vyle then so, Ꟶ wilbe meke in myne awne syght: Ꟶ of the very same maydeseruauntes which thou hast spoken of: shal I be had in honoure
Therfore Michol the daughter of Saul had no chylde, vnto the daye of her deeth.
It fortuned, that as the kyng satt in his house (after that the Lord had geuen hym rest rounde about from all his enemyes)
he sayde vnto Nathan the prophet: behold, I dwell now in an house of Cedar trees, but the Arcke of God dwelleth within the curtayne.
And Nathan sayd vnto the kyng: go Ꟶ do all that is in thine hert for the Lord is with the.
And it fortuned the same nyght that the woord of the lord came vnto Nathan sayeng:
go and tell my seruaunt Dauid, thus sayth the Lorde: shalt thou bylde me an house to dwelle in?
For I haue not dwelt in any house, sence the tyme that I brought the children of Israel out of Egipt, vnto this daye:
but haue walked, in a tent and tabernacle. In all the places where in I haue walked with al the children of Israel, spake I one word wt any of the tribes of Israel (sens I commaunded the iudges to fede my people Israel) sayeng: why bylde ye not me an house of Cedar trees?
Now therfore, so saye vnto my seruaunt Dauid: thus sayth the Lorde of Hostes. I toke the from the shepe cote (as thou wast folowyng shepe) that thou myghtest be ruler ouer my people Israel.
And I was with the in all that thou wentest to, Ꟶ haue destroyed all thyne enemyes out of thy syght, and haue made the a great name, lyke vnto the name of the great men that are in the worlde.
And therfore, I will appoynt a place for my people Israel, and wyll plant it, that they maye dwell in a place of their awne, and moue no moare, nether shall wyckyd people trouble them any more, as they did at the beginnyng:
sence the tyme that I sett Iudges ouer my people Israel. And I will geue the rest from all thine enemyes. And the Lord telleth the, that he wyll make the an howse.
And when thy dayes he fulfilled, thou shalt slepe wyth thy fathers, and I wyll set vp thy seede after the, which shall procead out of thy bodye, Ꟶ will stablyshe his kyngdome.
He shall bylde an house for my name, Ꟶ I wyll stablyshe the seate of his kyngdome for euer.
I wylbe his father, and he shalbe my sonne: yf he synne, I wyll chasten hym wyth soche a rodde as men be chastened wt, Ꟶ wt soche plages as the children of men be plaged wt.
But my mercie shal not depart awaye from him, as I toke it from Saul, whom I put downe before the.
And thyne house and thy kyngdome shall endure wt out ende after the, and thy seate shalbe stablyshed foreuer.
According to all these wordes and accordyng to all thys visyon, dyd Nathan speake vnto Dauid.
Then went Dauid in, and set hym downe before the Lord, and sayde: what am I, O Lord God? and what is my house? that thou shuldest haue brought me this farre forth?
And this was yet a small thing in thy sight, O Lord God, but thou hast spoken also of thy seruauntes house for a great while to come: For this is the vse of man, O lord God.
And what can Dauid saye moare vnto the: for thou Lord God knowest thy seruaunt.
Euen for thy wordes sake Ꟶ according to thine awne hert hast thou done all these greate thynges to make them knowen vnto thy seruaunt.
Wherfore thou art great, O Lord God: for there is none lyke the nether is there any God saue thou, according to all that we haue heard wt oure eares.
And what one people in the erth is lyke thy people Israel whose God, went Ꟶ delyuered them, that they myght be his people, Ꟶ that he myght make hym a name, Ꟶ to shewe great Ꟶ terrible things in the erthe, for thy people which thou redemedst to the out of Egipt, euen the people with their goddes.
For thou hast ordeyned thy people Israel, to be thy people for euer. And thou Lorde art become theyr God.
And now (Lord God) the worde that thou hast spoken concernyng thy seruaunt and his house: make it good for euer, and do as thou hast sayd.
For so shall thy name be magnified for euer, of men that shall saye: the Lorde of Hostes is the God of Israell: and the house of thy seruaunt shall be stablyshed before the.
For thou, O Lord of Hostes, God of Israell, hast tolde in the eare of thy seruaunt, sayeng: I wyll bylde the an house And therfore hath thy seruaunt found in his harte, to praye this prayer vnto the.
Therfore now Lord God, thou art God, and thy wordes must be true, thou that hast tolde this goodnesse vnto thy seruaunt.
And now go to, and blesse the housse of thy seruaunt, that it maye contynew for euer before the. for thou. Lord God hast spoken it, and with thy blessyng shall the house of thy seruaunt be blessed for euer.
After this it fortuned that Dauid smote the Philistines, and subdued them, Ꟶ toke the brydell of bondage out of the hande of the Philistines.
And he smote the Moabites Ꟶ measured them with a lyne, Ꟶ cast them downe to the grounde. Euen wyth two lynes measured he them whom he slue, and the length of one lyne saued he alyue. And so becam the Moabites Dauids seruauntes, Ꟶ payed trybute. Dauid smote also,
Hadarezer the sonne of Rehob kynge of zoba as he went to recouer his border at the ryuer Pherat.
And Dauid toke a thousand Ꟶ seuen hundred horsemen of his hoost, and twentye thousand fote men, and cut of the hofe of all his charette horses, reseruyng onely one hundred charettes.
And whan the Sirians of Damascon came to succoure Hadarezer kynge of zoba, Dauid slue of the Sirians two and twentye thousande men,
and put soudyours in Siria Damascon. And the Sirians became seruauntes, to Dauid, payeng tribute. And thus the Lord sarued Dauid, in all that he went vnto.
And Dauid toke the shildes of gold that belonged to the seruauntes of Hadarezer, Ꟶ brought them to Ierusalem.
And out of Beta Ꟶ Berothai (cities of Hadarezer) did Dauid bring exceding moch brasse.
When Thoi kyng of Aamath heard how Dauid had smytten all the hoste of Hadarezer,
he sent Ioram his sonne vnto kynge Dauid, to salute hym with peace, Ꟶ to blesse hym, because he had fought agaynst Hadarezer, and beaten hym: for Thoy had greate warre wt Hadarezer, which (Ioram) brought with him, vesselles of siluer, vessels of golde, and vessels of brasse:
Which brasse kyng Dauid dyd dedicat vnto the Lord wt the syluer and golde that he had consecrated of all nacyons, whych he subdued:
of Siria of the Moabites, Ꟶ of the chyldren of Ammon, of the Philistines, Ꟶ of Hamalek, and of the spoyle of Hadarezer sonne of Rehob kyng of zoba.
And Dauid gat hym a name after that he returned Ꟶ had smytten of the Siriens in the valeye of Salt .xviii. thousand men.
And he put kepers in Edom, euen thorow out al Edom put he soudyoures, Ꟶ all they of Edom becam Dauids seruauntes, And the Lorde kept Dauid whatsoeuer he toke in hand.
And Dauid raygned ouer all Israel, and executed ryght, Ꟶ Iustice vnto all his people.
And Ioab the sonne of zaruiah was ouer the host, and Iehosaphat the sonne of Ahilud was recorder.
And Sadoch the sonne of Ahitob, Ꟶ Abimelech the sonne of Abiathar were the Preastes, and Saraia was the Scrybe.
And Banaiahu the sonne of Iehoiada was ouer the Crethites and the Phelethites: Ꟶ Dauids sonnes were chefe rulars.
And Dauid sayd: is there yet any man left of the house of Saul? For I will shew hym mercye for Ionathas sake.
And there was of the houshold of Saul a seruaunt whose name was ziba: Ꟶ whan they had called hym vnto Dauid, the kyng sayd vnto him: art thou ziba? He sayd: thy seruaunt is he.
And the kyng sayde: remayneth ther yet any man of the house of Saul, whom I maye shew the mercye of God vpon? ziba answered the kynge: Ionathas hath yet a sonne, which is lame on his fete.
The king sayd vnto him where is he? ziba sayd vnto the kynge: behold, he is in the house of Machir the sonne of Amiel of Lodeber.
Then kyng Dauid sent, Ꟶ fett hym out of the house of Machir the sonne of Amiel, out of the Lodeber.
Now when Miphiboseth the sonne of Ionathas, the sonne of Saul was come vnto Dauid, he fell on his face, and did reuerence. And the kyng sayde: Miphiboseth? He answered: Behold thy seruaunt.
Dauid sayde vnto him: feare not, for I will surely shew the kindnesse for Ionathas thy fathers sake, Ꟶ will restore the all the feldes of Saul thy father, Ꟶ thou shalt eate bred on myne awne table continually.
And he bowed hym self, and sayde: what is thy seruaunt, that thou shuldest vouchesafe to loke vpon soche a deed dogg as I am?
Then the kyng called vnto ziba Sauls young man Ꟶ sayd vnto him: I haue geuen vnto thy masters sonne, all that pertayned to Saul and to all his house.
Se therfore that thou, Ꟶ thy sonnes and thy seruauntes tyll the lande, and bryng in, that thy masters sonne maye haue fode to eate. But Miphiboseth thy masters sonne shal eate bred allwaye vpon my table. For ziba had fiftene sonnes and twentye seruauntes.
Then sayd ziba vnto the kyng: According to all that my Lord the kyng hath commaunded his seruaunt, so shall thy seruaunt do. Well (sayd the kyng) Miphiboseth shall eate vpon my table, as one of the kynges sonnes.
Miphiboseth had a sonne that was younge, named Micha, and all that dwelled in the house of ziba were seruauntes vnto Miphiboseth.
And Miphiboseth dwelt in Ierusalem, for he dyd eate euer at the kynges table, and was lame on both his fete.
It happened after this, that the king of the children of Ammon died, Ꟶ Hanon his sonne raygned in his steade.
Then sayd Dauid: I will shew kyndnesse vnto Hanon the sonne of Nahas, as hys father shewed kyndnesse vnto me. And Dauid sent to confort hym by the hand of his seruauntes ouer hys father. And Dauids seruauntes came into the lande of the children of Ammon,
and the Lordes of the children of Ammon sayd vnto Hanon their Lord: thynkest thou that Dauid dothe honoure thy father, that he hath sent comfortoures to the? Hath not Dauid rather sent his seruauntes vnto the, to searche the cytie, Ꟶ to spye it out, and to ouerthrow it?
Wherfore, Hanon toke Dauids seruauntes, Ꟶ shaued of the one halfe of euerye mannes berd and cut of their garmentes in the myddle, euen harde to the buttockes of them, Ꟶ sent them awaye.
When they tolde it vnto Dauid, he sent to mete them (for they were men excedingly a shamed) Ꟶ the kyng sayd: tarie at Iericho vntill your beerdes be growen, and then returne.
And when the chyldren of Ammon saw that they stancke in the sight of Dauid, they sent and hired the Syrians of the house of Rehob, Ꟶ the Sirians of zoba .xx. thousand fote men, and of kyng Maacha a thousand men, Ꟶ of Istob twelue thousand men.
And when Dauid hearde of it, he sent Ioab Ꟶ all the host of strong men.
And the children of Ammon came out, and waged battell at the entring in of the gate, Ꟶ the Sirians of zobah, of Rehob, Istob and Maacah were by them selues in the felde.
When Ioab saw that the front of the battell was agaynst hym before and after, he chose of all the fresh young men of Israell, Ꟶ put them in araye agaynst the Syrians.
And the rest of the people he delyuered into the hand of Abisay hys brother, that he myght put them in araye agaynst the children of Ammon.
And be sayd, yf the Sirians be stronger then I, thou shalt helpe me. But yf the chyldren of Ammon be to strong for the, I will come and succoure the.
Therfore quyte the lyke a man, Ꟶ let vs stonde stiff for oure people, Ꟶ for the cities of oure God. And the Lord do that which is good in his owne eyes.
And Ioab proceded forth, Ꟶ the people that was with hym, to fight with the Sirians. But they fled before him.
And when the children of Ammon saw that the Sirians were fled, then fled they also before Abisay, and entred into the citye. And so Ioab returned from the children of Ammon, Ꟶ came to Ierusalem.
And when the Sirians saw that they were put to the worsse before Israel, they geathered them togeather.
And Hadarezer sent, Ꟶ brought out the Sirians that were beyounde the ryuer. And they came with their armye and Hobah the captayne of the host of Hadarezer went before them.
And when it was shewed Dauid, he geathered all Israel togeather, and passed ouer Iordan, Ꟶ cam to Helam: And the Sirians set them selues in araye agaynst Dauid, Ꟶ fought with him:
and the Sirians fled before Israel. And Dauid destroyed seuen hundred charettes of the Sirians, and fourtye thousand horsemen, and smote Sobah the captayne of their host, which also dyed there.
And when all the kinges (that were seruauntes to Hadarezer) saw that they were put to the worse before Israell, they made peace with them, Ꟶ serued them. And so the Sirians feared to helpe the children of Ammon any moare.
And it came to passe that (after the yeare was expyred) in the tyme when kynges vse to go forth to battell, Dauid sent Ioab and hys seruauntes wyth hym, and all Israel, whych destroyed the chyldren of Ammon, and beseged Raba. But Dauid taryed styll at Ierusalem.
And it chaunced in an euenynge, that Dauid arose out of hys bed, and walked vpon the roufe of the kynges palace, and from the roufe he sawe a woman wasshynge her selfe: and the woman was very bewtyfull to loke vpon.
And he sent to enquyre what woman it shuld be, sayenge: is it not Bethsabe the daughter of Eliam, and wyfe to Urias the Hethite?
And dauid sent messengers, and fett her. And she came in vnto hym Ꟶ he laye wyth her. And she was purifyed from her vnclennesse, and returned vnto her house.
And the woman conceaued, Ꟶ sent and tolde Dauid, Ꟶ sayd: I am wyth chylde.
And Dauid sent to Ioab, (sayenge:) sende me Urias the hethite. And Ioab sent Urias to Dauid.
And when Urias was come vnto hym. Dauid demaunded of him: howe Ioab dyd, and howe the people fared, and howe the men of warre prospered.
And Dauid sayd to Urias: go downe to thyne house, and washe thy fete. And Urias departed out of the kynges palace, and there folowed hym a seruyce from the kinges table.
But Urias slept at the dore of the kynges palace wythall the seruauntes of hys Lorde, and went not downe to hys house.
Which when they had tolde Dauid (sayenge: Urias went not downe into hys house.) Dauid sayde vnto Urias: Camest thou not from thy iorney? why dyddest thou not go downe then vnto thyne house?
Urias answered Dauid. The arcke Ꟶ Israel and Iuda dwell in pauylyons: and my Lorde Ioab and the seruauntes of my Lorde lye vpon the flatt erthe: and shall I then go into myne house, to eate, and to dryncke, and lye wyth my wyfe? By thy lyfe and by the lyfe of thy soule, I wyll not do thys thynge.
And Dauid sayde vnto Urias: tarye here this daye also, and tomorowe I wyll lett the depart. And so Urias abode in Ierusalem that daye, and the morowe.
And whan Dauid had called hym, he dyd eate and dryncke before hym, and he made hym droncke. And at euen he went out to lye on hys couche wyth the seruauntes of his Lord, but went not downe to hys house.
On the morow Dauid wrote a letter to Ioab, and sent it by the hande of Urias.
And he wrote thus in the letter, sayeng: put Urias in the forefront of the sharper battell, and come ye backe from hym, that he maye be smytten and dye.
So whan Ioab beseged the cytie, he assygned Urias vnto a place, where he wyst that stronge men were.
And the men of the cytie cam out, and fought wyth Ioab. And there were certen ouerthrowen of the people, and of the seruauntes of Dauid, and Urias the Hethite dyed also.
Then Ioab sent, and tolde Dauid all the thynges concernynge the warre,
and charged the messenger, sayenge: when thou hast made an ende of tellynge the matters of the warre vnto the kynge,
yf he begynne to fume, and saye vnto the: wherfore approched ye so nye vnto the cytie, whan ye dyd fyght? wyst ye not that they wolde hurle and shote from the wall?
who smote Abimelech sonne of Iereboseth? dyd not a woman cast a pece of a mylstone vpon hym from of the wall, and he dyed in Thebes? why went ye nye the wall? then saye thou? thy seruaunt Urias the Hethite is deed also.
So the messenger went, and came, and shewed Dauid all that Ioab had sent hym for,
and the messaunger sayd vnto Dauid: the men preuayled agaynst vs, and cam out vnto vs into the felde, Ꟶ we stacke vnto them, euen vnto the enteryng of the gate.
And the shoters shotte from the walles, vpon thy seruauntes, and some of the kinges seruauntes be deed. And thy seruaunt Urias the Hethite is deed also.
And Dauid sayde vnto the messenger: thus shalt thou saye vnto Ioab: let not that thynge trouble the. For the swerde deuoureth one as well as another: make thy battell more stronge agaynst the cytye to ouerthrowe it, Ꟶ se that thou courage Ioab.
And when the wyfe of Urias heard that her husbande was deed, she mourned for hym.
And whan the mournynge was past, Dauid sent and fett her to hys house, and she became hys wyfe, and bare hym a sonne. But this thynge that Dauid dyd, displeased the Lorde.
And the Lorde sent Nathan vnto Dauid. And he came vnto him and tolde hym: there were two men in one cytie, the one ryche, and the other poore.
The ryche man had excedynge many shepe and oxen.
But the poore had nothynge saue one lytle shepe, whych he had bought, and noryshhed vp. And it grewe vp wyth hym and wyth hys chyldren also, and dyd eate of hys awne meate, and drancke of hys awne cuppe, and slept in hys bosome, and was vnto hym as hys daughter.
And there cam a straunger vnto the ryche man. And he coulde not fynde in hys heart to take of hys awne shepe, and of hys awne oxen, to dresse for the straunger that was come vnto hym. But toke the poore mannes shepe, and dressed it for the man that was come to him:
And Dauid was excedyng wroth wt the man, and sayde to Nathan: as surely as the Lorde lyueth, the man that hath done this thyng is the chylde of deeth.
He shall restore the lambe twyse foure folde, because he dyd thys thynge, and had no pitye.
And Nathan sayth to Dauid: thou art the man. Thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel, I anoynted the kynge ouer Israel, and rydde the out of the hande of Saul,
I gaue the thy masters house, and thy masters wyues into thy bosome, and gaue the, the house of Israel and of Iuda, Ꟶ might (yf that had bene to lytle) haue geuen the so moche moare.
Wherfore then hast thou despised the commaundement of the Lorde, to do wyckednesse in hys syght? thou hast kylde Urias the Hethite with the swerde, and hast taken his wife to thy wyfe, Ꟶ hast slayne hym with the swerde of the chyldren of Ammon.
Nowe therfore, the swerde shall neuer depart from thyne house, because thou hast despysed me, and taken the wyfe of Urias the Hethite, to be thy wife.
Wherfore thus sayth the Lorde: beholde, I wyll stere vp euell agaynst the, euen out of thyne awne house, Ꟶ wyll take thy wyues before thyne eyes, and geue them vnto thy neyghboure, and he shall lye wyth thy wyues in the syght of the sonne.
For thou dydest it secretly, But I wyll do thys thynge before all Israel, and in the open sonne lygth.
And Dauid sayde vnto Nathan I haue synned agaynst the Lorde. And Nathan sayd vnto Dauid: the Lorde also hath put awaye thy synne, thou shalt not dye.
Howbeit, because in doyng thys deade, thou hast geuen the enemyes of the Lord a cause to rayle, the chylde that is borne vnto the, shall surelye dye.
And Nathan departed vnto hys house. And the Lorde stroke the chylde that Urias wyfe bare vnto Dauid, and it sickened sore.
Dauid therfore besought God for the chylde, and fasted and went in, and laye all nyght vpon the erthe.
And the elders of hys house arose and went to hym, to take him vp from the erth. But he wolde not, nether dyd he eate meat wyth them.
And it happened the seuenth daye, that the chylde dyed. And the seruauntes of Dauid durst not tell him, that the chylde was deed. For they sayd: beholde, while the chyld was yet alyue, we spake vnto hym, and he wolde not herken vnto oure voyce. Howe wyll he then vexe hym selfe, yf we tell hym, that the chylde is deed?
But Dauid seynge hys seruauntes whysperynge, perceaued, that the chylde was deed, Ꟶ Dauid sayd vnto hys seruauntes: is the chylde deed? They sayde: yee.
And Dauid arose from the erth, and washed and anoynted him selfe, and chaunged his apparell, Ꟶ came into the house of the Lorde, Ꟶ worshypped, Ꟶ afterward cam to hys awne house and badd that they shulde set bred before hym, and he dyd eate.
Then sayd his seruauntes vnto hym: what thynge is thys, that thou hast done? Thou dyddest faste and wepe for the chylde, whyle it was a lyue, Ꟶ as sone as it was deed, thou diddest ryse vp, and eate meate.
He sayde: whyle the chylde was yet a lyue, I fasted and wepte. For this I thought: who can tell whether God wyll haue mercye on me, that the chylde maye lyue.
But nowe, seynge it is deed, wherfore shulde I fast? can I brynge him agayne any moare? I shall go to hym, rather then he shall come agayne to me.
And Dauid conforted Bethsabe his wyfe, and went in vnto her, and laye wyth her, and she bare a sonne, and called his name Salomon, and the Lorde loued hym.
And he sent by the hande of Nathan the prophete, and called his name Iedidia, of the Lordes behalfe.
Ioab fought agaynst Raba the cytie of the chyldren of Ammon, and toke the cyty of the kyngdome.
And Ioab sent messengers to Dauid, sayeng: I haue made assawt to Raba, and haue taken the cytie wyth waters.
Nowe therfore geather the rest of the people together, and besege the cytie, that thou mayest take it: lest I take it, and call it after my name.
And Dauid geathered all the people together, and went agaynst Raba, Ꟶ beseged it, and gatt it.
And he toke theyr kynges croune from of hys heed, which wayed an hundred wayght of golde, and in it were precyous stones. And it was set on Dauids heed. And he brought out the spoyle of the cytie in excedynge great aboundance.
And he caryed out the people that was therin, and put them vpon sawes and vpon yron harowes, and vpon axes of yron, Ꟶ thrust them into the tylekell. Thus dyd he with all the cyties of the children of Ammon. And so Dauid and all the people returned vnto Ierusalem.
After this it chaunced that Absalom the sonne of Dauid had a fayre syster, named Thamar, whom Amnon the sonne of Dauid loued.
And he was so sore vexed, that he fell sycke for the loue of hys syster Thamar: for she was a virgyn, and he thought it harde for hym to haue hys purpose of her.
But Amnon had a frende, called Ionadab, the sonne of Simeah Dauids brother: and Ionadab was a very wyse man.
And he sayde vnto him: how cometh it, that thou beyng the kinges sonne, art thus consumed euery daye? Wylt thou not tell me? Amnon answered hym: I loue Thamar my brother Absaloms syster.
Ionadab sayde vnto him: laye the downe on thy bedde, Ꟶ make thy selfe sicke. And when thy father is come to se the, saye vnto hym: Oh let my syster Thamar come, and geue me meate, Ꟶ dresse it in my syght, that I maye se it and eate it of her hande.
And so Amnon laye downe, Ꟶ made hym selfe sycke. And when the kynge was come to se him, Amnon sayde vnto him: Oh let Thamar my syster come, Ꟶ make me a couple of frytters in my sygth, that I maye eate of her hande.
Then Dauid sent home to Thamar, sayeng: go now to thy brother Amnon house, and dresse him meate.
So Thamar wente to her brother Amnons house, and he was layed downe. And she toke floure, and made paste, and dressed frytters in his syght, Ꟶ dyd bake them,
and toke a platter, Ꟶ powred them out before him, but he wolde not eate.
And Amnon sayde: Haue out all men from me. And they went all out from hym. And Amnon sayde vnto Thamar: brynge the meate into the chambre, that I maye eate of thyne hand. And Thamar toke the frytters, whych she had made, Ꟶ brought them into the chambre to Amnon her brother.
And whan she had set them before him, to eate, he toke her, and sayd vnto her: come lye wt me my syster.
And she answered him: nay my brother, do not force me, for there hath no such thinge bene done in Israel: do not thou this abhominacion.
For whither shall I be able to go wt my shame? And thou shalt be as one of the foles in Israel. O speake vnto the kynge, and he shall not denye me vnto the.
Howbeit he wolde not herken vnto her voyce but toke her, Ꟶ forced her, and laye wt her.
And then Amnon hated her excedynglye: so that the hate wher wyth he hated her, was greater then the loue, wt which he before loued her. And Amnon sayde vnto her: vp, Ꟶ get the hence.
She answered him: Thou hast no cause. This euell that thou puttest me awaye is greater then the other that thou dyddest vnto me. Neuerthelesse he wolde not heare her,
but called his boye that serued him, Ꟶ sayd: put a waye this woman from me, Ꟶ bolt the dore after her.
And she had a kirtell of diuerse coloures vpon her: for wt soche were the kynges daughters (that were virgines) appareled. Then his seruaunt brought her oute, and locked the dore after her.
And Thamar toke Ꟶ put asshes on her heed, Ꟶ rent her gaye kyrtell that was on her, Ꟶ layed her hande on her heed, Ꟶ so went: Ꟶ as she went, cryed.
And Absalom her brother sayde vnto her: hath Amnon thy brother bene with the? Now yet be still my syster: he is thy brother. Let not this thynge greue thine hert And so Thamar remayned desolate in her brother Absaloms house.
But whan kynge Dauid heard of all these thinges, he was very wroth.
And Absalom sayde vnto hys brother Amnon nether good ner badd. Howbeit Absalom hated Amnon because he had forced hys syster Thamar.
And it happened after two yere, that Absalom had shepe shearers in the playne of Hazor besyde the trybe of Ephraim, Ꟶ bad all the kynges sonnes,
and cam to the kyng, Ꟶ sayd: beholde, thy seruaunt hath shepe sherers, let the kynge wt his seruauntes come to thy seruaunte.
The king answered Absalom: naye my sonne. We will not go all, ner be chargeable vnto the. And Absalom laye sore vpon hym: howbeit he wolde not go, but blessed hym.
Then sayd Absalom: Yf thou wylt not come, then let my brother Amnon go wt vs. And the kynge answered hym: what nedeth it, that he go wyth the?
But Absalom made soche instance that he let Amnon, Ꟶ all the kynges chyldren go with hym.
Nowe had Absalom commaunded his younge men, sayenge: marke when Amnons hert is mery wyth wyne Ꟶ when I byd you smyte Amnon, then kyll hym: and feare not, haue not I bydden you? be bolde therfore, Ꟶ playe the men.
And the younge men of Absalom dyd vnto Amnon euen as Absalom had commaunded. And all the kynges sonnes arose, Ꟶ euery man gat hym vp, vpon hys Mule, Ꟶ fled.
And it fortuned, that whyle they were yet in the waye, tydynges cam to Dauid sayeng: Absalom hath slayne all the kynges sonnes, Ꟶ there is none left alyue.
Then Dauid arose, Ꟶ tare his garmentes, and laye along on the erth: Ꟶ all his seruauntes stode by with theyr clothes rent.
And Ionadab the sonne of Simeah Dauids brother, answered, and sayde: let not my Lorde suppose that they haue slayne all the younge men the kynges sonnes, saue Amnon only is deed. For that hath bene determined in Absaloms mynde, sence he forced hys syster Thamar.
Nowe therfore, let not my Lorde the kynge take the thynge so greuouslye, to thincke that all the kinges sonnes are deed, saue Amnon only is deed.
But Absalom fled. And the younge man that kept the watche, lyfte vp hys eyes, and loked: And beholde, ther cam moche people by a waye, a longe by the hynder parte on an hylles syde.
And Ionadab sayde vnto the kynge: beholde, the kynges sonnes come: As thy seruaunt sayde, so it is.
And as sone as he had lefte speakynge: beholde, the kynges sonnes came, and lyfte vp theyr voyces, and wepte. The kynge also and all hys seruauntes wepte excedyngly.
But Absalom escaped, and went to Thalmai the sonne of Amihur kynge of Gesur. And Dauid mourned for hys sonne euery daye.
And so Absalom escaped and went to Gesur, and was there thre yeares.
And kynge Dauid desyred to go forth vnto Absalom: For where as Amnon was deed, he was comforted ouer hym.
Ioab the sonne of zaruia perceaued, that the kynges hert was towarde Absalom,
Ꟶ he sent to Thekoa, and fett thence a wyse woman, and sayde vnto her: fayne thy selfe to be a mourner, and put on mournynge apparell. And anoynt not thy self with oyle. but be as a woman that had longe tyme mourned for some deed bodye.
And come to the kynge, and speake of thys maner vnto hym. And so Ioab taught her what she shuld saye
And when the woman of Thekoa had fallen on her face to the grounde, and done obeysaunce, she sayde vnto the kynge: helpe me O kynge.
The kynge sayde vnto her: what ayleth the? She answered: I am a wedowe, and myne husbande is deed.
And thy handmayde had two sonnes, and they two fought together in the felde, (where was no man to go betwene them) but the one smote the other and slewe hym.
And beholde, the whole kynred is rysen agaynst thy handmayde, and they sayd: delyuer vs him that smote hys brother: that we maye kyll hym for the soule of his brother whome he slue. We will destroye the heyre also. And so they shall quenche my sparkle whych is left, that he shall stere vp (to my husbande) nether name ner issue vpon the erth.
And the kynge sayde vnto the woman: go home to thyne house, I wyll geue a charge for the.
And the woman of Thekoa sayde vnto the kynge: My Lorde O kynge, thys trespace be on me and on my fathers house, and the kynge and hys seate be giltlesse.
And the kynge sayd: yf any man saye ought vnto the, bryng hym to me, and he shall hurte the no moare.
Then sayde she: lett the kynge remember hys Lorde God, that the auenger of the bloude geather not on heapes together to destroye, and that they slaye not my sonne. And he answered: as sure as the Lorde lyueth there shall not one heere of thy sonne fall to the erthe.
The woman sayde: let thyne handmayde speake one worde moare vnto my Lorde the kynge. And he sayde: saye on.
The woman sayde: wherfore then hast thou determined such a thyng agaynst the people of God? For the kyng doth speake this thynge as one which is fautye, that he shulde not fett agayne hys banesshed.
For we must nedes dye, Ꟶ perysh as water spylt on the grounde, which cannot be geathered vp agayne: Neither doth God spare any soule. Let the kynge therfore fynde the meanes, that hys banysshed be not vtterly expelled from hym.
Nowe therfore am I come, to speake of this thing vnto the kynge my Lorde: For they that be of the people, haue feared me. And thy handmayde sayde: Nowe wyll I speake vnto the kyng, parauenture the kynge will perfourme the request of his handmayde.
And the kinge shall heare his handmayde, to delyuer her out of the hande of the man that wolde haue destroyed me and also my sonne out of the enheritaunce of God.
And thyne handmayde sayde: the worde of my Lorde the kynge shall nowe be confortable? For my Lorde the kynge is as an Angel of God, in hearyng of good and badd: therfore the Lorde thy God be with the.
Then the kynge answered, Ꟶ sayde vnto the woman: hyde not from me (I praye the) the thynge that I shall aske the: And the woman sayde: let my Lorde the kyng nowe saye on.
And the kynge sayde: Is not the hande of Ioab wyth the in all this matter? The woman answered, and sayde: as sure as thy soule lyueth my Lorde kynge, there is els no man (on the ryght hande nor on the leaft) but as my Lorde the kynge hath spoken, thy seruaunt Ioab he bad me, and he put all these wordes in the mouthe of thyne handmayde.
For to the intent that I shulde alter my communicacyon, hath thy seruaunt Ioab done this thinge. And my Lord is wise, euen as an Angell of God, to vnderstand all thynges that are in the erthe.
And the kynge sayde vnto Ioab beholde, I am content to do this thing. Go, and fett home the chylde Absalom agayne.
And Ioab fell to the grounde on his face, and bowed hym selfe, Ꟶ blessed the kynge And Ioab sayde: nowe thy seruaunt knoweth, that I haue founde grace in thy syght (my Lorde O kynge) in that the kynge hath fulfylled the request of hys seruaunt.
And so Ioab arose, and went to Gesur, and brought Absalom to Ierusalem.
And the kyng sayd: let him turne to hys awne house, and not se my face. And so Absalom returned to hys awne house, and sawe not the kynges face.
But in all Israel there was not so goodlye a man as Absalom, for he was very bewtifull: in so moche that from the sole of his fote to the toppe of his heed, there was no blemeshe in him.
And when he shaued hys heed (for at euery yeares end he shaued it, because the heer was heute on hym and must nedes shaue it) the heere of his heed wayed two hundred cycles after the kynges weyght.
And this Absalom had thre sonnes borne him and one daughter, named Thamar, whyche was afayre, woman to loke vpon.
So Absalom dwelt two yere in Ierusalem, Ꟶ sawe not the kynges face.
Therfore Absalom sent for Ioab, to haue sent hym to the kinge. But he wolde not come to him. And whan he sent agayne, he wolde not come.
Therfore he sayde vnto hys seruauntes: beholde, Ioab hath a parcell of lande fast by my place, and he hath barlye therin. Go, and set it on fire. And Absaloms seruauntes sett it on fyre.
Then Ioab arose Ꟶ came to Absalom vnto his house, Ꟶ sayde vnto him: wherfore haue thy seruauntes burnt my felde wyth fyre.
And Absalom answered Ioab: beholde, I sent for the, desyringe the to come, because I wolde haue sent the to the kinge, for to saye: wherfore am I come from Gesur. It had bene better for me, to haue bene there styll. Nowe therfore, wolde I se the kynges face. And yf there be any trespace in me, kyll thou me.
And so Ioab came to the kynge, Ꟶ tolde him: whych whan he had sent for Absalom, he came to the kynge, and fell to the grounde on hys face before hym. And the kynge kyssed Absalom.
After this it fortuned, that Absalom gatt hym charettes and horsses, and fyftie men to runne before him.
And he roase vp erlye in the morninges, and stode in the place of the entring in of the gate. And euery man that had anye matter and came to the kynge for iudgement, him dyd Absalom call vnto hym, and sayde: of what cytie art thou? He answered: thy seruaunt is of one of the trybes of Israel.
And Absalom sayde vnto hym: se, thy matter is good and ryghteous, but there is no man deputed of the kynge to heare the.
Absalom sayde moreouer: Oh, that I were made iudge in the lande, that euery man which hath anye pleye and matter in the lawe, myght come to me, and that I myght do him iustice?
And whan any man came nye to hym, and dyd him obeysaunce, he put forth his hande and toke hym to hym, and kyssed hym.
And on this maner dyd Absalom to all Israel that came to the kynge for Iudgement, and he stale the hertes of the men of Israel.
And after fourtye yeres it fortuned that Absalom sayde vnto the kynge: let me go nowe to Hebron, and paye my vowe which I haue vowed, vnto the Lorde:
for thy seruaunt vowed a vowe (when I was in Gesur in the lande of Siria) sayeng: yf the Lord shall bringe me agayne to Ierusalem, I will serue the Lord.
And the kynge sayde vnto hym: go in peace. And so he arose, and went to Hebron.
But Absalom sent spyes thorowe out all the tribes of Israel sayenge: as sone as ye heare the voyce of the trompet blowe, ye shall saye: Absalom raigneth kynge in Hebron.
And with Absalom went two hundred men out of Ierusalem, that were called. And they went wt pure hertes, not knowinge of any thynge.
And Absalom sent also for Ahithophel the Gilonite Dauids counseller, that he shulde come out of hys cytie Gilo, whyle he offered sacrifyces. And there was wrought stronge treason. For the people went and increased wt Absalom in multitude.
And there cam a messenger to Dauid Ꟶ sayd: the hertes of the men of Israel are turned after Absalom.
And Dauid sayde vnto all his seruauntes that were wt him at Ierusalem: vp, that we maye be gone, for we shall not else escape from Absalom. Make spede, to departe: leste he come sodenlie, and catche vs, Ꟶ bringe some myscheffe vpon vs, and smyte the cytie with the edge of the swerde.
And the kynges seruauntes sayde vnto him: beholde, thy seruauntes are redye, to do whatsoeuer my Lord the kyng shall apoynte.
And the kynge Ꟶ all his housholde departed a fote. And he left behinde hym ten concubines, to kepe the house.
And so the kynge Ꟶ all the people went out a fote, Ꟶ taryed in a place that was farre of.
And all his seruauntes went about him. And all the Cerethites and all the Phelethites and all the Gethites (euen .vj. hundred men whych were come a fote from Geth) went before the kynge.
Then sayde the kynge to Ithai the Gethite, wherfore commest thou wyth vs? Returne and abide with the kynge, for thou art a straunger, and art remoued from thyne awne place.
Thou camest but yesterdaye, and shulde I vnquyet the to daye to go wt vs? I wyll go whether I can. Therfore returne thou, Ꟶ carye agayne thy brethren. Mercye and truthe.
And Ithai answered the kynge and sayd: as trulye as God lyueth Ꟶ as my Lord the kinge lyueth, in what place my Lord the kynge shalbe, whether in deeth or lyfe, euen there also wyll thy seruaunt be.
And Dauid the kynge sayde to Ithai: come then and go forwarde. And Ithai the Gethite went forth, Ꟶ all hys men, Ꟶ all the chyldren that were wt hym.
And all the countreye wepte wyth a loude voyce, Ꟶ so dyd all the people that went forth. The kynge also hym selfe passed ouer the broke Kydron. And all the people went towarde the waye that leadeth to the wyldernesse.
And Sadock and all the Leuites were wyth him, and bare the arcke of the apoyntment of God. And there they set downe the Arcke of God. And Abiathar went vp, vntill the people were all come ouer, out of the cytie.
And the kynge sayde vnto Sadock. Carye the Arcke of God agayne into the cytie. If I shall fynde fauoure in the eyes of the Lorde, he will bringe me agayne, and shewe me both it, Ꟶ the tabernacle therof.
But and yf the Lorde thus saye: I haue no lust vnto the, beholde, here am I, let him do wyth me, what semeth good in his eyes.
The kynge sayde also vnto Sadock the preaste: Art not thou a Sear? Returne into the citie in peace. And take your two sonnes wyth you: Ahimaaz thy sonne, and Ionathas the sonne of Abiathar.
Beholde, I will tarye in the feldes of the wyldernesse, vntyll there come some worde from you to be tolde me.
Sadock therfore and Abiathar caryed the Arcke of God agayne to Ierusalem, and they taryed there.
And Dauid went vpon mount olyuet, and wepte as he went, and had his heed couered, Ꟶ went barefote. And all the people that was wyth hym, had euery man hys heed couered, and as they went vp, they wepte also.
And one tolde Dauid sayenge: Ahithophel is one of them that haue conspired wyth Absalom. And Dauid sayde. O Lorde, turne the councell of Ahithophel into folyshenes.
When Dauid was come to the toppe of the mount he worshypped God: and beholde, Husai the Arachite came agaynst hym with hys coote torne, and hauynge erth vpon his heed.
Unto whome Dauid sayde: yf thou go wyth me, thou shalt be a burthen vnto me.
But yf thou returne to the cytie, Ꟶ saye vnto Absalom: I wyll be thy seruaunt O kynge: (as I haue thus longe bene thy fathers seruaunt, so am I nowe thy seruaunt) thou mayst for my sake destroye the councell of Ahithophel.
And thou hast there with the Sadock and Abiathar the Preastes, vnto whom thou shalt shewe all that thou canst heare out of the kynges house.
And beholde, they haue there wyth them theyr two sonnes: Ahimaaz Sadockes sonne, and Ionathas Abiathars sonne: by them also shall ye sende me all that ye can heare.
And so Husai Dauids frende gat hym to the cytie. And Absalom also entred into Ierusalem.
And when Dauid was a lytle past the toppe of the hyll: beholde ziba the seruaunt of Miphiboseth came to mete hym with a couple of Asses sadeled, and vpon them two hundred loues and one hundred bonches of Resynges, and an hundred frayles of dryed fygges, and a bottell of wyne.
And the kyng sayd vnto ziba: what meanest thou wyth these? And ziba sayde. They be Asses for the kynges houshold to ryde on, and bread and frute for the younge men to eate, and wyne: that such as be faynt in the wyldernesse, maye drynk.
And the kynge sayde: where is thy masters sonne? ziba answered vnto the kynge: beholde, he taryeth styll at Ierusalem. For he sayde: thys daye shall the house of Israel restore me the kyngdome of my father.
Then sayde the kyng to ziba, beholde, thyne are all that pertayned vnto Miphiboseth. And ziba sayde: I do homage to the. I beseche the that I maye fynde grace in thy syght, my Lorde, O kynge.
And when kynge Dauid came to Bahurim: beholde, thence cam out a man of the kynred of the house of Saul, named Semei the sonne of Gera, and he cam out cursynge.
And he cast stones at Dauid, and at all the seruauntes of kynge Dauid: And all the people also and all the men of warre were on hys ryght hande, and on hys lefte,
And thus sayde Semei whan he cursed: come forthe, come forth thou bloude sheder, and thou man of Belyall.
The Lorde hath brought vpon the all the bloude of the house of Saul, in whose steade thou hast raygned, and the Lord hath delyuered the kyngdom into the hande of Absalom thy sonne. And beholde thou art come to thy mischeffe, because thou art a bloudesheder.
Then sayde Abisai the sonne of zaruia vnto the kynge: why doth thys deed dogg cursse my Lorde the kynge? let me go nowe, and take of the heed of hym.
And the kynge sayde: what haue I to do wyth you ye sonnes of zaruia: let hym cursse: for the Lorde hath bydden hym cursse Dauid, Who dare then saye: Wherfore hast thou done so?
And Dauid sayde to Abisai, and to all his seruauntes, beholde, my sonne whych cam of myne awne bodye, seketh my lyfe. How moche more then maye thys sonne of Iemini do it? Suffre him to cursse for the Lord hath bydden him:
haplye the Lorde wyll loke on my wepyng eyes Ꟶ wretchednesse, Ꟶ do me good for hys curssynge this daye.
And as Dauid and his men went by the waye, Semei went alonge on the hylles syde ouer agaynst hym, Ꟶ curssed as he went, and threwe stones at him, and cast dust.
And the kynge and all that were with him cam werye, and refresshed them selues there.
And Absalom and all the people of the men of Israel came to Ierusalem, and Ahithophel was wyth him.
And as sone as Husai the Arachite was come vnto Absalom, he sayde vnto hym: God saue the kynge, God saue the kyng.
And Absalom sayde agayne to Husai: is this the kyndnesse thou owest to thy frende? Why wentest thou not wyth hym?
Husai answered vnto Absalom: naye not so, but whom the Lorde and this people and all the men of Israel chose, hys will I be, and with hym wyll I dwell.
Moreouer, vnto whome shall I do seruice, but euen to hys sonne? And as I was seruaunt before wt thy father, euen so shall I be with the.
Then spake Absalom to Ahithophell: geue councell, what is best for vs to do.
And Ahithophell sayde vnto Absalom: get the in vnto thy fathers concubines, which he hath lefte to kepe the house. And all Israel shall heare, that thou art cast out of thy father: then shall the handes of all that are wyth the, be stronge.
And so they pitched Absalom a tent vpon the toppe of the house. And he went in vnto hys fathers concubynes in the syght of all Israel.
And the councell of Ahithophel which he counceled in those dayes, was as a man had asked councell of God: euen so was all the councell of Ahithophel, both wyth Dauid and wyth Absalom.
Ahithophel sayde vnto Absalom: let me chose out nowe twelue thousande men. And I will vp, Ꟶ folowe after Dauid thys nyght.
And I wyll come vpon hym, whyle he is werye and weake handed, and wyll feare hym: And all the people that are with hym, shall flee. And so will I smyte the kynge onlye,
and wyll bryng agayne all the people vnto the, euen as easely as yf I wolde brynge anye other thing. And whan I haue slayne the man whom thou sekest, all the people shall haue rest.
And the saying pleased Absalom well, and all the elders of Israel.
Then sayde Absalom: call also Husai the Arachite, and let vs heare his councell.
When Husai was come to Absalom, Absalom spake vnto hym, sayinge: Ahithophel hath geuen soche councell: Shall we do after his saying, or no? tell thou.
Husai answered vnto Absalom: the councell that Ahithophel hath geuen, is not good at this tyme:
For (sayd Husai) thou knowest thy father, Ꟶ his men, howe that they be strong. And they be chafed in their myndes, and are euen as a Beare robbed of her whelpes in the felde. Thy father is a man also practised in warre, Ꟶ maketh no tarienge with the people.
Beholde he lurketh now in some caue, or in some other stronge place. And though some of his men be ouerthrowen at the fyrst brunt, yet they that heare it will saye: The people that foloweth Absalom, be put to the worsse.
And the best men thou hast whose herttes are as the hertes of Lyons, shall shrynke therat. For all Israel knoweth, that thy father is a myghtye man, and they whych be wyth him are all men of warre.
Therfore my councell is, that all Israel be geathered vnto the, from Dan to Beerseba, (which are as the sande of the see in nombre) and that thou go to batayle in thyne awne person.
For so shall we come vpon him in one place or other, where we shall fynde hym, Ꟶ we will fall vpon him euen as thicke as the dewe falleth on the grounde. And of all the men that are wyth hym, we shall not leaue hym one.
Moreouer, yf he be gotten into a towne then shall all the men of Israel bringe ropes to that cytie, and we wyll drawe it into the ryuer, vntyll there be not one stone founde there.
And Absalom and all the men of Israel sayde: the councell of Husai the Arachite is better, then the councell of Ahithophell. For it was euen the Lordes determinaycon to destroye the good councell of Ahithophel: that the Lorde myght brynge euell vpon Absalom.
Then sayde Husai vnto Sadock and Abiathar the Preastes of this and that maner dyd Ahithophel and the elders of Israel councell Absalom. And thus and thus haue I counceled.
Nowe therfore send quicklye, and shewe Dauid saying tarye not all nyght in the feldes of the wyldernesse, but gett the ouer, lest the kynge be deuoured and all the people that are wt hym.
Nowe Ionathas and Ahimaaz abode by the well Rogell: (for they myght not be sene to come into the cytie.) And a wenche went and tolde them. And they went, Ꟶ shewed kynge Dauid.
Neuerthelesse a lad sawe them, and tolde it to Absalom. But they went both of them awaye quycklye, and cam to a mannes house in Bahurim, which had a well in his yarde into the whych they went downe.
And a woman toke and sprede a couerlet ouer the welles mouth, and strawed fyrmentie corne theron. And the thynge was not spyed.
And when Absaloms seruauntes came to the wyfe to the house, they sayde. Where is Ahimaaz Ꟶ Ionathas? The woman answered them they be gone ouer the lytell broke of water. And when they had sought them and coulde not fynde them, they returned to Ierusalem.
And as sone as they were departed, the other came out of the well, and went and tolde kynge Dauid, and sayde vnto hym: vp, and get you quyckly ouer the water for soche councel hath Ahithophel geuen, agaynst you.
Then Dauid arose, Ꟶ all the people that were wt hym, and they were come ouer Iordan be that it was daye: so that there lacked not one of them, that was not come ouer Iordan.
And when Ahithophel sawe, that his councell was not folowed, he sadelled his Asse, Ꟶ arose, Ꟶ gate hym home to hys awne house, and to hys awne cytie, and put hys housholde in order, and hanged him selfe, and dyed, and was buryed in the sepulchre of hys father.
Then Dauid came to Mahenaim. And Absalom passed ouer Iordan, he and all the men of Israel with him.
And Absalom made Amasa captayne of the hoste in stede of Ioab, whych Amasa was a mannes sonne named Iethra an Israhelite, that went into Abigail the daughter of Nahas syster to zeruia Ioabs mother.
So Israel and Absalom pytched in the lande of Gilead.
And when Dauid was come to Mahanaim, Sobi the sonne of Nahas out of Rabba the citie of the children of Ammon, Ꟶ Machir the sonne of Ammiel out of Lodeber, and Berzelai the Gileadite out of Roglim,
brought beddes, basens, erthen vesselles, wheat Ꟶ barly, floure, and parched corne, beanes, rice, ootmell, hony,
butter, shepe and chese of kyene, for Dauid and all the people that were with him, to eate. For they sayd: The people is hongrye, weerye, and thyrstye in the wyldernesse.
And Dauid nombred the people that were wyth hym, and sett captaynes of thousandes and of hundredes ouer them.
And Dauid sent forth the thirde parte of the people vnder the hande of Ioab, and another parte vnder the hande of Abisai the sonne of zeruia Ioabs brother, and the other thyrde parte vnder the hande of Ithai the Gethite. And the kynge sayde vnto the people: I wyll go with you also.
And the people answered: Thou shalt not go forth: for yf we fle, oure aduersaries will not care for vs: nether shall they regard vs, though halfe vs were slayne: but thou art worth ten thousande of vs: Wherfore it is better, that thou succoure vs out of the cytie.
And the kynge sayde vnto them: what semeth you best, that wyll I do. And the kynge stode by the gate syde, and all the people came out by hundredes and by thousandes.
And the kynge commaunded Ioab Ꟶ Abisai, Ꟶ Ithai sayeng: intreate the younge man Absalom gently for my sake. And all the people hearde, that the kynge gaue all the captaynes charge concernynge Absalom.
And so the people went out into the felde agaynst Israel, and the battel was in the woode of Ephraim:
Where the people of Israel were put to the worsse before the seruauntes of Dauid, Ꟶ there was a great slaughter that daye, euen of twentye thousande men.
For the felde was fought there in dyuerse places, all abroade vpon the erthe. And the wodd deuoured moo people that daye, than dyd the swerde.
And Absalom came before the seruauntes of Dauid rydynge vpon a Mule, whych caryed hym vnder the thicke bowes of a great Oke. And his heed was caught of the Oke, and he was lifte vp betwene heuen Ꟶ erthe: Ꟶ the Mule that was vnder hym, went his waye.
And one that saw it tolde Ioab, sayeng: beholde, I sawe Absalom hange in an Ocke:
and Ioab sayde vnto the man that tolde him. Yf thou dydest se hym, why dydest not thou there smyte him to the ground, Ꟶ I wold haue geuen the ten sicles of siluer, Ꟶ a girdle?
The man sayde vnto Ioab: though thou woldest laye a thousande sycles of syluer in my hande, yet wolde I not stretche out myne hande agaynst the kynges sonne. For we hearde with oure eares when the kynge charged the, and Abisai and Ithai, sayenge: Beware, that none touch the younge man Absalom:
Moreouer, yf I had done it, I shulde haue done agaynst myne owne life: for there is no matter hyd from the kinge: yee and thou thy selfe woldest haue bene agaynst me.
Then sayde Ioab: I may not stande thus taryeng wyth the. And he toke thre speares in his hande, Ꟶ thrust them thorowe Absalom, while he was yet a lyue on the bodye of the tree.
And ten seruauntes that bare Ioabs wepons, turned, and smote Absalom and slue him.
And when Ioab blewe the trompet, the people returned from folowynge Israel: for Ioab spared the people.
And they toke Absalom, and cast hym into a great pytt in the wood, Ꟶ layed a myghtie great heape of stones vpon hym. And all Israel fled to their tentes.
And thys Absalom yet in hys lyfe tyme toke counsell Ꟶ reared vp a piller, whyche is in kynges dale. For he sayd: I haue no sonne. And therfore to kepe my name in remembraunce do I it. And he called the pyller after hys awne name. And it is called vnto thys daye: Absaloms pyller.
Then sayde Ahimaaz the sonne of Sadock: let me runne nowe, and beare the kyng tydinges, how that the Lorde hath iudged hym quyte of the hande of hys enemyes.
And Ioab sayd vnto hym: thou art no man to beare good tydynges to daye: thou shalt beare tydynges another tyme: but to daye thou shalt beare none, because the kynges sonne is deed.
Then sayde Ioab to Chusi: go and tell the kynge, what thou hast sene: And Chusi bowed him selfe vnto Ioab, and ranne.
Then sayd Ahimaaz the sonne of Sadock agayne to Ioab: come what come wyll, let me also runne after Chusi. And Ioab sayd: Wherfore wilt thou runne my sonne? seing that for the tydynges thou shalt haue no rewarde: well (sayde he) come what will, let me runne.
He sayd vnto him: runne. Then Ahimaaz ranne by the playne waye, and came before Chusi.
And Dauid sat betwene the two gates. And the watcheman went vp to the rouffe ouer the gate vnto the walle, Ꟶ lyfte vp hys eyes, and sawe: Ꟶ beholde, there cam a man runnynge alone.
And the watcheman cryed, Ꟶ tolde the kynge. And the kynge sayde: yf he be alone, there is good tydinges in his mouth. And he came, Ꟶ drewe nye.
And the watcheman sawe another man runnynge, and he called vnto the porter and sayde: beholde, there commeth another man runnynge alone. And the kynge sayde: he is also a tydinges brynger.
And the watcheman sayde. me thynketh the runnynge of the formost is lyke the runnynge of Ahimaaz the sonne of Sadock The kynge sayde: he is a good man, and commeth with good tydinges.
And Ahimaaz called, Ꟶ sayde vnto the kynge: good tydinges, and he fell downe flatt to the erth vpon his face before the kynge, and sayde: blessed be the Lorde thy God, which hath shutt vp the men that lyft vp their handes agaynst my Lorde the kynge.
And the kynge sayde: is the younge man Absalom safe? Ahimaaz answered: When Ioab sent (Chusi) the kynges seruaunt, and me thy seruaunt, I sawe much a doo. But I whotte not what it was.
And the kynge sayde vnto him: turne, and stande here. And he turned, and stode styll.
And beholde, Chusi came also, and sayde: Good tydinges my Lorde the kynge, For the Lorde hath quytte the thys daye out of the hande of all them that rose agaynst the.
And the Kynge sayde vnto Chusi. Is the younge man Absalom safe? Chusi answered: The enemyes of my Lord the kynge, and all that ryse agaynst the, to do the hurt, be as that younge man is.
And the kynge was moued, and went vp to a chambre ouer the gate, and wept. And as he went, thus he sayde: O my sonne Absalom, my sonne, my sonne Absalom, wolde God I had dyed for the: O Absalom my sonne, my sonne.
And it was tolde Ioab: beholde, the kynge wepeth and mourneth for Absalom.
And the victorie of that daye was turned into mournynge vnto all the people. For the people hearde saye that daye, howe the kynge sorowed for hys sonne.
And the people stale awaye that daye from goynge into the cytie, as people confounded stele awaye, when they flee in battel.
But the kynge hyd his face, and cryed with a loude voyce. O my sone Absalom, O Absalon my sonne, my sonne.
And Ioab came into the house to the kynge, and sayde: thou hast shamed this daye the faces of all thy seruauntes, which this daye haue saued thy lyfe, and the lyues of thy sonnes and of thy daughters, Ꟶ the lyues of thy wiues, and of thy concubynes,
in that thou louest thyne enemyes, and hatest thy frendes. For thou hast declared thys daye, that thou regardest nether thy Lordes nor seruauntes. And this daye I do perceaue, that yf Absalom had lyued, Ꟶ all we had dyed this daye, that had pleased the well.
Nowe therfore vp, and come out, and speake kyndely vnto thy seruauntes: For I swere by the Lorde, except thou come out, there will not tarye one man with the thys nyght. And that wilbe worsse vnto the, then all the euell that fell on the from thy youth vnto thys houre.
Then the kynge arose, and satt downe in the Gate. And they tolde vnto all the people, sayinge: Beholde, the kynge doth sytt in the Gate. And all the people came before the kinge. But Israel fled, euery man to hys tent.
And it fortuned that all the people were at stryffe thorowe out all the trybes of Israel, sayinge: the kyng saued vs out of the hande of oure enemyes, he delyuered vs out of the hande of the Philistines, and nowe he is fleed out of the lande for Absalom.
But Absalom whom we anoynted ouer vs, is deed in battell. Therfore, why are ye so styll, that ye brynge not the kynge agayne?
And kyng Dauid sent to Sadock and Abiathar the preastes, sayinge: speake vnto the elders of Iuda Ꟶ saye: why are ye behynde, to brynge the kynge agayne to his house, seynge that soch tydinges is come from all Israel vnto the kynge euen to hys house?
Ye are my brethren, my bones Ꟶ my fleshe: wherfore then are ye the last that bringe the kynge home agayne?
And saye ye to Amasa: art thou not of my bone Ꟶ of my fleshe? God do so and so to me, yf thou be not captayne of the host to me for euer in the roume of Ioab.
And he bowed the hertes of all the men of Iuda, euen, as the hert of one man: so that they sent this worde to the kyng: Returne thou with all thy seruauntes.
So the kynge returned, Ꟶ came to Iordan. And Iuda came to Gilgal, for to go downe to mete the kynge, Ꟶ to conueye him ouer Iordan.
And Simei the sonne of Gera, the sonne of Iemini, whych was of Bahurim, hasted, and came with the men of Iuda to mete king Dauid,
and there were a thousande men of Beniamin wt hym, Ꟶ ziba the seruaunt of the house of Saul and his .xv. sonnes and twentye seruauntes with him. And they went quyckly ouer Iordan before the kynge. And there went ouer a boate
that caryed ouer the kynges housholde and they dyd him pleasure. And Simei the sonne of Gera fell before the kynge (as he was come ouer Iordan)
and sayde vnto him: let not my Lorde impute wickednesse vnto me, ner remember the thinges (that they seruaunt dyd wickedly when my Lorde the kyng departed out of Ierusalem) that the kyng shulde take it to herte.
For thy seruaunt doth knowe, howe that I haue done amysse. And therfore beholde, I am the fyrst this daye of all the house of Ioseph, that am come to go downe, to mete my Lorde the kynge.
But Abisai the sonne of zeruia answered, and sayde: shall not Semei dye for this, because he cursed the Lords anoynted?
And Dauid sayde: what matter is betwene you and me ye sonnes of zeruia? For thys daye ye be aduersaryes vnto me. Shall there any man dye this daye in Israel? Do not I knowe, that I am this daye kynge ouer Israel?
And therfore the kynge sayde vnto Semei: thou shalt not dye, Ꟶ the kynge sware vnto him.
And Miphiboseth the sonne of Saul came also to mete the kynge, Ꟶ had nether wasshed his fete, ner shauen his beerde, ner wasshed his clothes from the tyme the kynge departed, vntyll he came agayne in peace.
And it fortuned that when he was come to Ierusalem, and mett the kynge, the kynge sayde vnto him: wherfore wentest not thou wyth me Miphiboseth?
He answered: my Lorde, O kynge, my seruaunt deceaued me. For thy seruaunt sayde I wolde haue mine Asse sadled to ryde theron, for to go to the kynge, because thy seruaunt is lame.
And ziba hath falsely reported of thy seruaunt vnto my Lorde the kynge. And my Lorde the kynge is as an angel of God: do therfore what semeth good in thine eyes.
For all my fathers house were but deed men before my Lorde the kynge: and yet dydest thou put thy seruaunt amonge them that dyd eate at thyne awne table. What ryght therfore haue I yet, to crye any more vnto the kynge?
And the kynge sayde vnto him: Why speakest thou yet in thyne awne cause? I haue sayde: thou and ziba deuide the landes betwene you.
And Miphiboseth sayde vnto the kynge: yee lett him take all: for so moch as my Lorde the kynge is come agayne in peace vnto his awne house.
And Berselai the Gileadite came downe from Roglim, and went ouer Iordan with the kyng, to convaye him ouer Iordan:
Berselai was a very aged man, euen foure skore yere olde, Ꟶ prouyded the kynge of sustenaunce, whyle he laye at Mahanaim: for he was a man of verye great substaunce.
And the kynge sayde vnto Berselai: come thou with me, Ꟶ I will fede the with me in Ierusalem.
And Berselai sayde vnto the kynge: I am thus olde, and howe am I able to go vp with the kynge vnto Ierusalem?
I am this daye foure skore yere olde: and can I decerne betwene good and euell? Hath thy seruaunt any tast in that he eateth or drincketh? Can he heare any more the voyce of synginge men Ꟶ women? Wherfore then shulde thy seruaunt be yet a burthen vnto my Lorde the kynge?
Thy seruaunt will go a lytle waye ouer Iordan with the kynge: and why wyll the kynge recompence it me with soch a rewarde?
O let thy seruaunt turne back agayne, that I maye dye in myne awne cytie, and (be buryed) in the graue of my father and of my mother. Beholde, here is thy seruaunt Chimeam: let him go with my Lorde the kynge, and do to him, what shall please the:
And the kynge answered: Chimeam shall go with me. And I will do to him that thou shalt be content with. And whatsoeuer thou shalt requyre of me, that same will I do for the.
And all the people went ouer Iordan. And when the kynge was come ouer Iordan, he kyssed Berselai, and blessed him, Ꟶ he went backe agayne vnto his awne place.
And then the kynge went to Gilgal, and Chimeam went with him, Ꟶ so dyd all the people of Iuda, and brought ouer the kynge, and there were but halfe the men of Israel.
And beholde, all the men of Israel came to the kynge, and sayde vnto him, why haue oure brethren the men of Iuda stolen the awaye and haue brought the kyng Ꟶ his housholde, and all Dauids men with him ouer Iordan?
And all the men of Iuda answered the men of Israel: the kynge is nere of kynne to vs: wherfore be ye angrye for that matter? thynke ye that we eate of the kynges cost, or that we take vs any gyftes?
And the men of Israel answered the men of Iuda and sayde: we haue ten partes in the kynge, Ꟶ haue therto more ryght to Dauid then ye. Why then dyd ye despyse vs, that oure aduise shulde not be fyrst had in restoringe oure kynge agayne? And the wordes of the men of Iuda were fearcer, then the wordes of the men of Israel.
Whan there cam thither a certayne man of Belial (named Seba, the sonne of Bichri, a man of gemini) he blew a trompet Ꟶ sayde: we haue no parte in Dauid, neither haue we enheritaunce in the sonne of Isai, let the men of Israel departe vnto there tentes.
And so euery man of Israel went from Dauid, and folowed Seba the sonne of Bichri. But the men of Iuda claue fast vnto their kynge, from Iordan to Ierusalem.
And Dauid came to his house to Ierusalem, and toke the ten women his concubines, that he had left behynde him to kepe the house, and put them in warde, and fedd them: but laye no moare wyth them. And so they were enclosed vnto the daye of their deeth, lyuynge in wedowhode.
Then sayde the kynge to Amasa: call me the men of Iuda togeather agaynst the thirde daye, and be thou here also.
And so Amasa went to gather the men of Iuda to geather: but taried longer, then the tyme which he had appoynted him.
And Dauid sayde to Abisai: nowe shall Seba the sonne of Bichri do vs more harme, then dyd Absalom. Take thou therfore thy Lordes seruauntes, Ꟶ folowe after him: lest he gett him walled cyties, and escape vs.
And there went out after hym Ioabs men, and the Crethites and the Phelethites, and all the myghtiest men. And they departed out of Ierusalem to folowe after Seba the sonne of Bichri.
And when they were at the great stone in Gibeon, Amasa went before them. And Ioabs garment (that he had about him) was gyrde vnto him, and he had gyrded theron, a knyfe, which was ioyned fast to hys loynes, in soch a sheth that (as he went) it fell some tymes out.
And Ioab sayde to Amasa: art thou in health my brother? And Ioab toke Amasa by the chynne with the ryght hande, to kysse hym.
But Amasa toke no hede to the knyffe that was in Ioabs hande, for therwith he smote hym in the short rybbes, and shed out hys bowelles to the grounde, and thrust at him nomore, and he dyed. So Ioab and Abisai his brother folowed after Seba the sonne of Bichri.
And one of Ioabs men stode by him, and sayde: He that beareth any fauoure to Ioab, or good will to Dauid, let him go after Ioab?
And Amasa laye walowed in bloude, in the myddes of the waye. And there was a man, which when he sawe that all the people stode styll, he rowled Amasa out of the waye into the felde, Ꟶ cast a cloth vpon him, because he sawe that euery one that came, stode styll by hym.
And as sone as he was tombeled out of the waye, all the people went after Ioab, to folowe after Seba the sonne of Bichri.
And he went thorowe all the trybes of Israel vnto Abel, and to Bethmaacha and all the places of Barim. And they geathered together, and went after him.
And they came, Ꟶ beseged him in Abel Ꟶ in Bethmaacha And they cast vp a bancke agaynst the cytie that stode in the valleye. All the people that was with Ioab, thrust at the wall to ouerthrowe it.
Then cryed a wyse woman out of the cytie, heare heare, byd Ioab come hither, that I maye speake with hym.
When Ioab was come vnto her, the woman sayde: art thou Ioab? He answered: I am he. She sayde vnto him: heare the wordes of thy handmayde? And he answered: I do heare.
And she sayde agayne: They spake in the olde tyme, sayinge: men must aske peace first, how moche rather shulde they so do to Abell? For so haue they contynued hytherto:
I am one of them that are peaceable and faythfull in Israel. And thou goest about to destroye a citie and a mother in Israel. Why wilt thou deuoure the enheritaunce of the Lorde?
And Ioab answered, and sayde: God forbyd, God forbid it me, that I shulde ether deuoure or destroye.
The matter is not so: but a man of mount Ephraim (Seba the sonne of Bichri by name) hath lyfte vp his hande agaynst the kynge, euen against Dauid. Delyuer vs him only, and I will departe from the cytie. And the woman sayde vnto Ioab: Beholde, his heed shalbe throwen to the, ouer the wall.
And then the woman went vnto all the people with her wisdome. And they smote of the heed of Seba the sonne of Bichri, and cast it out to Ioab. And he blewe a trompet, and they skatered from the cytie, euery man to his tent. And Ioab returned to Ierusalem, vnto the kynge.
Ioab was ouer all the hoste of Israel. And Banaia the sonne of Iehoiada was ouer the Crethites Ꟶ Phelethites.
And Aduram was ouer the tribute. And Iehosaphat the sonne of Ahilud was Recorder.
Seua was scribe. And Sadock Ꟶ Abiathar were the preastes.
And Ira the Iairite was Dauids preast.
Then there fell an hongre in the dayes of Dauid, thre yeres together. And Dauid enquired of the Lorde. And the Lorde answered: it is for Saul, and the house of bloude, because he slue the Gibaonites.
And the kynge called the Gibaonites, Ꟶ sayde vnto them (Nowe the Gibaonites were, not of the chyldren of Israel, but a remnaunt of the Ammorites, and the chyldren of Israel sware vnto them: And Saul sought to sley them, for a zele that he had to the children of Israel and of Iuda.)
Wherfore Dauid sayde vnto them, what shall I do for you, and wherwith shall I make the attonement, that ye maye blesse the enheritaunce of the Lorde?
The Gibaonites answered him: we wyll haue no syluer ner gold, of Saul ner of hys house: nether is it oure mynde, that thou shuldest kyll any man in Israel. He sayde: what saye ye then that I shall do for you?
They answered the kinge: the man that consumed vs, Ꟶ ymagened to brynge vs to nought him will we destroye, that nought of him continewe in any of the coastes of Israel.
Let seuen men of his sonnes be delyuered vnto vs, and we will hange them vp vnto the Lorde, in Gibeah of Saul, whom the Lorde dyd chose. And the kynge sayde: I will geue them you.
But the kynge had compassyon on Miphiboseth the sonne of Ionathas, the sonne of Saul, because of the Lords othe that was betwene them: euen betwene Dauid and Ionathas the sonne of Saul.
But he toke the two sonnes of Rizpa the daughter of Aia (whom she bare vnto Saul) euen Armoni and Miphiboseth, Ꟶ the fyue sonnes of Michol (the daughter of Saul) whom she bare to Adriel the sonne of Barselai the Meholathite.
And he delyuered them vnto the handes of the Gibeonites, which hanged them in the hill before the Lorde. And they fell all seuen togeather, and were slayne in the dayes of heruest: euen in the fyrst dayes, and in the beginnynge of Barley heruest:
And Rizpa the daughter of Aia toke sackclothe and hanged it vp for them vpon the Rocke, euen from the begynninge of haruest vntyll rayne dropped vpon them out of heuen: and suffered nether the byrddes of the Ayre to fall on them by daye, nor beastes of the felde by nyght.
And it was tolde Dauid what Rizpa the daughter of Aia the concubyne of Saul had done:
and Dauid went, Ꟶ toke the bones of Saul and of Ionathas his sonne, from the men of Iabes in Gilead (which had stolen them from the strete of Bethsan, where the Philistines had hanged them when the Philistines had slayne Saul in Gilboa.)
And he brought thence the bones of Saul, and the bones of Ionathas his sonne, Ꟶ they toke vp the bones of them that were hanged.
And the bones of Saul and Ionathas hys sonne buryed they in the contrey of Beniamin, in zela, in the sepulchre of Cis hys father. And when they had performed all that the kynge commaunded. God was then at one with the lande.
It fortuned, that the Philistines had yet warre agayne with Israel. And Dauid went downe Ꟶ his seruauntes with hym, Ꟶ fought agaynst the Philistines. And Dauid waxed fayntie,
and Iesby of Nob one of the sonnes of the gyauntes (the yron of whose speare wayed thre hundred sycles, and he beynge gyrded with a newe swerde) thought to haue slayne Dauid.
But Abisai the sonne of zaruia succoured hym, and smote the Philistine, and killed him. Then the seruauntes of Dauid sware vnto him, sayinge: Thou shalt go no moare out with vs to battell, that thou quench not the lyght of Israel.
And yet after this, there was a battell with the Philistines at Nob, and then Sibbechai the Husathite slewe Saph which was one of the sonnes of the giauntes.
And there was yet another battell in Nob with the Philistines, where Elhanam the sonne of Iaere Orgim, a Bethlemite slue one Goliath a Gethite: the staffe of whose speare was as great as a weuers cloth beame.
And there was yet another battell in Geth where was a man of a great stature, Ꟶ had on euery hand .vj. fyngers and on euery fote .vj. toes .xxiiij. in all. And was borne also of the kynred of the giauntes in Geth.
And whan he defyed Israell, Ionathas the sonne of Simea the brother of Dauid slewe hym
These foure giauntes were borne in Geth, Ꟶ fell into the hande of Dauid and into the handes of his seruauntes.
And Dauid spake the wordes of thys songe vnto the Lorde, what tyme the Lorde had delyuered him out of the hande of all his enemyes, and out of the hande of Saul.
And he sayde: the Lorde is my rocke, and my castel, and my delyuerer.
God is my strength, in him will I trust: he is my shylde, and the horne of my saluacyon: my worshyp and my refuge: my sauiour, thou shalt saue me from wronge.
I will call on the Lorde which is prayse worthy, and so shall I be saued from myne enemyes.
For the corrupcyons of deeth closed me about: the floudes of Belial put me in feare.
The sorowes of hell compassed me about: the snares of deeth ouertoke me.
In my tribulacyon will I call vpon the Lorde, and crye to my God. And he shall heare my voyce out of his temple, and my crye shall enter into his eares.
The erth trimbled and quaked: the foundacyons of heuen moued and shoke, whan he was angrye.
Smoke went vp in his wrath, and consumynge fyre out of hys mouth, coles were kendled therof.
And he bowed heuen, and came downe, and there was darcknesse vnder his fete.
And he satt vpon Cherub Ꟶ dyd flye he was sene caryed vpon the wynges of the wynde.
He made darcknesse a tabernacle rounde about hym, with waters geathered to geather in thycke cloudes.
Thorowe the bryghtnesse of his presence were the fyre coles kyndled.
God thundred from heuen, and he that is most hye, doth put out his voyce.
He shotte arowes, and skatered them: he hurled lyghtenynge, and ouerthrewe them.
The flowinges of the see appered, and the foundacyons of the worlde were sene, by the reason of the rebukinge of the Lorde, and thorowe the blastynge of the breeth of hys nostrelles.
He shall sende from heauen, and fett me, he shall plucke me out of many waters.
He shall delyuer me from my myghtye aduersarye, and fro myne enemyes, for they are to stronge for me.
When they had ouertaken me in the daye of my calamytye the Lorde stayed me vp.
For he brought me out into rowmth: he delyuered me, because he had a loue vnto me.
The Lord will rewarde me accordinge to my ryghtwysnesse: accordynge to the purenesse of my handes will he recompense me.
For I haue kept the wayes of the Lorde, Ꟶ done no wyckednesse agaynst my God.
For all his lawes are in my syght, Ꟶ his statutes wyll not I put awaye fro me.
In his syght also haue I bene vndefyled, Ꟶ haue kepte me fro myne awne iniquite.
And the Lorde dyd to me agayne, accordynge to my ryghtwesnes, euen after my purenesse in his eyesyght.
Wyth the godly thou shalt be godly, and wt the man that is vncorrupt, thou shalt be vncorrupt.
With the pure thou shalt be pure, Ꟶ with the frowarde thou shalt be frowarde.
And the pore people that are in aduersyte, thou shalt helpe. And on the proude shalt thou cast thine eyes.
Thou art my light O Lorde: the Lorde shall lyght my darknesse.
For with thy helpe I will runne thorowe an Hoste of men, and in my God wyll I sprynge ouer a walle
God is vncorrupt in his waye: the worde of the Lorde is tryed in the fyre: he is the defender of all them that trust in him.
For who is a God, saue the Lorde? Ꟶ who is myghtie, saue oure God?
God strengtheth me with power, and ryddyth the waye in battell cleare before me.
He maketh my fete lyke hartes fete, Ꟶ setteth me fast vpon my hye holde.
He teacheth my handes to fyght, that euen a bowe of stele is to weake for myne armes.
Thou hast geuen me the shild of thy saluacyon, and with thy louinge mekenesse thou dost multiplie me.
Thou shalt make me space to walke in, and my legges shall not fayle me.
I wyll folowe vpon myne enemyes and destroye them, and turne not agayne vntyll I haue consumed them.
I will waste them and smyte them, that they shall not be able to aryse: yee, they shall fall vnder my fete.
Thou hast gyrded me about with myght to battell, and them that roase agaynst me, hast thou subdued vnder me.
And thou madest myne enemyes (Ꟶ them that hated me) to turne their backes to me, that I myght destroye them.
They loke for helpe, but there is none to saue them: Yee, euen vnto the Lorde do they crye, but he heareth them not.
I will beate them as smalle as the dust of the erth: I will stampe them as the dyrte of the strete, and will spreade them abroade.
Thou shalt delyuer me from the dissencyon of my people: thou shalt kepe me to be an heed ouer nacyons: the people whych I knewe not, shall serue me.
Straunge children dissemble with me. At the hearynge of the eare they obeye me.
Straunge chyldren will shryncke awaye, and they shalbe smytten with feare in their preuye chamber.
God is a lyue, and blessed be my maker: magnifyed be God, my most stronge saluacion.
It is God that aduengeth me, and bryngeth downe the people vnder me.
He delyuereth me fro myne enemyes, thou also shalt lyfte me vpon hye from them that ryse agaynst me, thou shalt delyuer me from the wicked men.
And therfore I will prayse the (O Lorde) amonge the nacyons, and wyll synge vnto thy name.
Whych sheweth greate saluacyon for his kynge, and dealeth mercyfully with his anoynted: euen wyth Dauid, and wyth his sede for euermore.
These be the last sayinges of Dauid. Dauid the sonne of Isay sayde. And the man (which was made, the anoynted of the God of Iacob, and the noble Psalmist of Israel) sayde:
the sprete of the Lorde spake by me, Ꟶ his worde was in my tonge.
The God of Israel spake of me, euen the most myghtie of Israel, sayde: he that beareth rule ouer men, ought to rule iustlye in the feare of God.
And as the mornynge lyght when the sonne is vp, a mornynge in whych are no cloudes to lett the bryghtnesse, and as the grasse of the erth is by the vertue of the rayne.
Shall not my house be so wt God? For he hath made with me an euerlastinge couenaunt, perfecte and sure in all poyntes Ꟶ this is truly all my health Ꟶ all my desire that it growe but not as grasse.
But the vngodly man of Belial shall be as a thorne cleane pluckt vp, which can not be taken wt handes:
But the man that shall touche them, must haue yron, or a longe helue. Or els must they be burnt with fyre in the same place.
These be the names of the myghtye men whom Dauid had: one that satt in the seat of wisdome, beinge chefest amonge thre, pleasaunt was he and stronge: he slue eyght hundred at one tyme.
After him was Eleazar the sonne of Dodi the sonne of Ahohi, one of the thre worthies wt Dauid, which defyed the Phylistines that were there geathered together to battell: whan the men of Israel were gone vp.
He arose Ꟶ layed on the Philistines, vntyll hys hande was werye, and claue vnto the swerde. And the Lorde gaue great victorye the same daye. And the people returned, and went after him to runne to the spoyle.
After him was Samma the sonne of Age the Hararite: and the Philistines geathered together besyde a towne. (Where was a parcell of lande full of ryce) and the people fled from the Philistines.
But he stode in the myddes of the grounde, and defended it, and slue the Philistines. And the the Lorde gaue great victorye.
These thre (which were of the thirtye chefe captaynes) went downe to Dauid in the haruest tyme vnto the caue Adullam, Ꟶ the hoost of the Philistines abode in the valeye of Geauntes.
And Dauid was then in an holde. And the Soudioures of the Philistines were in Bethlehem.
And Dauid longed and sayde. Oh, that I had of the water that is in the well by the gate of Bethlehem, for to drincke.
And the thre myghtie brake thorowe the Host of the Philistines, Ꟶ fett water out of the well of Bethlehem that was by the gate, and toke and brought it to Dauid: Neuerthelesse he wolde not dryncke therof, but offered it vnto the Lorde,
and sayde: the Lorde forbyd that I shulde do so. Is not this the bloude of the men that wente in ieopardye of their lyues? and therfore he wolde not dryncke it. And these thinges dyd these thre myghtie men.
Abisai the brother of Ioab, the sonne of Saruiah, was chefe amonge the thre, and he lyfte vp hys speare agaynst thre hundred, Ꟶ slue them, and had the name amonge the thre.
For he was nobler man then the thre and was their captayne. Howbeit he attayned not vnto thre.
And Banaiahu the sonne of Iehoiada (the sonne of a myghtie man) valyant in actes, of kabzeel, slue two stronge lyons, euen lyons of Moab. He went downe also, Ꟶ slue a lyon in a pyt in tyme of snowe.
And he slue an Egypcyan, a goodly bygge man, which had a speare in his hande. But he went downe to him with a staffe, and plucked the speare out of the Egypcians hande, and slue him wt hys awne speare.
These thynges did Banaiahu the sonne of Iehoiada, Ꟶ had the name amonge the thre worthies.
He was honorable amonge thirtye, but he attayned not to the (first) thre. And Dauid made him of hys councell.
Asahel the brother of Ioab also was one of the thirtye. Then Elhanan the sonne of Dodo of Bethlehem:
Samma the haronite: Elica the Harodite:
Helez the Paltite: Ira the sonne of Akes the Thekoite:
Abiezer of Anathoth: Meobnai the Husathite:
zelmon an Ahohite: Maharai the Netophatite:
Heleb the sonne of Baanah an Netophatite: Ithai the sonne of Ribai out of an hill of the chyldren of Beniamin:
Banaiahu the Phiratonite: Hedai, of the ryuer of Gaas:
Abialbon the Arbathite: Asmaueth a Barhumite:
Elihaba a Saalbonite: and the sonnes of Iasen, Ionathas.
Samma the Hararite. Ahiam the sonne of Sarar an Hararite:
Eliphelet the sonne of Aasbai the sonne of a Maachathite: Eliam the sonne of Aithophel the Gilonite:
Hezrai the Carmelite: Paarai the Arbite:
Igal the sonne of Nathan of zoba: Bani the Gadite:
zelec an Amonite: Naharai a Berothyte, which was the harnesberer of Ioab the sonne of zaruia.
Ira the Iethrite: Gareb the Iethrite
Uria the Hethite, thirtye Ꟶ seuen in all.
And agayne, the Lord was wroth agaynst Israel, and he moued Dauid agaynst them, in that he sayde: go and nombre Israel and Iuda.
For the kynge sayde to Ioab the captayne of his host: go thou abroade nowe, thorow out all the trybes of Israel, euen from Dan to Beer Seba, Ꟶ nombre ye the people, that I maye knowe the nombre of them.
And Ioab sayde vnto the kynge: I beseche the Lorde thy God, to make the people as many moo as they be: ye and an hundred tymes so many mo, and that the eyes of my Lorde the kynge maye se them. And what is the cause that my Lorde the kynge hath a lust to this thinge?
Not witstandynge the kynges worde preuayled agaynst Ioab and agaynst the captaynes of the hoste: And Ioab and the captaynes of the host went out from the presence of the kynge, to nombre the people of Israel.
And they passed ouer Iordan, and pitched in Aroer on the ryght syde of the cytie that lyeth in the myddes of the valeye of Gad, ouer agaynst Iazer.
And then they came to Gilead, and to the nether lande, where was a newe habitacyon, Ꟶ from thence they came to Dan Iaan about to Sidon,
Ꟶ came to the stronge holde of Tyre, and to all the cyties of the Heuites and of the Cananites, Ꟶ then went out to the South of Iuda, euen to Beerseba.
And so, when they had bene abroade thorowe out all the lande, they returned to Ierusalem agayne, after the ende of nyne monethes and twentye dayes.
And Ioab delyuered vp the nombre and summe of the people vnto the kynge. And there were in Israel eyghte hundred thousande men of myght that drewe swerdes. And the men of Iuda were fyue hundred thousande men.
And Dauids hert smote hym, after that he had nombred the people. And Dauid sayde vnto the Lorde: I haue synned excedyngly in that I haue done. And nowe Lorde take awaye the trespace of thy seruaunt: for I haue done very folyshely.
And when Dauid was vp in a morninge, the worde of the Lord came vnto the prophet Gad Dauids sear, sayinge:
go and saye vnto Dauid, thus sayth the Lord: I offer the thre thynges, chose the which of them I shall do vnto the.
So Gad came to Dauid, and shewed him, Ꟶ sayde vnto him. Wilt thou haue seuen yeres hunger to come in thy lande, or wilt thou flee .iij. monethes before thyne enemies, they folowinge the, or that there be thre dayes pestilence in thy lande? Nowe therfore aduyse the, Ꟶ se, what answere I shall geue to him that sent me.
And Dauid sayde vnto Gad: I am in extreme trouble. We will fall now into the hande of the Lorde, for moch is his mercye, and lett me not falle into the hande of man.
And so the Lorde sent a pestilence in Israel. from the mornynge vnto the tyme appoynted. And there dyed of the people from Dan to Beerseba seuenty thousande men.
And when the Angell stretched out his hande vpon Ierusalem to destroye it, the Lorde had compassion to do that euell, and sayde to the Angell that destroyed the people: it is nowe sufficient: holde thyne hande. And the angell was by the thresshinge place of Arefna the Iebusite.
And Dauid spake vnto the Lorde (when he sawe the angell that smote the people) and sayde: loo, it is I that haue synned, and I that haue done wyckedly. But these shepe, what haue they done? lett thyne hande (I praye the) be agaynst me and agaynst my fathers house.
And Gad came the same daye to Dauid, and sayde vnto him: go vp and reare an aultare vnto the Lord in the thresshinge flowre of Arefna the Iebusite.
And Dauid (accordinge to the sayinge of Gad) went vp, as the Lorde commaunded.
And Arefna loked, and sawe the kynge and his seruauntes cominge towarde him. And Arefna went out, and bowed him selfe before the kynge flat on his face vpon the grounde,
and Arefna sayde wherfore is my Lorde the kynge come to his seruaunt? Dauid answered: to bye the thresshynge flowre of the, and to make an aultare vnto the Lorde, that the plage maye cease from the people.
And Arefna sayde vnto Dauid: let my Lord the kynge take and offer what semyth him good in his eyes: Beholde, here be oxen for burnt sacrifyce, and steades and the other instrumentes of the oxen for wood.
All these thynges dyd Arefna geue vnto the kynge, Ꟶ sayde moreouer vnto the kynge: the Lorde thy God accept the.
And the kynge sayde vnto Arefna: not so, but I wyll bye it of the at a pryce, and wyll not offer sacrifyce vnto the Lorde my God of that which doth cost me nothinge. And so Dauid bought the thresshynge flowre, Ꟶ the oxen for fyftie sycles of syluer.
And Dauid buylt there an aultare vnto the Lorde, Ꟶ offered burnt sacrifyces and peace offeringes. And so the Lorde was intreated for the lande. And the plage ceased from Israel.
And kynge, dauid was olde Ꟶ stryken in yeres: so that whan they couered hym wt clothes, he caught no heat.
wherfore his seruauntes sayde vnto him let there be sought for my Lord the kynge a younge mayden, to stonde before the kynge and to cheryshe him. And let her lye in thy bosome, that my Lorde the kinge maye get heate.
And so they sought for a fayre damosell thorow out all the coastes of Israel, Ꟶ founde one Abisag a Sunamite, Ꟶ brought her to the kynge.
And the damosell was excedinge fayre, Ꟶ cherisshed the kynge, Ꟶ ministred to him. But the kyng knewe her not.
And Adonia the sonne of Hagith exalted him selfe, sayinge: I willbe kyng. And he gatt him charettes Ꟶ horsmen, and fyftie men to runne before him.
And his father wolde not displease him at anye tyme, nor sayd so moch to him as, why doest thou so? And he was a goodlye man, Ꟶ his mother bare him next after Absalom.
And he toke councell at Ioab the sonne of zaruia, Ꟶ at Abiathar the preast. And they helped Adonia.
But Sabock the preast, Banaiahu the sonne of Iehoiada, Nathan the prophet, Semei and Rei, and all the men of myght which were with Dauid, fauoured not Adonia.
And Adonia sacrifyced shepe and oxen, and fatt catell, by the stone of zoheleth, which is fast by the well of Rogell, and called all his brethren the kynges sonnes, and the men of Iuda the kynges seruauntes.
But Nathan the prophet and Banaiahu, and the other myghtie men, and Salomon his brother, he called not.
Wherfore, Nathan spake vnto Bethsabe the mother of Salomon, sayinge: hast thou not hearde howe that Adonia the sonne of Hagith doth rayne, and Dauid oure Lord knoweth it not?
Nowe therfore come, Ꟶ I will geue the councell, howe to saue thyne awne lyfe, Ꟶ the lyfe of thy sonne Salomon.
Go and get the in vnto kynge Dauid, and saye vnto him: didest not thou (my Lorde O kynge) swere vnto thy handmayde, sayinge? Salomon thy sonne shall raygne after me, Ꟶ he shall sytt vpon my seate? Why is then Adonia kynge?
Beholde, whyle thou yet talkest there with the kyng, I will come in after the, Ꟶ confirme thy wordes.
And Bethsabe went in vnto the kynge into the chambre. And the kinge was very olde, and Abisag the Sunamite ministred vnto the king.
And Bethsabe stowped Ꟶ made obeysaunce vnto the kynge. And the kynge sayde: what is thy matter?
She answered him: My Lorde, thou swarest by the Lorde thy God vnto thyne handmayde: Salomon thy sonne shall raygne after me, Ꟶ he shall sytt vpon my seate.
And beholde, nowe is Adonia kynge, Ꟶ my Lord the kynge wotteth not of it.
And he hath offered oxen, fat catell, Ꟶ many shepe, and hath called all the sonnes of the kynge, Ꟶ Abiathar the preast, and Ioab the captayne of the hoste. But Salomon thy seruaunt hath he not bydden.
And nowe my Lorde (O kynge,) the eyes of all Israel wayte on the, that thou shuldest tell them, who ought to sytte on the seate of my Lord the kynge after him.
For elles when my Lorde the kynge shall sleape with his fathers, I and my sonne Salomon shalbe synners.
And whyle she yet talked with the kynge, Nathan the prophet came also.
And they tolde the kynge sayinge: beholde, here commeth Nathan the prophete. And when he was come into the kynge, he made obeysaunce before the kynge vpon his face on the ground,
Ꟶ Nathan sayde: My Lorde (O kynge) hast thou sayd, Adonia shall raygne after me, Ꟶ he shall sytt vpon my seate?
For he is gone downe this daye, Ꟶ hath slayne many oxen, Ꟶ fat shepe, and hath called all the kynges sonnes, Ꟶ the captaynes of the host, Ꟶ Abiathar the preast. And beholde, they eate and dryncke before him, and saye: God saue kynge Adonia.
But me thy seruaunt, and Sadock the preast, and Banaiahu the sonne of Iehoiada, Ꟶ thy seruaunt Salomon hath he not called.
Is thys thynge done of my Lorde the kynge, Ꟶ thou hast not shewed it vnto thy seruaunt, who shulde sytt on the seate of my Lord the kyng after him?
Then kyng Dauid answered Ꟶ sayde: call me Bethsabe. And she came into the kynges presence, and stode before him.
And the kynge sware sayinge. As truly as the Lorde lyueth (that hath rydd my soule out of all aduersyte)
euen as I sware vnto the by the Lorde God of Israel, sayinge: Salomon thy sonne shall raygne after me, Ꟶ he shall syt vpon my seate for me, so will I do this daye.
Then Bethsabe bowed on her face to the erth, Ꟶ dyd reuerence vnto the kyng, Ꟶ sayde. I praye God that my Lorde kyng Dauid maye lyue euer.
And kyng Dauid sayde: call me Sadoch the preast, Ꟶ Nathan the prophet, and Banaiahu the sonne of Iehoiada. And they came before the kynge.
The kinge also sayde vnto them: take wt you the seruauntes of youre Lorde, Ꟶ set Salomon my sonne vpon myne awne Mule, Ꟶ carye him downe to Gihon.
And let Sadock the preast, Ꟶ Nathan the prophet anoynte him there, kynge ouer Israel. And blowe ye wt trompettes, Ꟶ saye: God saue kyng Salomon.
And then come vp after him, that he maye come and sytte vpon my seate. For he shalbe kynge in my steade. And I will commaunde him to be captayne ouer Israel and Iuda.
And Banaiahu the sonne of Iehoiada answered the kynge, Ꟶ sayde, Amen. I praye God that the Lorde God of my Lorde the kynge saye so to.
And as God hath bene with my Lorde the kynge, euen so be he with Salomon also, Ꟶ make his seate greater, then the seate of my Lorde kynge Dauids hath bene.
And so Sadock the preast, and Nathan the prophet, Ꟶ Banaiahu the sonne of Iehoiada, Ꟶ the Crethites and Phelethites went downe, Ꟶ sett Salomon vpon kynge Dauids Mule, and brought him to Gihon.
And Sadock the preast toke an horne of oyle out of the tabernacle, and anoynted Salomon. And all they of the people blewe trompettes, and sayde: God saue kynge Salomon.
And all the people cam vp after him, pyping with pipes and reioysynge greatlye, so that the erth range with the sounde of them.
And Adonia and all the gestes that he had called vnto him, hearde it, euen as they had made an ende of eatynge. And when Ioab hearde the sounde of the trompet, he sayde: howe happeneth it that there is soche a noyse in the cytie?
And as he yet spake: beholde, Ionathas the sonne of Abiathar the preast came. And Adonia sayde vnto him: come in, for thou art thou valeaunt man, and bryngest good tydynges.
And Ionathas answered Ꟶ sayd to Adonia: Uerely oure Lorde kynge Dauid hath made Salomon kyng.
And the kynge hath sent wt him, Sadock the preaste, Ꟶ Nathan the prophet, and Banaiahu the sonne of Iehoiada, and the Crethites, and the Phelethites, and they haue set him vpon the kynges mule.
And Sadock the preast, and Nathan the prophet haue anoynted hym kyng in Gihon. And they came vp agayne, and reioysed, that the cytie dyd sounde agayne. And that is the noyse, that ye haue hearde.
And Salomon sytteth on the seate of the kingdome.
And moreouer the kynges seruauntes came to blesse oure Lorde kinge Dauid, sayinge: thy God make the name of Salomon more honorable then thy name, and make hys seate greater then thy seate. And the kynge bowed hym selfe vpon the bedd.
And thus sayde the kynge: Blessed be the Lorde God of Israell: which hath made one to syt on my seate thys daye, myne eye seynge it.
And all the gestes that were with Adonia were afrayed, and rose vp, and went euery man hys waye.
And Adonia fearyng the presence of Salomon, arose, and went, and caught holde on the hornes of the aultare.
And one tolde Salomon, sayinge: beholde, Adonia doth feare kynge Salomon: for he hath caught holde on the hornes of the aultare, saying: let king Salomon swere vnto me thys daye that he wyll not sley his seruaunt with the swearde.
And Salomon sayde: yf he wyllbe a chylde of vertue, there shall not an heer of hym fall to the earth. But and yf wickednes be founde in him, he shall dye.
And so kynge Salomon sent, and they brought hym from the aultare. And he came, and dyd obeysaunce vnto kyng Salomon. And Salomon sayde vnto hym: gett the to thyne house.
The dayes of Dauid drewe nye that he shulde dye, and he charged Salomon hys sonne, sayinge.
I go the waye of all the worlde, be thou stronge therfore, and shewe thy selfe a man.
Kepe thou the watch of the Lorde thy God, that thou walke in hys wayes, and kepe his statutes, and his preceptes, hys iudgementes, and hys testimonyes, euen as it is wrytten in the lawe of Moses: that thou mayest prospere in all that thou doest, and in euery thynge that thou medlest withall.
That the Lorde also maye make good hys worde which he spake vnto me, sayinge: yf thy chyldren take heade to theyr waye, that they walke before me in truethe, with all their hertes, and with all their soules, then shalt thou not be without a man on the seat of Israell.
Moreouer, thou wottest howe Ioab the sonne of zaruia serued me, and what he dyd to that two captaynes of the hoostes of Israell: vnto Abner the sonne of Ner, and vnto Amasa the sonne of Iether: whom he slue and shed bloude in tyme of peace (euen as it had bene in warre) and put the bloude of warre vpon hys gyrdle that was about hys loynes, and in hys shoes that were on hys fete.
Deale with hym therfore accordynge to thy wysdome, and brynge not hys hoore heed downe to the graue in peace.
But shewe kyndnes vnto the sonnes of Berselai the Gileadite, that they maye eate at thy table. For they came to me, when I fled from Absalon thy brother.
And beholde, thou hast with the Semei the sonne of Gera, the sonne of Gemini, of Bahurim, which cursed me with an horryble curse, in the daye whan I went to Mahanahim. But he came to mete me at Iordan, and I sware to hym by the Lorde, sayinge: I wyll not sley the with the swearde:
But thou shalt not counte him as vngyltie. For thou art a man of wysdome, and knowest what thou oughtest to do vnto hym. His hoore heed shalt thou brynge to the graue with bloude.
And so Dauid slepte with hys fathers, and was buryed in the cytie of Dauid.
And the dayes which Dauid raygned vpon Israel, were fourtye yeares: seuen yeares raygned he in Hebron: and thirtye and thre yeares raygned he in Ierusalem.
Then satt Salomon vpon the seate of Dauid his father, Ꟶ his kyngdome was stablisshed mightely.
And Adonia the sonne of Hagith came to Bethsabe the mother of Salomon. And she sayde: Commest thou peaceably? And he sayde: peaceably.
He sayde moreouer: I haue somwhat to saye vnto the. She sayde: saye on.
And he sayde: thou knowest that the kyngdome was myne, and that all Israell set their faces on me, that I shulde raygne, howbeit, the kingdome is turned awaye, and geuen to my brother: for it is appoynted him of the Lorde:
and nowe I aske a peticion of the: denye me nott. And she sayde vnto him: Saye on.
And he sayde: speake, I praye the, vnto Salomon the kinge, for he will not saye the naye, that he geue me Abisag the Sunamite to wyfe.
And Bethsabe sayde: well, I will speake for the vnto the kinge.
Bethsabe therfore went vnto the kinge Salomon, to speake vnto him for Adonia. And the kinge rose vp to mete her, and bowed him selfe vnto her, and satt him downe on his seate. And there was a seate sett for the kinges mother, and she sat on his right syde.
Then she sayde: I desyre a lytell peticion of the, I praye the, saye me not naye. And the kynge sayde vnto her: Aske on, my mother: for I will not saye the naye.
She sayde: lett Abisag the Sunamite be geuen to Adonia thy brother to wyfe.
And kinge Salomon answered and sayde vnto his mother: why doest thou aske Abisag the Sunamite for Adonia? aske for him the kyngdome also: for he is myne elder brother, and hath for hym Abiathar the preaste and Ioab the sonne of zaruia.
Then kyng Salomon sware by the Lorde, sayinge: God do so, and so to me, yf Adonia haue not spoken this word agaynst his awne lyfe.
Nowe therfore, as trulye as the Lorde lyueth, which hath ordeyned me, and set me on the seate of Dauid my father, and made me an house, as he promised, Adonia shall dye thys daye.
And kyng Salomon sent by the hande of Banaiahu the sonne of Iehoiada, and he smote hym, that he dyed.
And vnto Abiathar the preste, sayde the kynge: get the to Anatoth vnto thyne awne feldes: for thou arte worthy of deeth: but I wyll not at this tyme kyll the, because thou barest the arcke of the Lorde God before Dauid my father, and because thou hast suffred with my father in all hys affliccyons.
And so Salomon put awaye Abiathar from being preste vnto the Lorde: that he myght fulfill the wordes of the Lord which he spake ouer the house of Eli in Silo.
Then tidynges came also to Ioab: for Ioab had turned after Adonia though he turned not after Absalom. And Ioab fled vnto the tabernacle of the Lorde, and caught holde on the hornes of the aultare.
And it was tolde kynge Salomon, howe that Ioab fled vnto the tabernacle of the Lorde, and stode by the aultare. Then Salomon sent Banaiahu the sonne of Iehoiada, sayinge: go and fall vpon him.
And Banaiahu came into the tabernacle of the Lord, and sayde vnto hym, Thus sayeth the kynge: come out. And he sayde: naye, but I will dye euen here. And Banaiahu brought the kynge worde agayne, saying: thus sayd Ioab, and thus he answered me.
And the kynge sayde. Do euen as he hath sayde: smyte hym, and burye hym, that thou mayest take awaye the bloude, which Ioab shed causelesse, from me, and from the house of my father.
And the Lorde shall bryng hys bloud vpon his awne heed, for he smote two men right wyser and better then he, and slue them with the swerde, my father Dauid not knowynge therof: euen Abner the sonne of Ner, captayne of the hoost of Israel, and Amasa the sonne of Iether captaine of the hoost of Iuda.
Theyr bloude shall therfore returne vpon the heed of Ioab, and on the heed of hys seed for euer. But vpon Dauid, and vpon his seed, and vpon hys house, and vpon hys seate shall there be peace for euer of the Lord.
So Banaiahu the sonne of Iehoiada went vp, and smote hym, and slue hym, and buryed hym in hys awne house in the wyldernesse.
And the kynge put Banaiahu the sonne of Iehoiada in hys rowme ouer the hoost and put Sadock the preste in the rowme of Abiathar.
And the kynge sente and called Semei, and sayde vnto hym: buylde the an house in Ierusalem, and dwell there: and se that thou go not forth thence any whether.
For be thou sure, that the daye that thou goest out, and passest ouer the ryuer of Cedron, thou shalte dye that daye, and thy bloude shalbe vpon thyne awne heade.
And Semei sayde vnto the kynge. Thys is a good thinge: as my Lorde the kynge hathe sayde: so wyll hys seruaunt do. And Semei dwelt in Ierusalem many a daye.
And it chaunced after thre yeres, that two of the seruauntes of Semei ranne away vnto Achis, sonne of Maacha king of Geth. And they tolde Semei, sayinge: beholde, thy seruauntes be in Geth.
And Semei stode vp, Ꟶ sadled hys asse, and gat hym to Geth to Achis, to seke hys seruauntes, and returned, and brought hys seruauntes agayne from Geth.
And it was tolde Salomon, howe that Semei hathe gone from Ierusalem to geth, and was come agayne.
And the kynge sent, and called Semei, and sayd vnto hym: Dyd I not charge the by the Lorde with an othe, and testifyed vnto the, sayinge: be sure, that whensoeuer thou goest out, and walkest abroade any whether, thou shalt dye the deeth? And thou saydest vnto me: it is good tidynges that I haue hearde.
Why then hast thou not kept the othe of the Lorde, and the commaundement that I charged the withall?
The kynge sayde moreouer to Semei: thou remembrest all the wyckednesse which thyne hert knoweth, and that thou dyddest to Dauid my father. The Lorde also shall brynge thy wyckednesse vpon thyne awne heed:
and kyng Salomon shalbe blessed, and the seat of Dauid stablysshed before the Lord for euer.
So the kynge commaunded Banaiahu the sonne of Iehoiada: which went out, and smote hym that he dyed: And the kyngdome was stablysshed in the hande of Salomon.
Salomon made affinite with Pharao kynge of Egypt, Ꟶ toke Pharaos daughter, and brought her into the cytie of Dauid, vntyll he had made an ende of buyldinge his awne house, Ꟶ the house of the Lord, and the wall of Ierusalem rounde about.
Onely the people sacrificed in aultars made on hylles, because there was no house buylte vnto the name of the Lord, vntill those dayes.
And Salomon loued the Lorde, and walked in the ordynaunces of Dauid hys father, saue onely that he sacrificed and offered incense vpon aultares in hylles.
And the kyng went to Gibeon, to offer there: for that was a speciall offerynge place. A thousand burnt offeringes dyd Salomon offre vpon that aultare:
and in Gibeon the Lorde apeared to Salomon in a dreame by nyght. And God sayde: aske what thou wylt, that I maye geue it the.
And Salomon sayde: thou haste shewed vnto thy seruaunt Dauid my father great mercy, when he walked before the in trueth, in ryghtewesnes, Ꟶ in playnesse of hert with the. And thou hast kepte for hym this greate mercy, that thou hast geuen hym a sonne, to sytt on hys seate: as it is come to passe thys daye.
And nowe, O Lord my God, it is thou that hast made thy seruaunt kynge in steade of Dauid my father, And I am but yonge, and wote not howe to go out and in.
And thy seruaunt is in the myddes of thy people, which thou haste chosen. And verely, the people are so manye, that they cannot be tolde nor nombred for multitude.
Geue therfore vnto thy seruaunt an vnderstandynge hert, to iudge thy people, that I maye decerne betwene good and bad. For who is able to iudge thys, thy so myghtye a people?
And thys pleased the Lorde well, that Salomon had desyred thys thynge.
And God sayde vnto him: because thou hast asked this thynge, and hast not asked longe lyfe, nether hast asked ryches, nor the soule of thyne enemyes, but hast asked vnderstandynge and discrecyon in iudgement.
Beholde, I haue done accordynge to thy peticyon. For I haue geuen the a wyse and an vnderstandynge herte, so that there was none like the before the, nether after the shal eny aryse lyke vnto the.
And I haue also geuen the, that which thou hast not asked, euen rychesse and honoure, so that there shalbe no kynge lyke vnto the all thy dayes.
And yf thou wylt walke in my wayes, to kepe myne ordinaunces and my commaundmentes, as thy father Dauid dyd walke, I will lengthen thy dayes. When Salomon awoke, behold, it was a dreame.
And he came to Ierusalem and stode before the arck of the testament of the Lorde, and offered burntofferynges and peace offerynges, and made a feaste to all his seruauntes.
Then came there two wemen, that were harlottes, vnto the kynge. and stode before hym.
And the one woman sayde: Oh my Lorde, I and thys woman dwell in one house. And I was delyuered of a chyld with her in the house.
And the thyrde daye after that I was delyuered, she was delyuered also: and we were together, and no straunger with vs in the house, saue we two.
And thys wyues chyde dyed in the nyght, for she smothered it.
And she rose at mydnyght, and toke my sonne from my syde, whyle thyne handemayde slepte, and layde it in her bosome, and putt her deed chylde in my bosome.
And when I rose vp to geue my chylde sucke: beholde, it was deed. But whan I had loked vpon it in the mornynge, beholde, it was not my sonne, which I dyd beare.
The other woman sayde: it is not so: but my sonne lyueth, and thy sonne is deed. And she sayde agayne: No, but thy sonne is deed, and my sonne is alyue. And thus they pleated before the kynge.
Then sayde the kyng: the one sayth, this that is alyue is my sonne: and the deed is thyne. And the other saythe, naye: but thy sonne is the deed, Ꟶ the lyuinge chylde is myne,
And the kynge sayde: bryng me a swearde. And they brought out a swearde before the kynge.
And the kynge sayde. Deuyde the lyuinge chylde in two, and geue the one halfe to the one, and the other to the other.
Then spake the woman, whose the lyuynge chylde was, vnto the kynge, for her bowelles yerned vpon her sonne, and sayde: I beseche the my Lorde, geue her the lyuyng chylde, and in no wyse sleye it. But the other sayd: let it be nether myne nor thyne, but deuyde it.
Then the kynge answered and sayd: geue her the lyuing chylde, and sley it not: for she is the mother therof.
And all they of Israel hearde of the iudgement, which the kynge hath iudged, and feared the kynge: for they sawe that the wysdome of God was in hym, to do iustice.
And so kynge Salomon was kinge ouer all Israel.
And these were hys lordes. Azariahu the sonne of Sadock the prest.
Elihoreph and Ahiah the sonnes of Sisa, scrybes. Iehosaphath the sonne of Ahilud, the recorder.
Banaiahu the sonne of Iehoiada was ouer the hooste. And Sadock and Abiathar were the preastes.
And Azariahu the sonne of Nathan was ouer the officiers. And zabud the sonne of Nathan was a preste, the kynges companyon.
And Ahisar stewarde of housholde. And Adoniram the sonne of Abda was ouer the trybutes.
And Salomon had twelue officiers ouer all Israel, which prouyded vitayle for the kynge and his housholde: eche man hys moneth in a yeare, made prouision for necessary thinges.
And these are theyr names: the sonne of Hur in mount Ephraim:
the sonne of Dekar in Makaz, and in Saalbin Ꟶ Bethsames, Elon and Bethhanan:
the sonne of Hesed in Aruboth, to whom perteyned Socho and all the land of Hepher:
the sonne of Abinadab in all the region of Dor, which had Tapheth the daughter of Salomon to wyfe:
Baana the sonne of Ahilud was ouer Chanach Ꟶ Magiddo, Ꟶ ouer all Bethsan, which is by zarthana beneth Iezrael, from Bethsan to the playne of Mehola, euen vnto the place that is ouer agaynst Iechmeam:
the sonne of Gaber had Ramoth Gilead, Ꟶ his were the townes of Iair: the sonne of Manasse, which are in Gilead, Ꟶ vnder him was the region of Argob which is in Basan thre skore greate cyties with walles and barres of brasse.
Ahinadab the sonne of Hiddo had Mahenaim.
Ahimaaz was in Nephthalim, and he toke Basmath the daughter of Salomon to wyfe.
Baana the sonne of Husai was in Aser Ꟶ in Aloth.
Iehosaphat the sonne of Paruah was in Isachar.
Semei the sonne of Ela was in Beniamin.
Gaber the sonne of Ury was in the countrey of Gilead, the lande of Sehon kyng of the Amorites, Ꟶ of Og king of Basan, and was officer alone in the lande.
And Iuda and Israel were many, euen as the sand of the see in nombre, eatyng, drynckyng Ꟶ making mery.
And Salomon raygned ouer all kyngdoms, from the ryuer vnto the lande of the Philistines: euen vnto the border of Egypt, and they brought presentes, and serued Salomon all the dayes of hys lyfe.
And Salomons breed for one daye was .xxx. quarters of manchet floure, and thre skore quarters of meale:
ten stalled oxen, and .xx. out of the pastures, and a hundred shepe, besyde hertes, buckes, and wilde goates and capons.
For he ruled in all the region on the other side Euphrates, from Thiphsah to Aza; ouer all the kynges on the other syde the ryuer. And he had peace with all hys seruauntes on euery syde.
And Iuda and Israel dwelt without feare, euery man vnder hys vyne and vnder hys fygg tre, from Dan to Beerseba, all the dayes of Salomon.
And Salomon had .xl.M. stalles of horses for charrettes, and .xij.M. horsmen.
And the officers prouyded vytayle for kyng Salomon and for all that came out of any place to kynge Salomons table, euery man hys moneth, so that there lacked nothyng.
Barlye also and straw for the horses and mules, brought they vnto the place where the offycers were, euery man in hys offyce.
And God gaue Salomon wysdome and vnderstandynge exceadynge moche, and a large hert, euen as the sand that is on the see shore:
and Salomons wysdome excelled the wysdome of all the chyldren of the east contrey, and all the wysdome of Egipt.
For he was wyser then all men, yee then, Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, Chalcol, Ꟶ Darda the sonnes of Mahol. And his name was spoken of thorowe out all nacyons on euery syde.
And Salomon spake thre thousand prouerbes. And his songes were a thousand and fyue.
And he spake of trees, euen from the Cedar tre that groweth in Libanon, vnto the Isope that spryngeth out of the wall. He spake also of beastes, of foules, of wormes, and of fysshes.
And there came of all nacyons to heare the wysdome of Salomon, and from all kynges of the earth, which had hearde of hys wysdome.
And Hiram kinge of Tire sent his seruauntes vnto Salomon, for he had heard, that they had anoynted hym kynge in the rowme of hys father. For Hiram was euer a louer of Dauid.
And Salomon sent to Hiram, saying:
thou knowest how that Dauid my father coulde not builde an house vnto the name of the Lorde hys God, for the warres which were aboute him on euery side, vntyll the Lorde putt them vnder the soles of hys fete.
But nowe the Lorde my God hath geuen me rest on euery syde, so that there is nether aduersarye, nor anye euyll plage.
And behold, I am determined to buyld an house vnto the name of the Lorde my God, as the Lorde spake vnto Dauid my father sayinge: thy sonne whom I wyll set vpon thy seate for the, he shall buylde an house vnto my name.
Nowe therfore, commaunde thou that they hewe me Cedar trees out of Libanon. And my seruauntes shalbe with thyne, and vnto the, wyll I geue the hyre for thy seruauntes, accordynge to all soche thynges as thou shalt appoynte, for thou knowest that ther are not amonge vs, that can skyll to hewe tymber, lyke vnto the Sidones.
Whan Hiram heard the wordes of Salomon, he reioysed greatly, Ꟶ sayd. Blessed be the Lord this daye which hath geuen vnto dauid a wyse sonne ouer this myghty people.
And Hiram sent to Salomon, saying: I haue consydred the thynges which thou sentest to me for: Ꟶ will accomplysh all thy desyre, concerning tymbre of Cedar trees and fyrre.
My seruauntes shall bryng them from Libanon to the see. And I will conuey them by ship vnto the place that thou shalt shewe me: Ꟶ wyll cause them to be discharged there, and thou shalt receaue them. And thou shalt do me a pleasure agayne yf thou minystre fode for myne house.
And so Hiram gaue Salomon cedar trees Ꟶ firre trees, accordyng to all hys desyre.
And Salomon gaue Hiram .xx.M. quarters of whete for fode to his housholde, and twentye buttes of pure oyle. Thus much gaue Salomon to Hiram yeare by yeare.
And the Lorde gaue Salomon wisdome as he promised him. And ther was peace betwene Hiram and Salomon: Ꟶ they two were confedered together.
And king Salomon reysed a some out of all Israel. And the some was thirtye thousande men,
whom he sent to Libanon .x.M. a moneth by coursse, so that when they had bene one moneth in Libanon, they abode two monethes at home. And Adoniram was ouer the some.
And Salomon had thre score and ten thousande that bare burthens, and foure score thousand masons in the mountaynes,
besydes the lordes, whom Salomon appoynted to ouer se the worke, euen thre thousand and thre hundred, which ruled the people that wrought in the worke.
And the kynge commaunded them to bryng great stones, weighty stones and hewed stones for the foundacion of the house.
And Salomons masons and the masons of Hiram dyd hewe them, wt the workmen of the corners. And so they prepared both tymbre Ꟶ stones for the buildyng of the house.
And it came to passe that in the .iiij.C. and .lxxx. yere (after the children of Israel were come out of the land of Egipt) and the .iiij. yere of the raygne of Salomon vpon Israel: and in the moneth ziff, which is the .ij. moneth, he beganne to buylde the house of the Lord.
And the house which Salomon buylt for the Lorde, was .lx. cubytes longe, and .xx. cubytes broade, and .xxx. cubites hye.
And he made a porche before the body of the temple, which was .xx. cubytes long after the bredth of the house, and .x. cubites broade, euen in the forefront of the house.
And in the house he made wyndowes broade without, and narowe within.
And in the wall of the house, he made chambers rounde about, (euen in the walles of the house) rounde about the temple Ꟶ the queer: and made sydes rounde about.
The nethermost chamber was fyue cubytes broad, and the myddle was syxe cubytes broade, Ꟶ the thyrd was seuen cubites broad. For without in the wall of the house he layed beames round about, that the beames of the chambers shuld not be fastened in the walles of the house.
And the house was buylt of stone, made perfecte allready before it was brought thyther, so that there was neither hammer, ner axe, ether any tole of yron heard in the house, whyle it was in buyldinge.
The dore of the myddle chambre was in the ryght syde of the house: and men went vp wt windyng stayres into the myddle chambre, and out of the myddle, into the thyrde.
And so he buylte the house and fynysshed it, and roufft it with beames of Cedar timber.
And then he buylt chambers to all the temple, of fyue cubytes heygth, and they were ioyned to the house with beames of Cedar.
And the worde of the Lorde came to Salomon, saying:
concernynge the house which thou arte in buyldynge, yf thou wylt walke in myne ordinaunces, and execute my lawes, and kepe my commaundementes, to walke in them: then wyll I make good vnto the my promes, which I promysed Dauid thy father.
And I wyll dwell amonge the chyldren of Israel, and will not forsake my people Israel.
Salomon therfore built the house and fynysshed it,
and syled the walles of the house within, wt borders of Cedar tree: euen from the pauement of the house vnto the rouffe dyd he syle the walles of it within, with Cedar tre: and borded the floure of the house wt planckes of fyrre.
And he syled .xx. cubytes in the sydes of the queer of the temple, both floore Ꟶ walles with bordes of Cedar, Ꟶ dressed it within in the secrete place of the temple, euen in the moost holye.
And the fyrst house, that is to saye, the body of the temple without, was fourtye cubites longe.
And the Cedar of the house within, was kerued with knoppes, Ꟶ grauen with floures, and all was Cedar timber, so that no stone was sene.
And the queer that was within the temple, he prepared, to set there the arcke of the appoyntement of the Lorde:
And the queer before was twentye cubites longe, and twenty cubites in bredth, and twentye cubytes in heygth. And he syled it with pure golde, and borded the aultare with Cedar.
And Salomon also syled the house within with pure golde. And he made golden barres runne alonge the queer, which he had couered with golde.
And the whole house, he ouerlayd with golde vntyll he had ended it. And the aultare that was in the queer he ouerlayde with golde also.
And within the queer he made .ij. Cherubins of olyue tree, ten cubytes hye.
Fyue cubytes longe was a wynge of the one Cherub, and fyue cubites longe was a winge of the other Cherub: so that from the vttermost parte of one wyng vnto the vttermost part of the other, were ten cubites.
And the other Cherub was ten cubites hye also, so that both the Cherubes were of one measure Ꟶ one syse.
For the heigth of the one Cherub was ten cubites, and so was it of the other. And he put the Cherubes within the ynner house.
And the Cherubes stretched out their winges, so that the one winge of the one touched the one wall, and the one winge of the other touched the other wall. And the other two winges of them touched one another in the myddes of the house.
And he ouerlayed the Cherubs with golde.
And in all the walles of the house round about, he made fygures of carued and syled worke: as namely, pictures of Cherubs and Palmetrees and grauen floures, both within in the queer, Ꟶ without in the temple.
And the floure of the house he couered with golde both within in the queer and also without in the temple.
And in the enteryng of the queer he made two dores of Olyue tree. And both the vpper Ꟶ two syde postes were .v. square. The two dores also were of Oliue tree,
and he graued them with grauynge of Cherubs and Palmetrees, and grauen floures, Ꟶ couered them with gold, and layed thinne plates of golde vpon the Cherubs and Palmetrees.
And in like maner dyd he in the dore of the temple, sauynge that the postes were of Oliuetre fouresquare.
The two dores were of fyrre tree: and eyther dore with two folding leaues,
he graued theron Cherubs Palmetrees, and flours: and couered them with golde, which was layed thynne vpon the carued worke.
And he buylt the ynner court wt thre rowes of hewed stone, and one rowe of Cedar wodde.
In the fourth yere was the foundacion of the house of the Lorde layed: euen in the moneth ziff.
And in the eleuenth yere in the moneth Bull, which is the eyght moneth, was the house full fynisshed thorowout all the partes therof, and accordynge to all the fasshyon of it. And so was he seuen yere in buyldynge it.
But Salomon was buyldyng his awne house thirtene yere, Ꟶ finysshed it all.
And he buylt the house in the wodd of Libanon, an hundred cubytes longe, and fyftye cubytes broad, Ꟶ .xxx. cubytes hye. And it stode vpon foure rowes of Cedar pyllars, and Cedar beames were layed vpon the pyllers.
And the rouffe was Cedar aboue vpon the beames, that laye on the pyllers: euen fyue and fourtye beames in fyftene rowes.
And there were wyndowes in thre rowes: and the wyndowes were one agaynst another thre folde.
And the dores with the syde postes, and the vpperposte were fouresquare, and had windowes one agaynst another thre folde.
And he made a porch by the pillars, that bare vp the house .l. cubites longe, and .xxx. cubites broad: Ꟶ that porch was before those Ꟶ the other pillers. For there was a thick tree set before them.
Then he made a porche to syt a iudge in, syled with Cedar thorowout all the pauementes.
And hys awne house (that he kept residence in: Ꟶ that was in another courte without the porch) was made of that same worcke. And then Salomon made an house for Pharaos daughter whom he had taken to wyfe, lyke vnto the fasshion of that porche.
And all these were of the best stones, hewed after a measure, and sawed wt sawes within and without, from the foundacion vnto the beames that laye aboue, after the measure, Ꟶ euen so on the outsyde towarde the great court.
And the foundacyon was layed vpon rych stones Ꟶ the very great stones: wherof some were .x. cubites, Ꟶ some .viij. cubites.
And aboue were good stones squared after a certayn rule, Ꟶ couered wt Cedar.
And the great court round about was wt thre rowes of hewed stone, Ꟶ one rowe of Cedar planckes, after the maner of the ynner court of the house of the Lorde, Ꟶ of the porch of the temple.
And kyng Salomon sent and fett one Hiram out of Tire,
a wedowes sonne of the tribe of Nephtalim, his father beyng a man of Tire. Which Hiram was a craftes man in brasse full of wysdome, vnderstandynge and connynge: to worke all maner of worcke in brasse. And he came to king Salomon, Ꟶ wrought all his worcke.
For he cast two pillers of brasse of .xviij. cubites hye a pece, Ꟶ a stringe of .xij. cubites dyd compasse ether them about.
And he made .ij. heed peces of molten brasse (after the fasshion of a crowne) to sett on the toppes of the pyllers. The heigth of the one heed pece conteined .v. cubites, Ꟶ the heigth of the other heed pece conteyned .v. cubites also:
he made also net worck Ꟶ garlandes of cheyne worcke, vpon the heed peces that were on the top of the pyllers, euen seuen rowes vpon the one heed pece, and seuen vpon the other.
And so he made the pyllers, and two rowes round about, in the one wrethen worcke, to couer the heed peces that were vpon the pomgranates. And thus dyd he also for the other heed pece.
And the heed peces that were on the toppes of the pillers, couered he aboue with a curyous worke of roses: towarde the palace by the space of .iiij. cubytes.
Likewyse, vnder the heed peces in those .ij. pillers beneth, oueragainst the middes Ꟶ before the net worke. And vpon the seconde heed pece were ther .ij.C. pomgranates in two rowes round about.
And he set vp the pillers in the porch of the temple. And when he had set vp the rightpiller, he called the name therof Ioachim: Ꟶ whan he had set vp the left piller, he called the name therof Boaz.
And in the toppe of the pyllers was a worke of roses, and so was the workmanshyp of the pyllers finyshed.
And he made a molten lauatory, ten cubytes wyde from brym to brym, round in compasse, Ꟶ .v. cubytes hye. And a stryng of thirtye cubytes dyd compasse it about:
and vnder the brym of it, there were knoppes round about, ten in one cubite: and they compassed the lauatory round about. And the knoppes were cast wt it, in two rowes, when it was caste.
And it stode on twelue oxen: of which thre loked toward the north .iij. towarde the west .iij. towarde the south, Ꟶ .iij. toward the east. and the lauatory stode vpon them, Ꟶ all theyr hinderpartes were inward.
It was an hand breadeth thycke, Ꟶ the brym wrought lyke the brim of a cup wt floures of lylies. And it conteyned two thousande bates.
And he made .x. sokettes of brasse .iiij. cubites longe, and .iiij. cubites broade a pece, Ꟶ .iij. cubites hye.
And the worke of the sokettes was on this maner. They had sides, and the sydes were betwene the ledges.
And on the sydes that were betwene the ledges, were lyons, oxen and cherubs. And lykewyse, vpon the ledges that were aboue: and beneth the lyons and oxen were certayne addicions made of thynne worke.
And vnder euery soket, were foure brasen wheles, and bordes of brasse. And in the foure corners therof, were vndersetters vnder the lauatorye, cast eche oueragaynst hys felowe.
And the stalke of the lauatory was in the myddle of it, one cubite hye, and a cubite and an halfe rounde: and in the heigth of it were grauen workes, whose sydes were made foursquare, and not rounde.
And vnder the sydes were .iiij. wheles: and the axeltrees ioyned fast to the bottome. And the heygth of euery whele was a cubyte and an halfe.
And the workmanshyp of the wheles was lyke the worke of a charret whele. And the axeltrees, the nauelles, spokes and shaftes were all molten:
And there were foure vndersetters in the .iiij. corners of one socket: and the vndersetters were of the very bottome selfe.
And in the heygth of the bottome was there round compasse of a cubite hye: and in that heygth of the bottome, there proceaded both ledges Ꟶ sydes out of the same.
For in the bordes of the ledges, and on the sydes, he had grauen pyctures of cherubins, lyons and palmetrees, one by an other rounde aboute.
Thus made he the ten sockettes after this maner. And they had all one fashion of castyng: one measure, and one sise.
Then made he .x. lauers of brasse, one lauer conteyning .xl. bates: and one lauer was foure cubytes, and vpon euery one of the ten sockettes, he put one lauer.
And he put fyue of those sockettes on the right side of the house and other fyue on the lefte. And he set the lauatorye on the ryght syde of the house eastwarde and towarde the south.
And Hiram made pottes, shouels and basens, and so finyshed all the worke that he made kyng Salomon for the house of the Lorde:
that is to saye, two pillers, two round heed peces, that were to be sett on the toppes of the two pillers .ii. net workes to couer the two round heed peces set vpon the toppes of the pyllers,
and .iiij.C. pomgranates for the two net workes, euen two rowes of pomgranates in one net worke, to couer the two heed peces that were to be sett on the toppes of the pyllers.
And the ten sockettes, and ten lauers on the sockettes.
The lauatory and .xij. oxen vnder it:
and pottes, shouelles and basens. And all these vessels which Hiram made to kyng Salomon for the house of the Lord, were of bright brasse.
In the playne of Iordan did the king cast them: euen in the thycke claye betwene Sococh and zarthan.
And Salomon left all the vessels vnwayed, because they were so exceadyng many, neyther founde they oute the weyght of the brasse.
And so Salomon made all the vessels that pertayned vnto the house of the Lorde: the golden aulter and the golden table, wheron the shewe bread was.
And fyue candelstyckes, for the ryght syde, and fyue for the lefte before the queer of pure golde: with floures,
lampes, and snoffers of golde: Ꟶ boules, flat peces, basons, spones and masoures of pure golde: and hindges made he of golde for the dores of the queer, the place moost holy, and for the dores of the temple also.
And so was ended all the worke that kyng Salomon made for the house of the Lorde. And Salomon brought in the thinges which Dauid his father had dedicated: euen the siluer, golde, Ꟶ vessels: and layed them vp amonge the treasures of the house of the Lorde.
Then Salomon gathred together the elders of Israel, all the heades of the tribes, and them that were captaynes among the father of the children of Israel, vnto him in Ierusalem, that they might bryng vp the arck of the appointement of the Lorde out of the citye of Dauid, which is Syon.
And all the men of Israel assembled vnto kynge Salomon to the festae that falleth in the monethe Ethanim, which is the seuenth moneth.
And all the elders of Israel were come and the preastes toke vp the arck.
They bare the arck of the Lord into the tabernacle of witnes, and all the holy vessels that were in the tabernacle: those dyd the prestes and the Leuites beare.
And kyng Salomon and all the congregacion of Israel that were assembled vnto hym, and went wyth hym before the arcke, dyd offer shepe and oxen, that coulde not be tolde nor nombred for multitude.
And so the prestes brought the arcke of the appoyntement of the Lorde vnto his place: euen into the queer of the temple Ꟶ place most holy, vnder the winges of the cherubs.
For the cherubs stretched out their winges ouer the place of the arck, Ꟶ couered both it Ꟶ also the staues therof a hie vpon it.
And they drewe out the staues, that the endes of them myght appeare out of the holy place within the queer: but they were not sene wt out. And there they haue bene vnto this daye:
and ther was nothyng in the arcke, saue the two tables of stone, which Moses put there at Horeb, in the which tables the Lord made an apoyntement with the chyldren of Israel, when he brought them out of the lande of Egypt.
And it fortuned that when the prestes were come out of the holy place, the cloude fylled the house of the Lorde,
that the preastes coulde not stande and minister, because of the cloude: for the glory of the Lord had fylled the house of the Lorde.
Then spake Salomon: the Lorde sayde: that he wolde dwell in the darck cloude.
I haue built the an house to dwell in an habitacion for the, to abyde in for euer.
And the kyng turned his face, and blessed all the congregacyon of Israel: and all the congregacion of Israel stode styll.
And he sayd: Blessed be the Lorde God of Israel, which spake wt hys mouth vnto Dauid my father, and hath wt his hande fulfylled it, saying:
Sens the daye that I brought my people Israel out of Egipt, I chose no cytie of all the trybes of Israel, to buylde an house, that my name myght be therin. But I haue chosen Dauid to be ruler ouer my people Israel.
And it was in the herte of Dauid my father to builde an house for the name of the Lord God of Israel.
And the Lord sayd vnto Dauid my father. Where as it was thyne herte to buylde an house vnto my name, thou diddest well, that thou was so mynded.
Neuerthelesse thou shalt not buylde the house, but thy sonne that shall come out of thyne loynes, he shall buyld the house vnto my name.
And the Lord hath made good his worde that he spake. And I am rysen vp in the rowme of Dauid my father, and sytt on the seate of Israel as the Lorde promised and haue buylt an house for the name of the Lorde God of Israel.
And I haue prepared therin a place for the arcke wherin is the couenaunt of the Lorde, which he made with our fathers, when he brought them out of the lande of Egypte,
Salomon stode before the aultare of the Lorde in the syght of all the congregacyon of Israel, and stretched out hys handes towarde heauen,
and sayde: Lorde God of Israel, ther is no God like the in heauen aboue, or in the earth beneth, thou that kepest couenaunt and mercy for thy seruauntes that walke before the with all their hert:
thou that hast kept with thy seruaunt Dauid my father, that thou promysedest hym. Thou spakest also with thy mouth, and hast fulfilled it wt thyne hande, as it is come to passe this daye.
Therfore nowe Lorde God of Israel kepe with thy seruaunt Dauid my father that thou promysedest hym, saying: thou shalt not be without a man in my syght to syt in the seate of Israel: so that thy children take hede to their waye, that they walke before me as thou hast walked in my syght.
And nowe, O God of Israel, let thy worde be verifyed, which thou spakest vnto thy seruaunt Dauid my father.
Will God in dede dwell on the erth? Beholde the heauens, and heauens of all heauens are not able to conteyne the. And howe shulde than this house do it, that I haue builded?
Haue thou therfore respect vnto the prayer of thy seruaunt, and to hys supplicacyon, O Lorde my God, to heare the voyce and prayer before the this daye:
that thyne eyes maye be open towarde this house, night and daye, euen toward this place, of which thou hast sayde: My name shal be there. That thou mayest herken vnto the prayer which thy seruaunt praieth in this place.
And regarde thou, the supplicacion of thy seruaunt Ꟶ of thy people Israel, when they praye in this place. And heare thou in heauen thy dwellynge place, Ꟶ when thou hearest, haue mercy.
Yf any man trespace against his neyghbour, and there go an oth betwene them, and the one compelled the other, and come swearyng before thyne aulter in this house,
then herken thou in heauen, and worke and iudge thy seruauntes, that thou condempne the vngodly to bryng hys waye vpon his head, and iustifye the righteous to geue hym accordyng to hys ryghteousnesse.
When thy people Israel be put to the worse before the enemye, because they haue synned agaynst the: and afterwarde turne agayne to the, and knowledge vnto thy name, and praye and make intercession vnto the in thys house:
then heare thou in heauen, to be mercyfull vnto the synne of the people Israel, Ꟶ brynge them agayne into the lande, which thou gauest vnto their fathers.
If heauen be shut vp, Ꟶ there be no rayne because they haue synned agaynst the: yet yf they praye in thys place, Ꟶ knowledge vnto thy name, Ꟶ turne from their synne, thorow thy scourgynge of them:
then heare thou in heauen, and be mercyfull of thy seruauntes and of thy people Israel, that thou shewe them a good waye to walke in, and geue rayne vpon thy londe that thou hast geuen vnto thy people to enheret.
If there be in the lande derth, or pestilence, drouth, blastynge, greshopper or caterpiller, or yf theyr enemye besege them in the lande of theyr cyties, or whatsoeuer plage or sycknesse chaunce:
then what prayers Ꟶ supplicacyon soeuer be made of any man of all thy people Israel, which shall knowledge euery man the plage of his awne hert, and stretche forth hys handes to warde thys house:
heare thou then in heauen, euen in thy dwellynge place, and be mercyfull, and worke, and geue euery man accordinge to all hys wayes (euen as thou that only knowest his hert, for thou onely knowest the hertes of all the chyldren of men:)
that they maye feare the as longe as they lyue in the lande, which thou gauest vnto oure fathers.
And lykewyse, yf a straunger that is not of thy people Israel come out of a farre contrey for thy names sake,
for they shall heare of thy greate name, Ꟶ of thy myghtie hande and of thy stretched out arme Ꟶ shall come and praye in thys house.
Therfore, heare thou in heauen thy dwellynge place, and do all that the straunger calleth to the for: that all nacions of the erth maye knowe thy name and feare the, as do thy people Israel: and that they maye knowe that thy name is called vpon in thys house whych I haue buylte.
Yf thy people go out to batell agaynst their enemye, whether soeuer thou shalt sende them and shal praye vnto the, (O Lord) to warde the waye of the cytie whyche thou hast chosen, and towarde the house that I haue buylte for thy name:
heare thou in heauen theyr prayer and supplicacion, and iudge their cause.
Yf they synne aganst the (for there is no man that synneth not) and thou be angrie with them, and delyuer them into the hande of theyr enemyes: so that they carye them awaye prysoners vnto the lande of theyr enemyes, whether farre or neare,
yet yf they turne agayne vnto theyr hertes in the lande (to the whych they be caryed awaye captyue,) and returne and praye vnto the in the lande of theyr enemyes, saying: we haue synned, we haue done wyckedlye, and haue committed vngodlynesse,
and so turne agayne vnto the with all theyr herte, and all theyr soule in the lande of their enemies, which led them awaye captyue, and praye vnto the toward the waye of theyr lande, whych thou gauest vnto theyr fathers, and towarde the cytie, which thou hast chosen, Ꟶ towarde the house which I haue buylt for thy name:
then heare thou theyr prayer and supplicacyon in heauen thy dwellynge place, Ꟶ iudge theyr cause:
and be mercyfull vnto thy people, that haue synned agaynst the, and vnto all theyr iniquyties, wherby they haue done wyckedly agaynst the, and get thou them the fauoure of those which led them awaye captyue, that they maye haue compassyon on them.
For they be thy people, and thyne enherytaunce, which thou broughtest out of Egypte, euen from the myddes of the fornace of yron.
And let thyne eyes be open vnto the prayer of thy seruaunt, and vnto the prayer of thy people Israel to herken vnto them, in all that they call for vnto the.
For thou dyddest seperat them, from amonge all the nacyons of the erth, (to be thyne owne enheritaunce) as thou saydest by the hande of Moses thy seruaunt, when thou broughtest oure fathers oute of Egipte O Lorde God.
And when Salomon had made an ende of prayinge all thys prayer and supplicacyon vnto the Lorde, he arose from before the aultare of the Lorde, and from knelynge on hys knees, and from stretchynge of his handes vp to heauen,
an stode and blessed all the congregacion of Israel with a loude voyce, saying.
Blessed be the Lorde, that hath geuen reste vnto hys people Israel, accordyng to all that he promised, there hath not fayled one word of all the good promyse, whych he promysed by the hande of Moses hys seruaunt.
The Lorde oure God be with vs, as he was with oure fathers, and forsake vs not,
nether leaue vs: but that he may bowe oure hertes vnto him, that we maye walcke in all his wayes and kepe hys commaundementes hys statutes and hys lawes, whyche he commaunded oure fathers.
And these my wordes whych I haue prayed before the Lorde, be nye vnto the Lorde oure God daye and nyght, that he defende the cause of his seruaunt, and the cause of hys people Israel (what thynge soeuer chaunce at any tyme)
that all nacyons of the erth maye knowe, that the Lord is God, and none but he.
Let youre herte therfore be perfecte with the Lord oure God, that ye walke in hys statutes, and kepe hys commaundementes, as thys daye.
And the kynge and all Israel with hym, offered offerynges before the Lorde.
And Salomon offered a sacrifyce of peace offeringes vnto the Lorde, and he offered vnto the Lorde .xxii. thousande oxen and an hundred Ꟶ twenty thousande shepe. And so the kynge Ꟶ all the chyldren of Israel dedicated the house of the Lorde.
The same daye dyd the kynge halowe the myddel of the courte, that was before the house of the Lorde: for there he offered burnt offerynges, meate offerynges and the fat of the peace offeringes: because the brasen aultare that was before the Lord, was to lytle to receaue the burnt offeringes, meate offerynges, and the fatt of the peace offerynges.
And Salomon helde that same tyme an hye feast Ꟶ all Israel with hym, a very great congregacyon, euen from the entrynge in of Hemath vnto the ryuer of Egypt, before the Lorde oure God, seuen dayes Ꟶ seuen dayes euen .xiiii. dayes.
And the eyght daye he sent the people awaye. And they blessed the kyng and went vnto theyr tentes ioyous and with glad herte, because of all the goodnesse that the Lorde had done for Dauid his seruaunt, and for Israel hys people.
And when Salomon had fynysshed the buyldynge of the house of the Lorde and the kynges palace, Ꟶ all that he had in hys mynde, and was apoynted to make:
the Lorde appered vnto hym agayne, as he appered to hym at Gibeon.
And the Lorde sayde vnto hym: I haue hearde thy prayer and thy intercessyon, that thou hast made before me. For I haue halowed this house (which thou hast buylte) to put my name ther for euer, and myne eyes and myne herte shalbe there perpetuallye.
And yf thou wylt walcke before me (as Dauid thy father walcked, in purenesse of herte and in ryghteousnesse) to do all that I haue commaunded the, and wylt kepe my statutes, Ꟶ my lawes,
then wyll I stablysshe the seate of thy kyngdome vpon Israel for euer, as I promysed to Dauid thy father sayinge. Thou shalt not be without a man vpon the seate of Israel.
But and yf ye and youre chyldren turne awaye from me, and wyll not kepe my commaundementes and my statutes (whyche I haue set before you) but go and serue other Goddes, and worshyppe them:
then wyll I wede Israel oute of the lande, whych I haue geuen them. And thys house whych I haue halowed for my name, wyll I cast oute of my syght. And Israel shalbe a prouerbe and a fable amonge all nacyons.
And thys house shalbe taken awaye: so that euery one that passeth by it, shalbe astonyed, and shall hysse, and they shall saye: why hath the Lorde done thus vnto thys lande and to thys house?
And they shall answere: because they forsoke the Lorde theyr God, whyche brought theyr fathers out of the lande of Egypt, and haue taken holde vpon other Goddes, and haue worshipped them, and serued them, therfore hath the Lorde brought vpon them all thys euell.
And it fortuned, that at the ende of twentye yeres, Salomon fynisshed the buyldynge of the two houses, that is to wete, the house of the Lorde and the kynges palace.
And Hyram the kynge of Tyre brought Salomon tymbre of Cedar, and fyrre trees, golde, and whatsoeuer he desyred. And Salomon agayne gaue Hyram .xx. cyties into the lande of Galile.
And Hyram came oute from Tyre to se the cyties whyche Salomon had geuen hym, and they pleased hym not.
And he sayde: what cyties are these, which thou hast geuen me, my brother? and he called them the lande of Cabull vnto thys daye.
And Hyram sent the kynge syxe skore hundred wayght of golde.
And thys is the summe, which kynge Salomon raysed for a trybute whan he buylded the house of the Lorde and hys awne house, and Millo, and the wall of Ierusalem, and Hazoer, and Megeddo, and Gazer.
For Pharao kynge of Egypte went vp, Ꟶ toke Gazer, and burnt it with fyre, and slue the Cananites that dwelt in the cytie, and gaue it for a present vnto hys daughter, Salomons wyfe.
And Salomon buylt Gazer and Beth Horon the nether:
and Baalath and Thamar in the wyldernesse and in the lande:
and all the treasure cyties that Salomon had, and cyties for hys charettes, Ꟶ cyties for hys horsemen, and all that Salomon desyred and wolde buylde in Ierusalem, in Libanon, and in all the lande of hys dominyon.
And all the people that were lefte of the Amorites, Hethites, Pheresites, Heuites and Iebusites, (whych were not of the chyldren of Israel)
theyr chyldren that were lefte after them in the lande, whom the chyldren of Israel also were not able to destroye. Those dyd Salomon compell to bryng tribute vnto thys daye.
But of the chyldren of Israel dyd Salomon make no bonde men. But they were men of warre, hys ministers, hys Lordes, his captaynes, and rulers of his charettes, and of hys horsemen.
And these were the Lordes, that were sett ouer Salomons worke: euen fyue hundred were they and fyftye, and they ruled the people that wrought the worcke.
And Pharaos daughter came vp oute of the cytie of Dauid vnto the house which Salomon had buylt for her. And then dyd he also buylde Millo.
And thryse a yere dyd Salomon offer burntofferinges and peace offeringes vpon the aultare, whyche he buylt vnto the Lorde. And he burnt incense vpon the altare that was before the Lorde, and so he fynisshed the house.
And kynge Salomon made a nauye of shyppes in Azion Gaber whyche is besyde Eloth, on the bryncke of the redd see, in the lande of Edom.
And Hyram sent by shyppe also of hys seruauntes, that were shypmen, and had knowledge of the see, wyth the seruauntes of Salomon.
And they came to Ophyr and fet from thence one and twentye skore hundred weyght of golde, Ꟶ brought it to kynge Salomon.
And the Quene of Saba hearynge the fame of Salomon (concernynge the name of the Lorde) came to proue him with harde questyons.
And she came to Ierusalem with a very great trayne: with Camelles that bare swete odoures, and golde exceadynge moche, and preciouse stones. And she came to Salomon and comoned with him of all that was in her hert.
And Salomon declared vnto her all her questions, so that there was not one thinge hydd from the kynge, which he expounded not vnto her.
And the quene of Saba consydred all Salomons wysdome, and the house that he had buylded,
and the meate of his table, Ꟶ the syttynge of hys seruauntes, the order of hys mynisters, and theyr apparell, hys dryncke, and his burnt sacrifices that he offered in the house of the Lorde, and she was astonnied.
And she sayde vnto the kynge. It was a true worde that I hearde in myne awne lande of thy sayinges, and of thy wysdome.
Howbeit I beleued it not, tyll I came, Ꟶ sawe it wyth myne eyes. And beholde, the one halfe was not tolde me: for thy wysdome and prosperite exceadeth the fame whych I hearde of the.
Happy are thy men: and happye are these thy seruauntes, which stande euer before the, and heare thy wysdome.
Blessed be the Lord thy god, which loued the, to set the on the seat of Israel, because the Lord loued Israel for euer, and made the kynge, to do equyte and ryghtewysnesse.
And she gaue the kynge syxe skore hundred weight of golde, and of swete odoures excedynge moch, and preciouse stones. There came nomore soche aboundaunce of swete odoures, as the quene of Saba gaue to kynge Salomon.
The nauye also of the shyppes of Hyram (that caryed golde from Ophyr) brought lyke wyse greate plenty of Almuge tre and preciouse stones.
And the kynge made of the Almuge trees, pillers for the house of the Lorde and for the kynges palace, and made harpes and psalteryes for syngers. There came no moare suche Almuge trees, nor were anye moare sene vnto thys daye.
And kyng Salomon gaue vnto the Quene of Saba accordynge to all her desyre whatsoeuer she asked: besydes that he gaue her of a fre wyll with his awne hande. And so she returned vnto her awne countrey: both she, and her seruauntes.
The weyght of golde that came to Salomon in one yeare, was syxe hundred thre score and syxe talentes of golde,
besydes that he had of chapmen and of marchauntes and of Potycaryes, and of all the kynges of Arabye, and of the Lordes of the countreye.
And kynge Salomon made two hundred bucklers of beaten gold, syxe hundred sycles of gold went to a buckler.
And he made thre hundred shyldes of beaten golde, thre pounde of golde went to one shylde, and the kynge put them in the house of the wood of Libanon.
And the kynge made a great seate of yuerye, and couered it with the best golde.
And the seate had syxe steppes. And the toppe of the seate was rounde behynde, Ꟶ there were pomelles on ether syde on the place of the seate and two Lyons stode besyde the pomelles.
And there stode .xii. Lyons on the steppes .vi. on a syde. Ther was none lyke (worke) sene in any kyngdome.
And all kynge Salomons drynckynge vesselles were of golde, Ꟶ lykewyse al the vesselles of the house of the wood of Libanon were of pure gold. And as for syluer, it was nothing worth in the dayes of Salomon,
For the kinges nauye of shyppes went on the see vnto Tharsis wt the nauie of Hyrams shippes: euen once in the yere went the nauye to Tharsis, Ꟶ brought golde and syluer Elephantes teth, apes and pecokes.
And so kynge Salomon exceaded all the kynges of the erth both in richesse Ꟶ wysdome.
And all the worlde resorted to Salomon, to heare his wysdome, which God had put in hys herte.
And brought him euery man his present, vessels of syluer and vessels of golde, rayment, harnesse, and swete odoures and horsses and Mules, yere by yere.
And Salomon gathered together charettes and horsmen: and he had a thousande and foure hundred charettes, Ꟶ twelue thousande horsemen, whom he bestowed in the charette cyties, and with the kynge at Ierusalem.
And the kynge made syluer in Ierusalem as plenteous as stones, Ꟶ Cedar as plenteouse as the wylde fygge trees that growe aboundauntly in the feldes.
The bryngyng of horses also out of Egypte: Ꟶ the collection of the wares: dyd the kynges marchauntes take agayne, and sold the stuffe for a pryce.
A charet came vp out of Egypte for syxe hundred sycles of syluer: that is one horsse for an hundred and fyftye. And euen so so for all the kinges of the Hethithes and for the kynges of Syria, dyd they brynge them oute thorowe theyr handes.
But kynge Salomon loued many outelandishe wemen: and the daughter of Pharao: and wemen of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, zidonites, and Hethites.
Where as yet (concernynge these nacyons) the Lorde sayde vnto the chyldren of Israell: come not ye at them, nor let them come at you: elles wyll they turne youre hertes after theyr goddes. Neuerthelesse, Salomon claue vnto them in loue.
And he had seuen hundred Quenes, and thre hundred concubines, and his wyues. turned a waye his hert.
For it came to passe, when Salomon was olde, hys wyues turned his herte after other Gods: and his herte was not perfecte with the Lord his God, as was the herte of Dauid his father:
for Salomon folowed Astaroth the God of the zidons, and Milcom, the abhominacion of the Ammonites.
And Salomon wrought wyckednesse in the sight of the Lorde, Ꟶ folowed not the Lorde perfectly, as dyd Dauid hys father.
For than did Salomon buylde an hye place for Chamos the abominacyon of Moab, in the hyll that is before Ierusalem, Ꟶ vnto Moloch the abhominacyon of the chyldren of Ammon.
And lykewise dyd he for all his out landishe wyues, which burnt incense and offered vnto theyr gods.
And the Lorde was angrye with Salomon, because hys hert was turned from the Lorde God of Israel which had appeared vnto him twyse,
and gaue him a charge (concerninge this thinge) that he shuld not folowe other gods. But he kepte not that, which the Lorde commaunded him,
wherfore the Lord sayde vnto Salomon: for as moch as this is done of the, and thou hast not kepte myne appoyntment, and my statutes (which I commaunded the) I wyll rent the kyngdome from the, and wyll geue it to thy seruaunt.
Notwithstandynge in thy dayes I will not do it because of Dauid thy father but will take it from the hande of thy sonne.
Howbeit, I will not take awaye all the kyngdome: but will geue one trybe to thy sonne, because of Dauid my seruaunt, and because of Ierusalem which I haue chosen.
And the Lorde stered vp an aduersarye vnto Salomon: euen one Hadad an Edomite of the kynges sede, which was in Edom.
For when Dauid was in Edom, and Ioab the captayne of the hoste was gone vp to burye them that were slayne, he smote all the men chyldren in Edom.
For syxe monethes dyd Ioab remayne there and all Israel, tyll he had destroyed all the men chyldren in Edom.
And thys Hadad fled and certen other Edomites of hys fathers seruauntes with him, to come into Egipte: Hadad beyng yet a lytle chylde.
And they arose out of Madian, and came to Paran, and toke men with them out of Paran and came to Egypte vnto Pharao kynge of Egipte, which gaue him an house, Ꟶ appoynted him vitayles, and gaue him lande.
And Hadad gat greate fauoure in the syght of Pharao, so that he gaue hym to wyfe the syster of his awne wyfe, euen the syster of Thahpenes the quene.
And the sister of Thahpenes bare him Genubath his sonne, whom Thahpenes norisshed in Pharaos house. And Genubath was of Pharaos householde amonge the sonnes of Pharao.
And when Hadad hearde in Egypte, that Dauid was layde to slepe wyth hys fathers, and that Ioab the captayne of the host was deed also, he sayd to Pharao: let me departe, that I maye go to myne awne contreye.
Pharao sayde vnto hym: what hast thou lacked here with me, that thou woldest thus go to thine awne contreye? He answered. Nothing. Howbeit, let me go
And God stered him vp an other aduersary, one Rezon the sonne of Eliada, whyche fled from his Lorde Hodadezer kynge of zoba.
And he gathered men vnto hym, and became captayne ouer the companye, when Dauid slewe them. And they went to Damasco, and dwelt there, and raigned in Damasco:
Therfore was he an aduersarye to Israel all the dayes of Salomon. And this was the myschefe, in that Hadad dyd abhorre Israel, and raygned ouer Syria
And Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat an Ephrathite of zareda (whose mother was called zeruah, which was a wydowe, and he Salomons seruaunt) lyfte vp his hande agaynst the kynge.
But this was the cause, that he lyfte vp his hande agaynst the kyng. Salomon buylte Mello, Ꟶ mended the broken places of the cytie of Dauid his father.
And this felowe Ieroboam was a man of warre. And Salomon sawe the younge man, that he was able to do the worke, he made hym ruler ouer all the tribute of the house of Ioseph.
And it chaunced at that ceason, that Ieroboam went out of Ierusalem, and the prophete Ahiah the Silonite mett him by the waye hauynge a newe mantell on hym, and they two were alone in the felde.
And Ahiah caught the newe mantell that was on hym and rent it in twelue peces,
and sayde to Ieroboam take the ten peces. For thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel: behold, I wyll rent the kyngdome oute of the handes of Salomon, and wyll geue ten tribes to the
and he shall haue one, for my seruaunte Dauids sake and for Ierusalem the cytie whyche I haue chosen out of all the trybes of Israel:
because they haue forsaken me, and haue worshypped vnto Astharoth the God of the zidons, Ꟶ Chamos the God of the Moabites, and Milcom the God of the chyldren of Ammon, and haue not walked in my wayes (to fulfyll my pleasure, my statutes and my lawes) as dyd Dauid hys father.
I wyll not take the whole kyngdome out of his hande: but wyll make hym chefe all hys lyfe longe, for Dauid my seruauntes sake, whom I chose: because he kepte my commaundementes and my statutes.
But I wyll take the kyngdome out of his sonnes hande, Ꟶ wyll geue it vnto the, euen ten tribes of it:
and vnto hys sonne wyll I geue one trybe, that Dauid my seruaunt maye haue a lyght allwaye before me in Ierusalem, the cytie which I haue chosen me, to put my name there.
And I wyll take the, Ꟶ thou shalt raygne accordynge to all that thy soule desyreth, Ꟶ shalt be kynge ouer Israel.
And yf thou herken vnto all that I commaunde the, Ꟶ wylt walke in my wayes Ꟶ do that is ryght in my syght, that thou kepe my statutes and my commaundementes (as Dauid my seruaunt dyd) then wyll I be with the, Ꟶ buylde the a sure house that shall contynewe, as I buylte for my seruaunt Dauid, and wyll geue Israel vnto the
And I wyll for thys offence (which Salomon hath commytted) vexe the seede of Dauid, but not for euer.
Salomon sought therfore to kyll Ieroboam, and Ieroboam arose, and fled into Egypte vnto Sisak kynge of Egypte, and continued there in Egypte vntyll the deeth of Salomon.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Salomon, and all that he dyd, and hys wysdome: are they not wrytten in the boke of the wordes of Salomon?
The tyme that Salomon raygned in Ierusalem vpon all Israel, was fourtye yere.
And Salomon slepte and he layde him with hys fathers, and was buryed in the cytie of Dauid his father, and Rehoboam his sonne raygned in hys steade.
And Rehoboam went to Sichem: for all Israel were come to Sichem, to make him kynge.
And Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat (which was yet in Egypte) hearde of it for he fled to Egypte from the presence of kyng Salomon, Ꟶ dwelt in Egypte.
So they sent and called hym: and Ieroboam and all the congregacyon of Israel came, and spake vnto Rehoboam, sayenge
thy father made oure yocke greuouse, nowe therfore, make thou the greuouse seruice of thy father and hys sore yocke which he putt vpon vs, lyghtter, Ꟶ we wyll serue the.
And he sayde vnto them: departe yet for the space of thre dayes, and then come agayne to me. And the people departed.
And kynge Rehoboam toke councell with the olde men that stode before Salomon hys father, while he yet lyued, and sayde: what councell geue ye, that I maye haue matter to answere thys people?
And they sayde vnto hym: If thou be a seruaunt vnto thys people this daye, and folowe theyr myndes and answere them, and speake kynde wordes to them: they wyll be thy seruauntes for euer.
But he forsoke the councell that the olde men had geuen him, and called vnto hys councell yonge men, that were growen vp with him, and wayted on hym.
And he sayde vnto them: what councell geue ye, that we maye answere thys people? for they haue commoned with me, sayenge: make the yocke which thy father dyd putt vpon vs, lyghtter?
And the younge men that were growen vp with hym spake vnto hym sayenge: Thus shalt thou speake vnto thys people (that haue sayde vnto the: thy father made oure yocke heuye, butt make thou it vs lyghtter) Euen thus shalt thou saye vnto them: My lytle fynger shalbe wayghtier, then my father was in the loynes.
And nowe where as my father did lade you Ꟶ put a greuouse yocke vpon you, I wyll make it heuyer. My father also corrected you wt scourges, but I wyll chastyse you with scorpions.
And so Ieroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the thyrde daye, as the kynge had apoynted, sayenge: come to me agayne the thyrde daye.
And the kyng answered the people churlyshly, and lefte the olde mens councell (that they gaue hym)
Ꟶ spake to them after the councell of the younge men, sayenge. My father made youre yocke greuouse, and I will make it greuouser. My father also chastised you with whyppes, but I wyll chastise you with scorpyons.
And the kynge herkened not vnto the people: for it was the ordinaunce of God, that he myght performe hys sayenge, which the Lorde spake by Ahiah the Silonite vnto Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat.
And so, when all Israel sawe, that the kynge regarded them not, the people answered the kynge with these wordes, sayenge, what porcion haue we in Dauid: we haue no enheritaunce in the sonne of Isai. To youre tentes, O Israel, nowe se to thyne awne house Dauid. And so Israel departed vnto theyr tentes.
Howbeit, ouer the chyldren of Israel which dwelt in the cytie of Iuda, dyd Rehoboam raygne styll.
Then kynge Rehoboam sent Aduram the receauer of the tribute. And all they of Israel stoned hym to deeth. But kynge Rehoboam made spede to gett hym vp to hys charet, and to flye to Ierusalem.
And they of Israel rebelled agaynst the house of Dauid, vnto thys daye.
And when all Israel heard that Ieroboam was come agayne, they sent and called hym vnto the multitude, and made hym kynge ouer all Israel: and there was no trybe that folowed the house of Dauid, but Iuda onely.
And when Rehoboam was come to Ierusalem, he gathered all the house of Iuda, with the trybe of BenIamin an hundred Ꟶ foure skore thousande of chosen men (which were good warryoures) to fyght agaynst the house of Israel, and to brynge the kyngdome agayne to Rehoboam the sonne of Salomon.
And the worde of God came vnto Semaia the man of God, sayenge:
speake vnto Rehoboam the sonne of Salomon kynge of Iuda, and vnto all the house of Iuda Ꟶ BenIamin, and to the remnaunt of the people, sayenge.
Thus sayth the Lorde. Ye shall not go vp, nor yet fyght agaynst youre brethren the chyldren of Israel, returne euery man to his house, for this thinge is my doing. They herkened therfore to the worde of the Lorde, and returned to departe, accordynge to the worde of the Lorde.
Then Ieroboam buylt Sichem in mount Ephraim, Ꟶ dwelt therin And went from thence, Ꟶ buylt Penuel.
And Ieroboam thought in his hert: nowe shall the kyngdome returne to the house of Dauid.
For yf thys people go vp and do sacrifyce in the house of the Lorde at Ierusalem, then shall the hert of this people turne agayne vnto theyr Lorde Rehoboam kynge of Iuda: and so shall they kyll me, and go agayne to Rehoboam kynge of Iuda.
Wherupon the kynge toke councell, and made two calues of golde, and sayde vnto them. It is muche for you to go vp to Hierusalem. Beholde, O Israel: these are thy goddes, which brought you out of the lande of Egypte.
And he set the one in bethel, and the other set he in Dan.
And this thynge turned to synne. for the people went (because of the one) as farre as Dan.
And he made an housse of hillaultares, and made preastes of the lowest of the people, which were not of the sonnes of Leui.
And Ieroboam made a feaste the .xv. daye of the eyght moneth, lyke vnto the feaste that is in Iuda, and offered on the aultare. And so did he in Bethel, to offer vnto the calues that he had made. And he put in Bethel the Preastes of the hyllaultares, which he had made.
And he offered burnt offeringes vpon the alter, which he had made in Bethel, the .xv. daye of the eyght moneth: euen in the moneth which he had ymagened of hys awne herte: and made a solempne feast vnto the chyldren of Israel, and offred vpon the aultare, and burnt incense.
And beholde, there came a man of God out of Iuda (by the worde of the Lord) vnto Bethel, Ꟶ Ieroboam stode by the aulter to put incense.
And he cried agaynst the aultare in the worde of the Lord Ꟶ sayde. O aultare, aultare, thus sayth the Lord: Beholde, a chylde shall be borne vnto the house of Dauid, (Iosia by name) Ꟶ vpon the shall he offer the preastes of the hillaultares that burne incense vpon the, Ꟶ mennes bones shalbe brent vpon the.
And he gaue a token the same tyme, sayenge: thys is the token, that the Lorde hath spoken it. Beholde, the aulter shall rent, and the asshes that are vpon it, shall fall out.
And when the kynge hearde the sayenge of the man of God (which had cryed agaynst the aulter in Bethel) he stretched out hys hande from the aultare, sayenge: hold him. And his hande which he put forth agaynst him, dryed vp, Ꟶ he coulde not pull it in agayne to hym:
the aulter also claue asunder, and the asshes fell out from the aulter, accordinge to the token which the man of God had geuen by the worde of the Lorde.
And the kynge answered, and sayde vnto the man of God. Oh praye vnto the Lorde thy God, and make intercessyon for me, that my hande maye be restored me agayne. And the man of God besought the Lorde, and the kynges hande was restored agayne, Ꟶ became as it was afore.
And the kynge sayde vnto the man of God come home with me, that thou mayest dyne, and I wyll geue the a rewarde.
And the man of God sayde vnto the kynge: yf thou woldest geue me halfe thyne house, I will not go in with the, nether wyll I eate breade or drincke water in thys place.
For so was it charged me, thorowe the worde of the Lorde, sayeng: eate no bread nor dryncke water, nor turne againe by the same waye that thou camest.
And so he went another waye, Ꟶ returned not by the waye that he came to Bethel.
And there dwelt an olde prophet in Bethel, Ꟶ hys sonne came, and tolde hym all the workes, that the man of God had done that daye in Bethel: and the wordes which he had spoken vnto the kynge tolde they theyr father also.
And theyr father sayde vnto them: what waye went he? And his sonnes shewed him what waye the man of God went, which came fom Iuda.
And he sayde vnto hys sonnes: sadle me the Asse. Which whan they had sadled, be gatt hym vp theron,
and went after the man of God, Ꟶ founde hym syttynge vnder a tre. And he sayde vnto him: art thou the man of God that camest from Iuda? And he sayde: I am.
He sayde vnto him: come home with me, and eate bread.
He answered: I maye not returne with the, to go in with the nether wyll I eate bread or drincke water with the in this place.
For it was sayde to me in the worde of the Lorde: Thou shalt eate no bred, nor drincke water there, nor turne agayne to go by the waye that thou camest.
He sayde vnto him: I am a prophet also as well as thou, and an Angell spake vnto me in the worde of the Lorde, sayenge: brynge him agayne with the into thyne house, that he maye eate bread and dryncke water. And he lyed vnto hym.
And so he went agayne with hym, and dyd eate bread in hys house and drancke water,
And it fortuned, that as they sate at the table, the worde of the Lorde came vnto the prophete, that brought him agayne.
And he cryed vnto the man of God that came from Iuda, sayenge: thus sayth the Lord because thou hast disobeyed the mouth of the Lorde, and hast not kept the commaundement which the Lorde thy God commaunded the,
but camest backe agayne, and hast eaten bread and droncke water in the place (concernynge the which the Lorde dyd saye vnto the: Thou shalt eate no bread nor dryncke water) thy carkasse shall not come vnto the sepulchre of thy fathers.
And so it came to passe, that when he had eaten bread and droncke, the prophete which brought him agayne, sadled him an asse.
And whan he was gone, a Lyon mett hym by the waye, and slue him, and his carkasse was cast in the waye, and the Asse stode therby, and the Lyon stode by the coarse also.
And men that passed by, sawe the carkasse cast in the waye, and the Lyon standynge therby: Ꟶ they came and tolde it in the towne where the olde prophete dwelt.
And when the prophete that brought him backe agayne from the waye, hearde therof, he sayde: it is the man of God: he was disobedient vnto the worde of the Lorde, and therfore the Lorde hath delyuered him vnto the Lyon, which hath rent him and slayne him, accordinge to the worde of the Lorde, which he spake vnto hym.
And he spake to his sonnes, sayinge. sadle me an Asse: and so they dyd.
And he went, and founde hys bodye cast in the waye, and the Asse and the Lyon stode by the coarse. And the Lyon had not eaten the carkasse, nor hurt the Asse.
And the prophete toke vp the bodye of the man of God, and layed it vpon the Asse, and brought it agayne: and the olde prophete came to the cytie to lament, and to burye hym.
And he layde hys bodye in his awne graue, and they lamented ouer him. (Alas my brother.)
And when he had buried him, he spake to his sonnes, saying. When I am deed, se that ye burye me in the sepulchre wherin the man of God is buryed: laye my bones besyde hys bones.
For the sayenge which he cryed at the worde of the Lord agaynst the aultare in Bethel (and agaynst all the houses of hyll aultares which are in the cyties of Samarie) shall come to passe.
Howbeit, for all that, Ieroboam conuerted not from hys wycked waye: but turned backe, and made of the lowest of the people preastes of the hill aultares. And whoso pleased hym, he fylled hys hande, and he became preaste of the hill aultares.
And this thynge turned to synne vnto the house of Ieroboam euen to destroye hym, and to brynge hym to naught from of the face the erthe.
At that tyme Abia the sonne of Ieroboam fell sycke.
And Ieroboam sayde vnto hys wyfe: vp (I praye the) and disguyse thy selfe, that thou be not knowen to be the wyfe of Ieroboam, and get the to Silo. For ther is Ahia the Prophete which tolde me that I shulde be kynge ouer thys people.
And take with the ten loues, and cracknelles, and a cruse of honye, and go to him: that he maye tell the what shall become of the childe.
And Ieroboams wyfe dyd so: and arose, and went to Silo, and came to the house of Ahia. But Ahia coulde not se, for hys eyes were waxen dymme for age.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Ahia: beholde, the wyfe of Ieroboam cometh, to aske a thinge of the for her sonne, for he is sycke. But thus shalt thou saye vnto her. And when she came in, she feyned her selfe to be a nother woman.
But when Ahia hearde the sounde of her fete as she came in at the dore, he sayde: come in thou wyfe of Ieroboam, why feynest thou thy selfe so, to be another? I am sent to the to shewe the heuy thinges.
Go, tell Ieroboam, thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel. It repenteth me for as moche as I exalted the from amonge the people, and made the prynce ouer my people Israel.
I dyd rent the kyngdome awaye from the house of Dauid and gaue it the: Neuertheles, thou hast not bene as my seruaunt Dauid, which kepte my commaundementes, and folowed me wyth all hys herte, to do that whych is ryght in myne eyes:
but hast done euyll, aboue all that were before the: for thou hast gone, and made the other goddes, and molten ymages, to prouoke me, and hast cast me behynde thy backe: therfore beholde,
I wyll brynge euell vpon the house of Ieroboam, and wyll rote out from Ieroboam euen hym that pysseth agaynste the wall and hym that is in preson and forsaken in Israel, and wyll take awaye the remnaunt of the house of Ieroboam, as a man taketh awaye donge, tyll he hath caryed out all.
Whosoeuer (of Ieroboams house) dye in the towne, hym shall the dogges eate: Ꟶ he that dieth in the felde, shall the fowles of the ayre eate: for the Lorde hath sayde it.
Up therfore and gett the to thyne house. Beholde, whan thy fote entereth into the cytie, the chylde shall dye.
And all they of Israel shall mourne for him, and burye him: for he onely of Ieroboam, shall come to the sepulchre, because in hym there is founde goodnesse towarde the Lorde God of Israel in the house of Ieroboam.
Moreouer, the Lorde shall stere hym vp a kynge ouer Israel, which shall destroye the house of Ieroboam in that daye. But what is it now?
For the Lorde shall smyte Israell, as whan a rede is shaken in the water and he shall wede Israel out of thys good lande (which he gaue to theyr fathers,) and shall skatter them beyonde the ryuer, because they haue made them Idoles groues, and angred the Lorde.
And he shall geue Israel vp, becuase of the synnes of Ieroboam, which dyd synne, and made Israel to synne.
And Ieroboams wyfe arose, and departed, and came to Thirzah, and whan she came to the thresholde of the dore, the chylde was deed.
And all Israel buryed hym, and lamented him, accordynge to the worde of the Lorde which he spake by the hande of hys seruaunt Ahia the Prophete.
And the rest of the wordes that concerne Ieroboam, howe he warred, and howe he raygned. Beholde they are wrytten in the boke of the Cronicles of the kynges of Israel.
And the dayes which Ieroboam raygned, were .xxii. yere. And whan he was layed aslepe with hys fathers, Nadab his sonne raygned in his steade.
Rehoboam the sonne of Salomon raygned in Iuda, and Rehoboam was .xli. yere olde when he beganne to raygne, and he raygned .xvij. yere in Ierusalem (the cytie which the Lorde dyd chose out of all the trybes of Israel, to put his name there.) His mothers name was Naama an Ammonite.
And Iuda wrought wickednesse in the syght of the Lorde, and angred him in moo thinges then their fathers dyd, in their synnes, which they synned.
For they also made them hyll aulters, Images, Ꟶ Idols groues on euery hye hyll, Ꟶ vnder euery thick tre.
And there was a stues of male chyldren in the lande, Ꟶ they dyd accordinge to all the abhominacions of the nacions which the Lorde cast out before the chyldren of Israel.
And it fortuned, that in the fyft yere of kynge Rehoboam: Sisack kynge of Egypte came vp agaynst Ierusalem,
and toke awaye the treasures of the house of the Lorde, Ꟶ the treasures of the kynges house, Ꟶ spoyled all that was to be had. And he toke awaye the shyldes of golde which Salomon had made.
In whose steade kynge Rehoboam made brasen shyldes, and committed them vnto the handes of the kepynge of the captaines of the garde, which wayted at the dore of the kynges house.
And whan the kynge went into the house of the Lord, they of the garde bare them, and brought them agayne into the garde chambre.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Rehoboam, and all that he dyd, are they not wrytten in the boke of the Cronicles of the kynges of Iuda?
And there was warre betwene Rehoboam and Ieroboam all theyr lyues.
And Rehoboam slepte with his fathers, and was buried besyde his fathers in the cytie of Dauid. Hys mothers name was Naama an Ammonite. And Abiam hys sonne raygned in hys steade.
In the .xviij. yere of kynge Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat, raygned Abiam ouer Iuda.
Thre yere raygned he in Ierusalem and hys mothers name was Maacha the daughter of Abisalom.
And he walked in all the synnes of his father, which he had done before hym and hys hert was not perfect with the Lord hys God as the hert of Dauid his father.
Neuerthelesse for Dauids sake dyd the Lord hys God geue hym a lyght in Ierusalem, that he sett vp his sonne after hym, and to stablisshe Ierusalem:
because Dauid dyd that which was ryght in the syght of the Lorde, and turned from nothinge that he commaunded hym all the dayes of hys lyfe saue onely in the matter of Urias the Hethite.
And there was warre betwene Rehoboam and Ieroboam as longe as he lyued.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Abiam, and all that he dyd, are they not wrytten in the boke of the Cronicles of the kynges of Iuda? And ther was warre betwene Abiam and Ieroboam.
And Abiam slepte with hys fathers, and they buryed hym in the cytie of Dauid. And Asa his sonne raygned in his steade.
In the .xx. yere of Ieroboam kynge of Israel, raygned Asa ouer Iuda
.xli. yere raygned he in Hierusalem, Ꟶ hys mothers name was Maacha, the daughter of Abisalom.
And Asa dyd that semed ryght in the eyes of the Lorde, as dyd Dauid his father.
And he toke awaye the whore kepers out of the lande, and put awaye all the abhominable Idols that his fathers had made.
And he put downe Maacha hys mother from berynge rule, because she had made ymages in groues. And Asa destroyed her ymages, and burnt them by the broke Cedron.
But the hillaulters were not put downe. Neuerthelesse Asaes herte was perfecte with the Lord all his dayes.
He brought in the holy vessels of his father, (Ꟶ that he had dedicat) vnto the house of the Lorde: golde Ꟶ syluer, Ꟶ Iewelles.
And there was warre betwene Asa Ꟶ Baasa kynge of Israell all theyr dayes.
And Baasa kynge of Israel, went vp agaynst Iuda, Ꟶ buylt Rama, so that he wolde let none go out or in, to Asa kynge of Iuda.
Then Asa toke all the syluer Ꟶ golde, that was lefte in the treasures of the house of the Lorde, Ꟶ the treasures of the kynges house, and delyuered them vnto the handes of hys seruauntes, Ꟶ Asa sent them to Benhadad the sonne of Tabrimon the sonne of Hezion kynge of Siria, (that dwelt at Damasco,) sayenge:
there is a bonde betwene me Ꟶ the, betwene my father and thy father. And beholde, I haue sent vnto the a present of syluer Ꟶ golde that thou come Ꟶ breake the bonde that thou hast wt Baasa kynge of Israell, that he maye departe from me.
So Benhadad herkened vnto kyng Asa, and sent the captaynes of the hostes (which he had) agaynst the cyties of Israel, Ꟶ smote Hion, Ꟶ Dan, Ꟶ Abel, Beth Macah, Ꟶ all the region of Ceneroth with all the lande of Nephthali.
And when Baasa heard therof, he lefte buylding of Rama Ꟶ dwelt in Thirza.
Then kyng Asa made a proclamacyon thorowout all Iuda, that none shuld be excused. And so they toke the stones of Ramah Ꟶ the tymber (wherwith Baasa had buylded,) Ꟶ kyng Asa buylt with them the hyll of BenIamin and Mizpa.
The remnaunt of all the wordes that concerne Asa, and all hys myght and all that he dyd, Ꟶ the cyties whych he buylded, are they not wrytten in the boke of the chronicles of the kynges of Iuda? Neuerthelesse in hys olde age he was diseased in hys fete.
And Asa slepte wyth hys fathers, Ꟶ was buryed besyde his fathers in the cytie of Dauid hys father. And Iehosaphat his sonne raygned in his steade.
And Nadab the sonne of Ieroboam beganne to raygne vpon Israel the seconde yere of Asa kynge of Iuda, and raygned vpon Israel two yere.
And he dyd euell in the syght of the Lorde, walkynge in the waye of hys father and in hys synne wherwith he made Israel synne.
And Baasa the sonne of Ahia (whych was of the house of Isachar) conspired agaynst hym, and Baasa smote him at Gibbethon which is a cytie of the Philistines: for Nadab Ꟶ all Israel layed seage to Gibbethon.
Euen in the thirde yere of Asa kynge of Iuda, dyd Baasa slaye him, and raygned in his steade.
And it fortuned that whan he was kyng, he smot all the house of Ieroboam, and lefte him naught that breathed, vntyll he had put hym cleane out, accordyng vnto the sayeng of the Lord, which he spake by his seruaunt Ahia the Selonite:
because of the synnes of Ieroboam wherwyth he synned and made Israel synne, whan he wyth hys prouocacyon angred the Lorde God of Israel.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Nadab, and all that he dyd, are they not wrytten in the boke of the chronicles of the kynges of Israel?
And there was warre betwene Asa and Baasa kynge of Israel all theyr dayes.
So in the thyrde yere of Asa kynge of Iuda, began Baasa the sonne of Ahia to raygne ouer all Israell in Thirza .xxiiij. yeare.
And he dyd that which is euell in the syght of the Lorde, walkynge in the waye of Ieroboam, Ꟶ in his synne, which made Israel to synne.
Then the worde of the Lorde came to Iehu the sonne of Hanani agaynst Baasa, sayeng:
for as moche as I exalted the out of the dust, Ꟶ made the captayne ouer my people Israel, and thou hast walked in the waye of Ieroboam, and hast made my people Israel to synne, to angre me wt theyr synnes:
Beholde, I wyll roote out the posterite of Baasa, and the posterite of hys house, and wyll make hys house lyke the house of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat.
That man of Baasa whych dyeth in the cytie, him shall the dogges eate: and that man of hym whych dyeth in the feldes, shall the foules of the ayre eate.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Baasa, Ꟶ what he dyd, Ꟶ his power, are they not written in the boke of the chronicles of the kynges of Israel?
And so Baasa slepte wt hys fathers, Ꟶ was buried in Thirza. And Ela his sonne raygned in his steade.
And by the hande of the prophete Iehu the sonne of Hanani, came the worde of the Lorde agaynst Baasa, and agaynst his house, Ꟶ agaynst all the wyckednesse that he dyd in the syght of the Lorde (in angringe him wt the worke of his awne handes) that he shulde be lyke the house of Ieroboam, Ꟶ because he kylled hym.
The .xxvj. yere of Asa kynge of Iuda beganne Ela the sonne of Baasa to raygne ouer Israel in Thirza, two yere.
And his seruaunt zimri (which was captayne of halfe his charettes) conspired agaynst hym, as he was in Thirza drynckynge: and was droncken in the house of Arza stuard of hys house in Thirza.
And zimri came, and smote him, and kylled hym in the .xxvij. yere of Asa kynge of Iuda, and raygned in hys steade.
And it fortuned that whan he was kynge and satt on hys seate, he slue all the house of Baasa, not leauynge therof, one to pisse agaynst a wall: Yee, he slue hys kynsfolkes and frendes, also.
And thus dyd zimri destroye all the house of Baasa, accordynge to the worde of the Lorde, whych he spake agaynst Baasa by the hande of Iehu the prophet,
for all the synnes of Baasa Ꟶ synnes of Ela hys sonne, whych they synned, and made Israel to synne, and angre the Lord God of Israel with their vanities.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Ela, Ꟶ all he dyd, are they not wrytten in the boke of the Chronicles of the kynges of Israel?
In the .xxvij. yere of Asa kynge of Iuda, dyd zimri raygne .vij. dayes in Thirza, and the people was then in the hoost besegynge Gebethon a citie of the Philistines.
And the people in the hoost heard one saye: zimri hath conspired, Ꟶ slayne the kynge: Wherfore, all they of Israell made Amri (the captayne of the hoost) kyng ouer Israel that same daye, euen in the hoost.
And Amri departed vp from Gibbethon, and all Israel with hym, Ꟶ they beseged Thirza.
And when zimri sawe that the citie must nedes be taken, he went into the palayse of the kynges house, and burnt him selfe and the kynges house wt fyre, and so dyed,
for his synnes whych he synned, in doynge that which is euell in the syght of the Lorde, and in walkynge in the waye of Ieroboam and in hys synnes whych he dyd, and in that he made Israel to synne.
The rest of the wordes that concerne zimri and the treason that he wrought, are they not wrytten in the boke of the Chronicles of the kynges of Israel?
Then were the people of Israel deuyded into two partes, for halfe the people folowed Thibni the sonne of Ginath, makynge hym kynge: Ꟶ the other halfe folowed Amri.
But the people that folowed Amri, preuayled agaynst the people that folowed Thibni the sonne of Ginath. And so Thibni dyed, and Amri raygned.
In the .xxxi. yere of Asa kynge of Iuda, beganne Amri to raygne ouer Israel .xii. yere. Sixe yere raygned he in Thirza.
He bought the hyll Sohomron of one Schemar for two talentes of syluer, and buylt in the hill, and called the name of the cytie whych he buylt, after the name of Schemar whych had bene owner of the hyll Schomron.
But Amri wrought that which is euell in the eyes of the Lorde, and dyd worsse then all that were before hym.
For he walked in all the waye of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, Ꟶ in hys synnes, that made Israel synne, to anger the Lorde God of Israel wt their vanyties.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Amri, Ꟶ all that he dyd, Ꟶ his strength that he shewed, are they not written in the boke of the chronicles of the kynges of Israel?
And so Amri slepte wt hys fathers and was buryed in Schemaron, and Ahab his sonne raygned in hys steade.
In the .xxxviij. yere of Asa kynge of Iuda, beganne Ahab the sonne of Amri to raygne ouer Israel, and the same Ahab the sonne of Amri raygned ouer Israell in Samaria .xxij. yere.
And Ahab the sonne of Amri dyd euell in the syght of the Lord, aboue all that were before.
For it semed vnto hym but a lyght thinge to walke in the synnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat. He toke Iezabel also the daughter of Ethbaal kynge of the Sidonites to wyfe, and went and serued Baal, Ꟶ worshypped hym.
And he reared vp an aultare for Baal in the temple of Baal, whych he had buylded in Schomron.
And Ahab made groues, and proceded further in angrynge the Lorde God of Israel then all the kynges of Israel that were before hym.
In his dayes dyd Hiel of Bethel buylde Iericho. And it coste him Abiram his eldest sonne when he layde the foundacion, Ꟶ his youngest sonne Segub, when he sett vp the gates, according vnto the worde of the Lord which he spake by Iosua the sonne of Nun.
And Elia the Thesbite (whych was of the enhabiters of Gilead) sayde vnto Ahab: as truly as the Lord God of Israel lyueth, before whome I stande there shalbe nether dewe nor rayne these yeres, but accordynge to my worde.
And the worde of the Lorde came vnto him, sayeng:
gett the hence, Ꟶ turne the estwarde, Ꟶ hide thy selfe in the brooke Cherith, that is it that lyeth before Iordan:
Thou shalt drynck of the ryuer, Ꟶ I haue commaunded the rauens to fede the there.
And so he went, Ꟶ dyd according vnto the worde of the Lord: For he went, Ꟶ dwelt by the brooke Cherith, that is before Iordan.
And the rauens brought him bread Ꟶ fleshe in the mornyng, Ꟶ lykewise bread Ꟶ flessh in the euening, Ꟶ he drancke of the brooke.
And it chaunced after a while, that the brooke dryed vp, because ther fell no rayne vpon the erth
And the word of the Lorde came vnto him, sayeng:
vp Ꟶ gett the to zarphath, whych is in Sido, Ꟶ dwell there. Beholde I haue commaunded a wydowe there to sustayne the.
So he arose, Ꟶ went to zarphath. And when he came to the gate of the cytie, the wedow was there, geathering stickes. And he called to her, Ꟶ sayd: fet me I praye the, a lytle water in a vessell, that I maye dryncke.
And as she was goyng to fett it, he cryed after her, and sayd: bryng me I praye the, a morsell of bread also in thyne hande.
She sayd: As truely as the Lord thy God lyueth, I haue no bread readye, but euen an handfull of mele in a barell, and a lyttle oyle in a cruse. And behold, I am gathering two stickes for to go in, Ꟶ dresse it for me and my sonne, that we maye eate it, and dye.
And Elia sayde vnto her: feare not, come Ꟶ do as thou hast sayde: but make me therof a lyttle cake fyrst of all, Ꟶ bringe it vnto me: and afterwarde make for the and thy sonne.
For thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel: the meale in the barell shall not be wasted nether shall the oyle in the cruse be mynisshed, vntyll the Lorde haue sent rayne vpon the erthe.
And she went, and dyd as Elia sayde. And she Ꟶ he Ꟶ her house dyd eate a good space,
and the meale wasted not out of the barell, nether was the oyle spent out of the cruse accordyng to the worde of the Lorde, which he spake by the hande of Elia.
And after these thynges, it happened, that the sonne of the wyfe of the house fell sycke. And his sycknesse was so sore, that there was no breath left in him.
And she sayde vnto Elia: what haue I to do with the, O thou man of God? art thou come vnto me, to call my synne agayne to remembraunce, Ꟶ to slaye my sonne?
He sayde vnto her: geue me thy sonne. And he toke him out of her lappe, and caryed him vp into a lofte wher he abode, Ꟶ layde him vpon his awne bedd,
Ꟶ called vnto the Lorde, and sayde: O Lorde my God, hast thou punysshed also this wedowe (wt whom I dwell as a stranger) Ꟶ hast slayne her sonne?
And he stretched hym selfe vpon the chylde thre tymes, Ꟶ called vnto the Lorde, and sayd: O Lorde my God, let this childes soule come into him agayne.
And the Lorde hearde the voyce of Elia, and the soule of the chylde came into hym agayne, Ꟶ he reuyued.
And Elia toke the boye, and brought hym downe out of the chambre into the house, Ꟶ delyuered hym vnto hys mother, and Elia sayde: beholde, thy sonne lyueth.
And the woman sayde vnto Elia: nowe I knowe, that thou art a man of God, and that the worde of the Lorde in thy mouth, is true.
After processe of many dayes the worde of the Lord came to Elia in the thyrde yeare, sayinge: go shewe thy selfe vnto Ahab, and I wyll sende rayne vpon the erth.
And Elia went to shewe hym selfe vnto Ahab, Ꟶ ther was a great famyshement in Schomron.
And Ahab called Obadia, whych was the gouerner of hys house: Ꟶ Obadia feared God greatlye:
For when Iezabell destroyed the prophetes of the Lord, he toke an hundred prophetes and hyd them, fiftie men in one caue Ꟶ fyftie in another, Ꟶ prouyded bred Ꟶ water for them.
And Ahab sayde vnto Obadia: Go into the lande, vnto all fountaynes of water, Ꟶ vnto all brokes, yf happlye we maye fynde grasse, to saue the horses and the mules, Ꟶ that we destroye not some of the beastes.
And so they deuyded the lande betwene them, to walke thorow it. Ahab went one waye by hym selfe, and Obadia went another waye by hym selfe.
And it chaunced that as Obadia was in the waye, Elia mett him. And Obadia knewe hym, Ꟶ fell on hys face, Ꟶ sayde: art not thou my Lord Elia?
And he answered hym: I am he. Go and tell thy Lorde: beholde, Elia is here.
He sayde: what haue I synned, that thou woldest delyuer thy seruaunt into the hand of Ahab, to sley me?
As trulie as the Lord thy God lyueth, there is no nacyon or kyngdome, whether my Lorde hath not sent, to seke the. And when they sayde: he is not there, he tooke an othe of the kyngdome Ꟶ nacyon, whan he founde the not.
And nowe thowe sayest: goo Ꟶ tell thy Lorde, that Elia is here.
And as sone as I am gone from the, the sprete of the Lord shall carie the into some place that I do not knowe. and so when I come and tell Ahab, Ꟶ he canne not finde the, he shall sley me. But I thy seruaunt feare the Lorde from my youth vp.
Was it not tolde my Lorde, what I dyd, when Iezabell slue the prophetes of the Lorde howe I hydde an hundred men of the Lordes prophetes, fyftie men in one caue and fyftie in another, and prouyded them of breed and water?
And nowe thou sayest, goo thou nowe and shewe thy Lorde. Beholde, Elia is here, that he maye sley me?
And Elia sayde: as truly as the Lorde of Hostes lyueth, before whom I stande, I wyll shew my selfe vnto him this daye.
So Obadia went to mete Ahab, and tolde hym. And Ahab went to mete Elia.
And it fortuned that whan Ahab sawe Elia, he sayde vnto him: art thou he that troubleth Israel?
He answered: it is not I that haue troubled Israel, but thou, and thy fathers house, in that ye haue forsaken the commaundementes of the Lorde, and thou hast folowed Baal.
Nowe therfore sende and geather to me all Israel vnto mount Carmel, and the prophetes of Baal foure hundred and fyftie, and the prophetes of the Idols groues foure hundred, which eate of Iezabels table.
So Ahab sent vnto all the chyldren of Israel, Ꟶ gathered the prophetes togeather vnto mount Carmel.
And Elia came vnto all the people, and sayde: howe longe halte ye betwene two opynions? If the Lord be God, folowe hym: but yf Baal be he, then go after hym. And the people answered hym not one worde.
Then sayde Elia vnto the people agayne. I onely remayne a prophete of the Lorde: but Baals prophetes are foure hundred and fyftie.
Let them therfore geue vs two oxen, Ꟶ let them chose the one, Ꟶ cut hym in peces, Ꟶ laye hym on wodd, and put no fyre vnder: and I will dresse the other oxe, Ꟶ laye him on wodd, and will put no fyre vnder.
And call ye on the name of youre God, Ꟶ I wyll call on the name of the Lorde: and then the God that answereth by fyre, let him be God. And all the people answered Ꟶ sayde. yt is well spoken.
And Elia sayd vnto the prophetes of Baal: chose you an oxe, and dresse hym fyrst (for ye are many) and call on the name of your goddes, but put no fyre vnder.
And they toke the one oxe that he dyd geue them, Ꟶ they dressed it Ꟶ called on the name of Baal from mornynge to noone: sayeng: O Baal heare vs. But there was no voyce nor one to answere. And they lepte vpon the aulter that they had made.
And at none it fortuned, that Elia mocked them, and sayde: crye lowde, for he is a God: peraduenture he is talkinge or occupyed (in folowinge vpon his enemyes) or is in his iourneye, or happely he slepeth, Ꟶ must be awaked withe youre crye.
And they cryed lowde, and cut them selues, as their maner was, wt knyues Ꟶ launcers, tyll the bloude folowed on them.
And it chaunsed, that when myddaye was passed they prophesyed vntill the tyme of the euenyng sacrifyce. But there was nether voyce ner one to answere, ner any that regarded them.
And Elia sayde vnto all the folke: come to me. And all the people came to hym. And he repayred the aulter of the Lord, that was broken.
And Elia toke .xij. stones according to the nombre of the .xij. trybes of the sonnes of Iacob (vnto whom the worde of the Lorde came, sayeng. Israel shalbe thy name.
And with the stones he made an aultare in the name of the Lorde. And he made a dyche rounde about the aulter, as brode as two forowes of the corne felde.
And he put the wodd in order, Ꟶ hewed the oxe in peces, Ꟶ layed hym on the wodd, and sayde: fyll foure barels wt water, and powre it on the burntsacrifyce Ꟶ on the wodd.
And he sayd: do so agayne. And they dyd so the seconde tyme. And he sayde agayne: do it the thyrde tyme. And they dyd it the thyrde tyme.
And the water ranne rounde about the aulter, and he fylled the pitte wyth water also.
And it fortuned when the tyme came (wherin the burntsacrifyce of the eueninge vsed to be offred) Elia the prophete came Ꟶ sayd: Lord God of Abraham, Isahac Ꟶ of Israel, it shalbe knowen this daye, that thou art the God in Israel, Ꟶ that I am thy seruaunt, Ꟶ that I haue done all these thynges at thy commaundement.
Heare me (O Lorde) heare me, that this people maye knowe, that thou art the Lorde God, Ꟶ thou hast turned theyr herte agayne now at the last.
And the fyre of the Lord fell, Ꟶ consumed the burntsacrifyce Ꟶ the wodd, the stones Ꟶ the dust, Ꟶ lycked vp the water that was in the pitte.
And when all the people sawe it, they fell on their faces, Ꟶ sayd. The Lord, he is God, the Lord, he is God.
And Elia sayde vnto them. Take the prophetes of Baal, Ꟶ let not one of them escape. And they toke them, and Elia brought them vnto the brooke Kison, Ꟶ slue them there.
And Elia sayd vnto Ahab: gett the vp, eate and drinck, for ther is a sounde of moche rayne.
And so Ahab went vp to eate and to drinck, Ꟶ Elia went vp to the toppe of Carmel. And he layed him selfe flatt vpon the erth, Ꟶ put his face betwene his knees,
Ꟶ sayd to his seruaunt: go vp (I praye the) Ꟶ looke towarde the waye of the see. And he went vp Ꟶ loked, Ꟶ sayde: there is nothyng. And he sayde: go agayne .vij. tymes.
And it fortuned, that at the seuenth tyme he sayd: behold, there ariseth a little clowde of the see, lyke a mannes hande. He sayde: go, Ꟶ saye vnto Ahab, Make fast thy charet, Ꟶ gett the downe, that the rayne stoppe the not.
And it came to passe, that in the meane while, the heuen was blacke wt clowdes Ꟶ winde, Ꟶ there was a great rayne. And Ahab gatt vp Ꟶ came to Iezreel.
And the hand of the Lord was on Elia, Ꟶ he gyrded vp hys loynes, Ꟶ ranne before Ahab, tyll he came to Iezreel.
And Ahab tolde Iezabel, all that Elia had done, and howe he had slayne all the prophetes wyth the swerde.
Then Iezabel sent a messenger vnto Elia, sayenge: so Ꟶ so let the goddes do to me, yf I make not thy soule lyke one of theyrs, by to morowe thys tyme.
When he sawe that, he arose Ꟶ went for his lyfe and came to Beerseba in Iuda, Ꟶ left his seruaunt there.
But he hym selfe went a dayes iourney into the wyldernesse, and came and satt downe vnder a Iuniper tree, and desyred for his soule; that he myght dye, and sayde, it is nowe ynough (O Lorde) take my soule, for I am not better then my fathers.
And as he laye and slepte vnder the Iuniper tree: beholde, an Angell touched hym, and sayde vnto hym: vp, and eate.
And whan he loked aboute hym: beholde, there was a loaffe of broyled breade Ꟶ a vessell of water at his heed. And he dyd eate and drincke, and layde him downe agayne to slepe.
And the Angell of the Lorde came agayne the seconde tyme, and touched him, and sayde: vp, and eate, for thou hast yet a great iourneye.
And he arose, and dyd eate and dryncke, and walked in the strength of that meate fourtye dayes Ꟶ fourtye nyghtes, euen vnto Horeb the mount of God.
Whan he came thether into a caue, he lodged there in, all nyght. And beholde, the worde of the Lorde came to him Ꟶ sayde vnto hym: what doest thou here Elia?
And he answered. I haue bene gelous for the Lorde God of Hostes sake. For the chyldren of Israel haue forsaken thy couenant, broken downe thyne aulters and slayne thy prophetes with the swerde, and I onlye am lefte, and they seke my lyfe to take it awaye.
And he sayde: come out Ꟶ stande vpon the mount, before the Lord. And beholde the Lorde went by, Ꟶ a myghtie stronge wynde that rent the mountaynes Ꟶ brake the rockes before the Lorde. But the Lorde was not in the wynde. And after the winde came an erth quake. But the Lorde was not in the erthe quake.
And after the erthe quake, came fire: but the Lord was not in the fyre. And after the fyre, came a small styll voyce.
And when Elia hearde it, he couered his face with hys mantle, Ꟶ went out Ꟶ stode in the entringe in of the caue. And beholde, there came a voyce vnto him, Ꟶ sayd. what doest thou here Elia?
And he answered. I haue bene gelouse for the Lorde God of Hostes sake: because the chyldren of Israel haue forsaken thy couenaunt, cast downe thyne aulters, Ꟶ slayne thy prophetes with the swerde, Ꟶ I only am lefte, Ꟶ they seke my lyfe to take it awaye.
And the Lorde sayde vnto him: go Ꟶ turne thy waye to the wildernesse vnto Damasco, that thou mayest annoynte Hazael, kynge ouer Siria.
And Iehu the sonne of Nimsi, shalt thou annoynte kyng ouer Israel. And Elysa the sonne of Saphat of Abel Meholoh shalt thou annoynte to be prophete in thy rowme.
And it shall come to passe that whoso escapeth the swerde of Hazael, hym shall Iehu slaye: and yf any man scape the swerde of Iehu, hym shall Elisa put to death.
And therto I haue lefte me seuen thousande in Israel, of whych neuer man bowed his knees vnto Baal, nor kyssed him wyth hys mouthe.
So he departed thence, Ꟶ founde Elisa the sonne of Saphat plowyng, Ꟶ hauyng twelue yocke of oxen before him, Ꟶ he wt the twelue. And Elia went by him, Ꟶ cast his mantell vpon him.
And he lefte the oxen, Ꟶ ranne after Elia Ꟶ sayde: let me I praye the, kysse my father Ꟶ my mother, Ꟶ then I will folow the. He sayd vnto him: go backe agayne, for what is it, that I haue done to the?
And whan he went backe agayne from him, he toke a couple of oxen, Ꟶ slue them, and dressed the fleshe wyth the instrumentes of the oxen, Ꟶ gaue vnto the people, and they dyd eate. And then he arose, Ꟶ went after Elia, and mynistred vnto hym.
And Benhadad the kyng of Siria gathered all his hoste together, hauynge .xxxij. kynges wt hym, and horses and charettes: Ꟶ went vp and beseged Samaria, Ꟶ warred agaynst it.
And he sent messengers to Ahab kynge of Israel into the cytie, and sayde vnto him: thus sayeth Benhadad.
Thy syluer and thy golde is myne, and the fayrest of thy wyues, and of thy chyldren be myne.
And the kyng of Israel answered and sayde. My Lorde kynge accordynge to thy sayeng, I am thyne and all that I haue.
And whan the messengers came agayne, they sayd: thus sayeth Benhadad. For as moche as I haue sent vnto the, sayinge: thou shalt delyuer me thy syluer Ꟶ thy golde, and thy wyues, Ꟶ thy chyldren.
I wyll therfore sende my seruauntes vnto the to morow this tyme: Ꟶ they shall serche thyne house, Ꟶ the houses of thy seruauntes. And whatsoeuer is pleasaunt in thyne eyes, they shall take it in their handes, and bringe it awaye.
Then the kyng of Israel sent for all the elders of the lande, Ꟶ sayde: take hede I praye you Ꟶ se, howe thys felow goeth about myscheafe. For he sent vnto me, for my wyues, for my chyldren, for my syluer Ꟶ for my golde: Ꟶ I denyed hym not.
And all the elders Ꟶ all the people sayde: herken not vnto hym, nor consent.
Wherfore he sayde vnto the messengers of Benhadad: tell my Lorde the kynge, all that thou dyddest send for to thy seruaunt at the fyrst tyme, that I wyll do, but this thing I maye not do. And the messengers departed, and brought answer agayne.
And Benhadad sent vnto hym agayne, and sayd: and thus do the Gods vnto me, yf the dust of Samaria be ynough for all the people that folowe me, to take euery man an handfull.
And the kynge of Israel answered, Ꟶ sayde: tell hym: let not him that putteth on his harnesse boste hym selfe, as he that putteth it of.
And it fortuned, that when Benhadad hearde that tydynges, as he was wt the kynges drynkyng with in the pauyllyons, he sayde vnto his seruauntes, put on yor harnesse. And they set them selues in araye agaynst the cytie.
And beholde there came a Prophet vnto Ahab kynge of Israel, sayinge: thus sayth the Lorde. Hast thou sene all this great multitude? beholde, I wyll delyuer it into thyne hande this daye, and thou shalt knowe, that I am the Lorde.
And Ahab sayd: By whom? he sayde: thus sayth the Lorde: euen by the seruauntes of the gouernoures of the sheres. He sayde agayne: Who shall ordre the batayll? And he answered: thou.
Then he nombred the seruauntes of the gouerners of the shyres: and they were two hundred and .xxxij. And after them also, he nombred all the people, all the chyldren of Israel, euen seuen thousande.
And they went out at none. but Benhadad dyd dryncke tyll he was droncken in the pauyllyons both he and the kynges: euen .xxxij. kynges, that holpe hym.
And the seruauntes of the gouernours of the shyres went out fyrst. And Benhadad sent out, and they shewed hym, sayeng: there are men come out of Samaria.
He sayde. Whether they be come out for peace, take them a lyue: or whether they be come out to fyght, take them yet a lyue.
And so those younge men of the gouernours of the shyres came out of the cytie, and the Host after them, and they slue euery one hys enemye that came in his waye.
And the Siriens fled, and they of Israel folowed after them. And Benhadad the kynge of Syria scaped on a horsse, wyth his horsemen.
And the kynge of Israel went out, and smote the horsses Ꟶ charettes, Ꟶ wyth a great slaughter slue he the Sirians.
And there came a Prophete to the kynge of Israel, and sayde vnto hym: go forth and playe the man, be wyse and take hede what thou doest: for when the yere is gone about, the kynge of Siria wyll come vp agaynst the.
And the seruauntes of the kyng of Siria sayde vnto hym. The Gods of the hilles are theyr Gods, and therfore they had the better of vs: but let vs fyght agaynst them in the playne, and for what ye will, we shall haue the better of them.
And this do: take the kynges a waye euery man out of his place, and put dukes in their rowmes.
And do thou nombre the an hoste, lyke the host that thou hast loste, soche horses Ꟶ soch charettes, and we will fyght agaynst them in the playne, Ꟶ thou shalt se vs gett the better of them. And he herkened vnto their voyce, Ꟶ dyd euen so.
And it fortuned, that after the yere was gone aboute, Benhadad nombred the Syrians, and went vp to Aphek to fyght agaynst Israell.
And the children of Israel were nombred, Ꟶ with theyr whole nombre went they agaynst them, and the chyldren of Israel pitched before them, lyke two lytle flockes of kyddes: but the Sirians fylled the countreye.
And there came a man of God, and sayde vnto the kyng of Israel: thus sayth the Lorde: Because the Sirians haue sayed: the Lorde is but God of the hylles, and not God of the valeys: therfore will I deliuer all this great multitude into thine hande, Ꟶ ye shall knowe, that I am the Lorde.
And they pitched one ouer agaynst the other .vij. dayes, Ꟶ it came to passe, that in the seuenth daye the batayle was ioyned. And the chyldren of Israel slue of the Sirians an hundred thousand fote men in one daye.
But the rest fled to Aphek into the cytie. And there fell a walle vpon .xxvij. thousand of the men that were lefte. And Benhadad fled, Ꟶ came into the cytie, from chambre to chambre.
And his seruauntes sayde vnto hym. Beholde, we haue hearde saye, that the kynges of the house of Israel are mercyfull kinges. We will therfore put sacke cloth about or loynes and ropes about oure neckes, Ꟶ go out to the kyng of Israel: yf happlye he wyll saue thy lyfe.
And so they gyrded sacke clothe aboute theyr loynes Ꟶ put ropes aboute theyr heedes, Ꟶ came to the kyng of Israel, Ꟶ sayde. Thy seruaunt Benhadad sayth, I praye the let me lyue. He sayde: is he yet alyue? he is my brother.
And they toke the worde for good lucke Ꟶ hastely caught it out of his mouth Ꟶ sayde: yee thy brother Benhadad. He sayd: go, bring hym hyther. And Benhadad came out vnto hym, Ꟶ he caused him to come vp into the charett.
And he sayd vnto him: the cyties whych my father toke from thy father, I wyll restore agayne. And thou shalt make streates for the in Damasco, as my father dyd in Samaria. And I wyll make an apoyntment with the, Ꟶ send the awaye. And so he made an appoyntment with him, and sent hym awaye.
And there was a certen man of the children of the prophetes, which sayde vnto his neyghboure in the worde of the Lorde: smyte me I praye the. And the man wold not smyte him:
Then sayde he vnto him. Because thou hast not herkened vnto the voyce of the Lorde: beholde as soone as thou art departed from me, a lyon shall slaye the. And it came to passe, that as soone as he was departed from him, a Lyon founde him, Ꟶ slue him.
Then he founde another man Ꟶ sayde: smyte me I praye the. And the man smote him, so that in smytinge he wounded hym.
So the Prophete went forth, Ꟶ wayted for the kyng by the waye, Ꟶ put him selfe out of knowledge wt asshes, which he layed vpon hys face.
And when the kyng came by, he cryed vnto the kyng, Ꟶ sayd: thy seruaunt went out in the myddes of the battell. And beholde, there went awaye a man, whom another man brought vnto me, and sayde: kepe this man. And yf he be myssed or lost, thy lyfe shall go for his: or else, thou shalt paye a talent of syluer.
And as thy seruaunt had here Ꟶ there to do, he was gone. And the kyng of Israel sayde vnto hym: euen so shall thy iudgement be, as thou hast defyned it thy selfe.
And he hasted, Ꟶ toke the asshes awaye from his face: Ꟶ the kyng of Israel knewe him, that he was of the Prophetes.
And he sayde vnto him. thus sayth the Lorde: because thou hast lett go a man that is in my cursse, thy lyfe shall go for his lyfe, and thy people for his people.
And the king of Israel went to his house, waywarde, Ꟶ in displeasure, Ꟶ came to Samaria.
After these thynges, it chaunced, that Naboth the Iezrahelite had a vyneyarde in Iezrahel, harde by the palace of Ahab kyng of Samaria.
And Ahab spake vnto Naboth, sayenge. Geue me thy vyneyarde, that I maye make me a garden of yerbes therof, because it lyeth so nye my house: Ꟶ I will geue the for it a better vyneyarde then it is: or rather yf it please the, I will geue the, the worthe of it in money.
And Naboth sayde to Ahab: the Lorde forbyd the from me, that I shulde geue the enheritaunce of my father vnto the.
And Ahab came into hys house heuye. Ꟶ euell a payde, because of the worde which Naboth the Iezrahelite had spoken to him, for he had sayde: I wyll not geue the the enheritaunce of my fathers. And he layde him downe vpon his bed, and turned awaye his face, and wolde eate no bread.
But Iezabell hys wyfe came to him, and sayde vnto hym: why is thy sprete so waywarde, that thou eatest no breade?
And he sayde vnto her: For I spake vnto Naboth the Iezraelite, and sayde vnto hym: geue me thy vyneyarde for money: or else yf it please the, I wyl geue the another vyneyarde for it. And he answered: I wyl not geue the my vyneyarde.
And Iezabell his wyfe sayde vnto hym: Dost thou thus gouerne the kyngedom of Israel? vp, Ꟶ eate bread, and set thyne hert at rest, I will geue the, the vyneyarde of Naboth the Iezraelite.
And so she wrote a letter in Ahabs name, and sealed it wyth hys seale and sent the lettre vnto the elders and to the nobles that were in hys cytye dwellinge wyth Naboth.
And she wrote in the letter, sayenge: proclayme a fast, and set Naboth on hye amonge the people,
and set two vnthriftes before him, to beare witnesse agaynst him, sayenge: thou dydest blaspheme God and the kyng. And then carye hym out, and stone hym to deeth.
And the men of his cyte: that is to saye, which dwelt in his cytie, did as Iezabel had sent vnto them, and as it was written in the letter whych she had sent vnto them.
They proclamed fastyng, and set Naboth among the chefe of the people,
Ꟶ there came in two men (the children of Belial) and sate before him. And the two vnthriftie persones wytnessed agaynst Naboth, in the presence of the people, sayeng: Naboth dyd blaspheme God and the kyng, And they caried hym out of the cytie, and stoned hym wyth stones that he dyed.
And then they sent to Iezabel, sayenge: Naboth is stoned to dethe.
And it fortuned when Iezabel heard that Naboth was stoned to deeth: she sayde to Ahab: vp, and take possession of the vyneyarde of Naboth, the Iezrahelite, which he denied to geue the for money, for Naboth is not aliue, but deed.
And when Ahab hearde that Naboth was deed, he stode vp to go downe to the vyneyarde of Naboth the Iezrahelite, and to take possession of it.
And the worde of the Lorde came vnto Elia the Thesbite, sayeng:
vp and go downe to mete Ahab kynge of Israel, which is in Samaria. For lo, he is gone downe to the vineyarde of Naboth: to take possession of it.
And therfore shalt thou saye vnto him thus sayth the Lorde: hast thou kylled, Ꟶ gotten possession? And thou shalt speake vnto him sayeng: thus sayth the Lorde in the place where dogges lycked the bloud of Naboth, shall dogges licke euen thy bloud also.
And Ahab sayde to Elia: hast thou founde me, o thou myne enemye? He answered: I haue founde the: for thou art euen solde to worcke wickednesse in the syght of the Lorde.
Beholde, I will bring euell vpon the, and will make cleane riddance of thy posterite Ꟶ wil destroye from Ahab, euen him that maketh water agaynst the wall, Ꟶ him that is shut vp Ꟶ left behynde in Israel:
Ꟶ will make thyne house, lyke the house of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, Ꟶ lyke the house of Baasa the sonne of Ahia, for the prouocacion, wherwith thou hast prouoked, and made Israel to synne.
And of Iezabel spake the Lorde sayeng: dogges shall eate Iezabell, in the possession of Iezrahel.
And he that dyeth of Ahab in the towne, him shal dogges eate: Ꟶ he that dyeth in the feldes, him shal the foules of the ayre eate.
But there was none lyke Ahab which dyd euen sell hym selfe, to worcke wyckednesse in the syght of the Lorde, and that because Iezabel hys wyfe prycked hym forwarde.
He dyd exceadynge abhominablye, in folowyng foule Idoles, according to all thynges, as did the Ammorites whom the Lord cast out before the children of Israel.
And it fortuned, that when Ahab hearde those wordes, he rent hys clothes, and put sackecloth about his flesh, and fasted, and laye in sack and went bare fote.
And the worde of the Lorde came to Elia, the Thesbyte, sayenge:
seest thou how Ahab humbleth hym selfe before me? because he so submytteth hym selfe before me, I wyl not bringe that euell in his dayes: but in his sonnes dayes, wyll I bringe euell vpon hys house.
And they continued thre yere without warre betwene Siria and Israel.
And in the third yere did Iehosaphat the kynge of Iuda, come downe to the kynge of Israel.
And the kynge of Israel sayde vnto hys seruauntes, knowe ye not that Ramoth in Gilead is oures? and we syt stylle, and take it not out of the hande of the kynge of Siria.
And he sayde vnto Iehosaphat: wilt thou come with me to batayle, agaynst Ramoth in Gilead? And Iehosaphat sayd vnto the kyng of Israel: I will be as thou art, and my people shall be as thyne, and my horsses as thyne.
And Iehosaphat sayde vnto the kynge of Israel: aske councell I praye the at the worde of the Lord to daye.
And then the king of Israel geathered the prophetes together upon a foure hundred men, and sayde vnto them: shall I go agaynst Ramoth in Gilead to batayle, or shall I let it alone? And they sayd, go vp: for the Lorde shall delyuer it into the handes of the kyng.
And Iehosaphat sayde: is there here neuer a Prophet of the Lorde more, that we myght enquyre of him?
And the kyng of Israel sayd vnto Iehosaphat: there is yet one man (Michea the sonne of Iimla,) by whom we maye aske councell of the Lorde. But I hate hym: for he doth not prophesye good vnto me, but euel. And Iehosaphat sayde: let not the kyng saye so.
Then the kynge of Israel called a chamberlayn and sayde: fet Michea the sonne of Iimla hyther at once.
And the kynge of Israel and Iehosaphat the kyng of Iuda set ether in hys seat and theyr apparell on them, in a voyde place besyde the entrynge in of the gate of Samaria, and all the Prophetes prophesyed before them.
And zedekia the sonne of Canaana made hornes of yron, and sayd: thus sayth the Lorde: wyth these hornes shalt thou pusshe the Syrians, vntyll thou haue made an ende of them.
And all the Prophetes phrophesyed euen so, sayeng: go vp to Ramoth in Gilead, and prosper, for the Lorde shall delyuer it into the kynges hande.
And the messenger that was gone to call Michea, spake vnto hym sayenge: beholde the wordes of the Prophetes speake good vnto the kynge wt one mouth: let thy worde therfore (I praye the) be lyke the worde of euery one of them, to speake that whych is good.
And Michea sayde: as truely as the Lorde lyueth, whatsoeuer the Lorde sayeth vnto me, that wyll I speake.
And so he came to the kynge, and the kynge sayde vnto hym: Michea, ought we to go agaynst Ramoth in Gilead to batayle or to be still? He answered vnto hym: go and prosper, the Lorde shall delyuer it into the hande of the kynge.
And the kynge sayd vnto hym: So Ꟶ so many times do I charge the, that thou tell me nothyng, but that whych is true, in the name of the Lorde.
He sayd: I saw all them of Israel scatered vpon the hylles, as shepe that haue not a sheperde. And the Lorde sayde: these haue no master, let euery man retourne to hys house in peace.
And the kynge of Israel sayde vnto Iehosaphat: dyd I not tell the, that he wolde prophesye no good vnto me, but euell?
And he sayde agayne: heare thou therfore the worde of the Lorde. I saw the Lorde syt on hys seate, and all the hoost of heauen stode about hym, on hys ryght hand and on hys lefte.
And the Lorde sayde: who shall persuade Ahab, that he maye go and fall at Ramoth in Gilead? and one sayde on thys maner, and a nother on that,
And there came forth a certayne sprete, and stode before the Lorde and sayde: I wil persuade hym.
And the Lorde sayde vnto hym: wherwyth? And he sayde: I wyll go out, and be a false sprete in the mouth of all hys prophetes. He sayde: thou shalt persuade hym, and preuayle, go forth then, and do euen so.
Now therfore beholde the Lord hath put a lyenge sprete in the mouth of all these thy prophetes: and the Lorde hath spoken euell towarde the.
But zedekia the sonne of Chanaana went to and smote Michea on the cheke, Ꟶ sayde: whan went the sprete of the Lorde from me, to speake vnto the?
And Michea sayde: beholde, thou shalt se in that daye, when thou shalt go from chambre to chambre to hyde the.
And the kyng of Israel sayd: take Michea and carye hym vnto Amon the gouerner of the cytie, and vnto Ioab the kynges sonne,
and saye: thus sayth the kynge: Put thys felow in the preson house, and fede him wyth breed of affliction, and with water of trouble vntyll I retourne in peace.
And Michea sayde: yf thou retourne in peace, the Lord hath not spoken by me. And he sayd: herken ye people euery one of you.
And so the kynge of Israel and Iehosaphat the kyng of Iuda went up to Ramoth in Gilead.
And the kynge of Israel sayde to Iehosaphat: chaunge the, whan thou goest to warre: and put on thyne apparell. And the kyng of Israel chaunged hym selfe, and went to battell.
But the kynge of Syria commaunded the, .xxxii. capitaynes (that had rule ouer hys charettes) sayenge: fyght nether wyth small nor greate saue onely agaynst the kynge of Israel.
And when the capytaynes of the charettes sawe Iehosaphat, they sayde: Surely it is the kynge of Israel, and they turned to fyght agaynst hym. And Iehosaphat cryed.
And so it came to passe, that when the captaynes of the charettes saw that he was not the kynge of Israel, they turned back from hym.
And a certen man drewe a bowe ignorantlye and smote the kynge of Israel betwene the ribbes, and his harnesse. Wherfore he sayde vnto the dryuer of his charettes: turne thy hande, and carye me out of the host, for I am sycke.
And the battell encreased that daye, Ꟶ the kyng stode still in his charet agaynst the Sirians, Ꟶ dyed at euen. And the bloude ranne out of the wounde into the myddes of the charett.
And there went a proclamacyun thorowe out the hoste aboute the goynge downe of the sonne, sayinge: euery man to his cytie, Ꟶ to his awne countreye.
And so the kyng of Israel dyed, and they came to Samaria, and buryed him there.
And one wasshed the charet in the pole of Samaria and the dogges lycked vp his bloude (and harlottes wasshed by the pole syde) accordinge vnto the worde of the Lord which he spake.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Ahab Ꟶ all that he dyd, Ꟶ the Iuorie house which he made, and all the cyties that he buylded, are they not written in the boke of the chronicles of the kynges of Israel?
And so Ahab slepte with his fathers, and Ahazia his sonne raygned in his steade.
Iosaphat the sonne of Asa beganne to raygne vpon Iuda in the fourth yere of Ahab kyng of Israel,
and Iehosaphat was .xxxv. yere olde when he beganne to raygne, Ꟶ raygned .xxv. yere in Ierusalem. His mothers name was Azuba the daughter of Silhi.
And he walked in all the wayes of Asa hys father and bowed not therfrom: but dyd that which was ryght in the eyes of the Lorde. Neuertheles, the hyllaulters were not taken out of the waye: for the people offered Ꟶ burnt incense yet, in the hyllaultares.
And Iehosaphat made peace with the kyng of Israel.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Iehosaphat, and the myght that he vsed, and howe he warred, are they not wrytten in the boke of the chronicles of the kynges of Iuda?
And the remnaunt of the stues of the males, which remayned in the dayes of his father, he put cleane out of the lande.
There was then no kynge made in Edom.
And Iehosaphat made ten shippes in the se, to come thorowe Tharsis to Ophir for golde, but they went not: for the shyppes brake at ozion Gaber.
Then sayde Ahazia the sonne of Ahab vnto Iehosaphat: let my seruauntes go with thy seruauntes in the shippes. But Iehosaphat wolde not.
And Iehosaphat dyd slepe with his fathers, and was buryed with hys father in the cytie of Dauid his father: And Iehoram his sonne raygned in his steade.
Ahazia the sonne of Ahab beganne to raygne ouer Israel in Samaria, the seuententh yeare of Ichosaphat kynge of Iuda, Ꟶ reygned two yeares ouer Israel.
But he did euell in the syght of the Lorde, and walked in the waye of his father, Ꟶ in the waye of his mother, Ꟶ in the waye of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, which made Israel to synne.
For he serued Baal, Ꟶ worshypped him, and prouoked the Lorde God of Israel vnto wrath. accordynge to all that his father had done.
And Moab did wickedly agaynst Israel after the deeth of Ahab.
And Ahazia fell thorowe a graate of hys vpper chambre that he had in Samaria: and whyle he was in his sycknesse, he sent messengers, and sayde vnto them: go and enquyre of Beelzebub the God of Ekron, whether I shall recouer of this my disease.
But the angell of the Lorde spake to Elia the Thesbyte: Aryse, and go vp agaynst the messengers of the kynge of Samaria Ꟶ saye vnto them: Is there not a God in Israel, that ye go to aske councell at Beelzebub the God of Ekron?
Wherfore, thus sayth the Lorde: thou shalt not come downe from the bed on which thou art gone vp, but shalt die the death. And Elia departed.
And whan the messengers turned backe agayne vnto him, he sayde vnto them: why are ye nowe come agayne?
They answered him: there came a man vp against vs, Ꟶ sayde vnto vs? go Ꟶ turne agayne vnto the kynge that sent you, Ꟶ saye vnto him: Thus sayeth the Lorde. Is there not a God in Israel, that thou sendest to enquire of Beelzebub the God of Ekron? Therfore thou shalt not come downe from the bed on which thou art gone vp, but shalt dye the death.
And he sayde vnto them: what maner a man was that which came vp in youre waye, Ꟶ tolde you these wordes?
And they answered him: it was an hearry man and gyrde with a gyrdle of lether about his loynes. And he sayde: it is Elia the Thesbyte.
Then the kyng sent vnto him a captayne ouer fyftie, with his fyftie men, which came to him: and beholde, he satt on the toppe of an hyll. And he spake vnto him: Thou man of God, the kyng hath sayd: come downe.
Elia answered and sayde to the captayne ouer the fyftie: yf I be a man of God, fyre come downe from heauen, and consume the Ꟶ thy fyftie. And there came fyre of God, and consumed him and his fyftie.
And the kynge went agayne, Ꟶ sent to him another captayne ouer fyftie with his fyftie. And he answered and sayde vnto him. O man of God, thus hath the kyng sayd: make hast, and come downe.
Elia answered and sayde vnto them: yf I be a man of God, fyre come downe from heauen, and consume the Ꟶ thy fyftie. And there came fyre of God downe from heauen, Ꟶ consumed him and his fyftie. And the kyng went agayne and sent the thirde captayne ouer fyftie wt his fyftie men.
And the thirde captayne ouer fyftie went vp and came Ꟶ fell on his knees before Elia and be sought him, and sayde vnto him: O man of God, let my lyfe and the lyfe of these fyftie thy seruauntes be preciouse in thy syght.
Beholde, there came fyre downe from heauen, and burnt vp the two fore captaynes ouer fyftie with their fyfties: therfore let my lyfe nowe be preciouse in thy syght.
And the Angell of the Lorde sayde vnto Elia: go downe wt him, Ꟶ be not afrayde of him. And he arose, and went downe with him vnto the kyng.
And he sayde vnto him, thus sayth the Lorde: for as moch as thou hast sent messengers to aske councell at Beelzebub the God of Ekron as though there had bene no God in Israel whose worde thou mightest seke after: therfore thou shalt not come downe of the bedd on which thou art gone vp, but shalt dye the death.
And so he dyed accordynge to the worde of the Lorde which Elia had spoken. And Iehoram beganne to raygne in his steade, in the seconde yeare of Iehoram the sonne of Iehosaphat kyng of Iuda, because he had no sonne.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Ahazia, what thynges he dyd, are they not wrytten in the boke of the chronicles of the kynges of Israel?
And it chaunced, that whan the Lorde wolde take vp Elia in to heauen by a whorle wind, Elia went with Elisa from Gilgal.
And Elia sayde vnto Elisa tary here I praye the, for the Lorde hath sent me to Bethel. Elisa sayde vnto him: as surely as the Lorde liueth, and as thy soule lyueth, I will not leaue the. And they came downe to Bethel,
And the chyldren of the Prophetes that were at Bethel, came out to Elisa, Ꟶ sayde vnto him: knowest thou not, howe that the Lorde will take a waye thy master from thy head this daye? He sayde: I knowe it also holde ye youre peace.
And Elia sayde vnto him. Elisa, tary here I praye the, for the Lorde hath sent me to Iericho. He sayde: as surely as the Lord lyueth and as surely as thy soule lyueth, I will not leaue the, Ꟶ so they came to Iericho.
And the chyldren of the prophetes that were at Iericho came to Elisa and sayde vnto him: knowest thou not, that the Lord will take a waye thy master from thy head thys daye? He answered: I knowe it also, holde ye your peace.
And Elia sayde vnto him: tarye I praye the here, for the Lorde hath sent me to Iordan. He sayde: as surely as the Lorde lyueth, and as thy soule lyueth, I will not leaue the. And so they two went togeather.
And fyftie men of the sonnes of the prophetes came and stode on the other syde afarre of, and they two stode by Iordan.
And Elia toke his mantell and wrapte it together, Ꟶ smote the waters, and they were deuided, parte the one waye Ꟶ parte the other, so that they two went ouer thorowe drye lande.
And it fortuned, that as sone as they were ouer, Elia sayd vnto Elisa: aske what I shall do for the, yer I be taken awaye from the. And Elisa sayde: I praye the let thy sprete be dowble vpon me.
And he sayde: thou hast asked an hard thynge. Neuerthelesse, yf thou se me whan I am taken a waye from the thou shalt haue it so: yf thou do not, it shall not be.
And it fortuned, that as they went walkyng and talkynge: beholde, there appeared a charet of fyre and horsses of fyre, and parted them both a sondre. And Elia went vp thorowe the whorlewinde into heauen.
And Elisa, sawe, Ꟶ cryed: O my father, O my father, the charet of Israel and the horsemen therof, and he sawe him nomoare: Ꟶ he toke his awne clothes, Ꟶ rent them in two peces.
He toke vp also the mantell of Elia that fell from him, Ꟶ went backe agayne Ꟶ stode by Iordans syde,
Ꟶ toke the mantell of Elia (that fell from him,) and smote the waters and he sayd: where is the Lorde God of Elia, and he him selfe? And when he had smyten the waters, they parted this waye Ꟶ that waye, Ꟶ Elisa went ouer.
And whan the chyldren of the prophetes which were at Iericho sawe hym from a farre, they sayde: the spryte of Elia doth rest on Elisa, and they came to mete him, and fell to the grounde before him,
Ꟶ sayde vnto him. Se: there be with thy seruauntes fyftie stronge men let them go Ꟶ seke thy master: happlye the spryte of the Lorde hath taken hym vp, and cast hym vpon some mountayne or in to some valeye. And he sayde. Ye shall sende none.
And whan they laye vpon him tyll he was ashamed, he sayde. Send. They sent therfore fyftye men, which sought him thre dayes and thre nyghtes, but founde him not.
And whan they came agayne to him, which taryed at Iericho, he sayde vnto them: dyd I not saye vnto you, that ye shulde not go?
And the men of the cytie sayde vnto Elisa beholde, Syr, the dwellynge of this cytie is pleasaunt as thou thy selfe seest: but the water is naught Ꟶ the grounde baren.
He sayde. Brynge me a new cruse, and put salt therin. And they brought it to him.
And he went vnto the springe of the waters, and cast the salt in thither, Ꟶ sayde: thus sayth the Lorde. I haue healed this water, ther shall not come henceforthe ether deeth or barennesse.
So the waters were healed vnto this daye, accordinge to the sayinge of Eliseus, which he spake.
And he went vp from thence vnto Bethel. And as he was goinge vp the waye, there came lytle chyldren out of the cytie, Ꟶ mocked him, Ꟶ sayd vnto him. Go vp thou bald heed, go vp thou bald heed.
And he turned backe, and looked on them, and cursed them in the name of the Lorde. And there came two she Beares out of that woodd Ꟶ tare .xlii. chyldren of them.
And he went from thence to mount Carmel, and from thence he turned agayne to Samaria.
Iehoram the sonne of Ahab beganne to raygne vpon Israel in Samaria the .xviij. yere of Iehosaphat kynge of Iuda, and raygned twelue yeres.
And he wrought euell in the syght of the Lorde: but not lyke his father and lyke his mother, for he put a waye the ymages of Baal, that his father had made.
Neuerthelesse, he cleaued vnto the synnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat (which made Israel to synne) and departed not ther from.
And Mesa kynge of Moab was a Lorde of shepe, and rendered vnto the kynge of Israel an hundred thousande lambes Ꟶ an hundred thousande rammes with the wolle.
But whan Ahab was deed, it fortuned, that the kynge of Moab rebelled agaynst the kynge of Israel.
And kynge Iehoram went out of Samaria the same ceason, and nombred all Israell,
Ꟶ went, Ꟶ sent to Iehosaphat the kynge of Iuda, sayinge: the kynge of Moab hath offended agaynst me, wilt thou come wt me agaynst Moab to battell? He answered: I wyll come vp, for as I am, so art thou and as my people be, so are thy people, Ꟶ thy horses as myne.
And he sayde. What waye shall we go vp? And he answered. The waye thorowe the wildernesse of Edom.
And so the kynge of Israel toke his iourneye, and the kynge of Iuda, Ꟶ the kynge of Edom. And when they had compassed the waye seuen dayes, they had no water for the hoost and for the cattell that folowed them.
And the kynge of Israel sayde. Alas, the Lorde hath called these thre kynges together, to delyuer them ouer into the hande of Moab.
But Iehosaphat sayde: is there not here a prophet of the Lorde, that we maye enquyre of the Lorde by him? And one of the kynge of Israels seruauntes answered and sayde: here is Elisa the sonne of Saphat, which powred water on the handes of Elia.
And Iehosaphat sayde Is not the worde of the Lorde wt hym? And so the kynge of Israel, Ꟶ Iehosaphat and the kynge of Edom went downe to him.
And Elisa sayde vnto the kynge of Israel. what haue I to do with the? Get the, to the prophetes of thy father, and to the prophetes of thy mother. And the kynge of Israel sayde vnto him. Oh naye, For the Lorde hath called these thre kynges together to delyuer them into the hande of Moab.
And Elisa sayde: as sure as the Lord of Hostes lyueth (in whose syght I stand) and it were not that I regarde the presence of Iehosaphat the kynge of Iuda, I wolde not loke towarde the, nor yet se the.
But nowe bringe me a mynstrell. And whan the mynstrell played, the hande of the Lorde came vpon him.
And he sayde. Thus sayeth the Lorde. Make this playne grounde full of diches.
For thus sayth the Lorde: ye shall se nether wynde nor rayne, Ꟶ yet the broke shalbe fylled wt water, that ye maye dryncke, both ye, and youre beastes, and youre catell.
And this is yet but a small thynge in the syght of the Lorde, for asmoch as he will geue ouer the Moabites also into youre handes.
And ye shall smyte euery stronge towne, and euery goodlye cytie, and shall fell euery pleasaunt tree, and stoppe euery well of water, and marre euery good platte of grounde with stones.
And in the morninge, whan the meateofferynge was offred, it fortuned, that there came water by the waye from Edom, and the contreye was fylled with water.
And when all the Moabites hearde that the kynges were come vp to fyght agaynst them, they gathered all to geather, from the youngest that was able to put on harnesse and so vpwarde, and stode in the border of the lande.
And they were vp early in the morninge and the sonne shone vpon the water, that the Moabites sawe the water a farre of as red as bloude,
and they sayde. This is the bloude of slaughter: the kynges are slayne and one hath smytten another. Nowe therfore Moab gett the to the spoyle.
And when they came to the Hoste of Israel, the Israelytes stode vp and smote the Moabites, so that they fledd before them, but they folowed vpon them, Ꟶ smote Moab.
And they ouerthrewe the cyties, Ꟶ on euery good parcell of lande, cast euery man his stone, and fylled it, and they stopte all the welles of waters, and felde all the good trees. Onely in the cytie of brick left they the stones therof: howbeit they went aboute it with slynges, and smote it.
And when the kynge of Moab sawe, that the battell was sore agaynst him, he toke wt him seuen hundred men that drew the swerde to haue gone thorowe, euen vnto the kynge of Edom: but they coulde not.
And then he toke his eldest sonne (that shulde haue raygned in his steade) Ꟶ offered him for a burnt offering vpon the wall. And ther was great indignacyon agaynst Israel, and they departed from him, and returned to their awne lande.
And there cryed a certen woman of the wyues of the prophetes vnto Elisa, sayinge: thy seruaunt my husbande is deed, and thou knowest, that thy seruaunt dyd feare the Lorde. And the creditor is come, to fett my two sonnes, to be his bondemen.
Elisa sayde vnto her. Tell me what shall I do for the? What hast thou in thyne house? She sayde, thyne handmayde hath nothinge at all in the house, saue a pitcher with oyle.
He sayde vnto her: Go Ꟶ borowe vessell for the, of them that are without euen of all thy neyboures, emptie vesselles and that not a fewe.
And when thou art come in, thou shalt shutt the dore after the and after thy sonnes, and powre out into all those vesselles, and sett asyde that which is full.
And so the woman went from him, and shutt the dore after her and after her sonnes. And they brought to her, Ꟶ she powred out.
And it came to passe, that when the vesselles were full, she sayde vnto her sonne: brynge me yet a vessell. And he sayde vnto her: I haue no mo. And the oyle ceased.
Then she came, and tolde the man of God. And he sayde: go Ꟶ sell the oyle, Ꟶ paye them that thou art in dett vnto, but lyue thou Ꟶ thy chyldren of the rest.
And it fell on a daye, that Elisa came to Sunem, where was a great woman, that toke him in, for to eate breed. And so it came to passe, that from that tyme forth (as ofte as he came that waye) he turned in thither to eate breed.
And she sayde vnto her husbande. Beholde, I perceaue, that this is a holy man of God, that commeth so oft by oure place.
Lett vs make him a chambre (I praye the) with walles, Ꟶ let vs set him there a beed, Ꟶ a table, a stole Ꟶ a candelsticke: that he maye turne in thyther when he commeth to vs.
And it fortuned on a daye, that he came thither Ꟶ turned into the chambre, Ꟶ laye there in,
and sayde to Gehezi his seruaunt: call this Sunamite. And whan he called her, she presented hyr selfe before hym.
And agayne he sayde vnto him: Tell her. Beholde, thou hast bene carefull for vs, and hast made all thys prouision. What shall we nowe do for the? Woldest thou be spoken for to the kynge or to the captayne of the Hoste? She answered I dwell amonge myne awne people.
And he sayde agayne, what is to be done for her? Ge hezi answered. Uerely she hath no chylde, Ꟶ her husbande is olde.
And he sayde: call her. And whan he had called her, she stode in the dore.
And he sayde by soch a tyme, and as sone as the frute can liue, thou shalt embrace a sonne. And she sayde: Oh naye my Lorde, thou man of God, do not lye vnto thine handmayd.
And the wyfe conceaued, and bare a sonne that same ceason that Eliseus had sayde vnto her as sone as the frute coulde haue lyfe.
And when the chylde was growne, it fell on a daye, that he went out to his father, and to the reapers.
And he sayde vnto hys father, my heed, my heed. And he sayd to a lad. Carye him to his mother.
And whan he had taken him and brought him to his mother, he sate on her knees tyll none, and then dyed.
And she went vp, and layde him on the bed of the man of God, and shut the dore about him, and went out,
and called vnto her husbande and sayde: sende with me (I praye the) one of the younge men Ꟶ one of the Asses, For I wyll runne to the man of God, and come agayne.
And he sayde: wherfore wylt thou go to him seinge that to daye is nether newe mone nor Saboth daye. She answered: For health.
Then she sadelled an Asse, Ꟶ sayde to hir seruaunt: leade a waye the asse, and make her not to go slowly (because I ryde vpon her) but whan I byd the.
And so she went Ꟶ came vnto the man of God, to mount Carmel. And it fortuned: that when the man of God sawe her farre of, he sayde to Gehezi his seruaunt. Beholde, yonder is the Sunamite.
Runne therfore to mete her, and saye vnto her: Is all well with the and with thy husbande, Ꟶ with the ladd? And she answered. All is well.
And when she came to the man of God vp to the hyll, she caught him by the fete. But Gehezi went to her, to thrust her awaye. And the man of God sayde: let her alone, for her soule is vexed within her, and the Lorde hath hidd it from me, and hath not tolde it me.
Then she sayde: dyd I desyre a sonne of my Lorde? dyd I not require the, that thou shuldest not disceaue me?
Then he sayde to Gehezi: gyrde vp thy loynes, and take my staffe in thyne hande, and go thy waye. If thou mete anye man salute him not. And yf any salute the, answere him not agayne. And laye my staffe vpon the face of the chylde.
And the mother of the chylde sayde: as sure as the Lorde lyueth, Ꟶ as thy soule liueth. I will not leaue the. And he arose and folowed her.
Gehezi went before them, Ꟶ layed the staffe vpon the face of the chylde. But there was nether voyce nor any feling. Wherfore he went agayne to mete him, and tolde him, sayinge: the childe is not awaked.
And when Elisa was come into the house: Beholde, the chylde was deed and layde vpon his bed.
He went in therfore, Ꟶ shut the dore to the ladd and him, and prayed vnto the Lorde.
And went vp Ꟶ laye vpon the ladd, Ꟶ put his mouth on his mouth, Ꟶ his eyes vpon his eyes, Ꟶ his handes vpon his handes, and whan he so laye vpon the chylde, the flesshe of the chylde waxed warme.
And he went agayne, Ꟶ walked once vp and downe in the house, and then went vp, and layed him selfe vpon him agayne. And then the chylde gasped seuen times and opened his eyes.
And he called Gehezi, Ꟶ sayde: Call for this Sunamite. So he called her: which when she was come in vnto him, he sayde vnto her: take thy sonne.
Therfore she went in, and fell at his fete, Ꟶ bowed her selfe to the grounde, and toke vp her sonne, and went out.
Elisa came agayne to Gilgal, and there was a derth in the lande, and the chyldren of the prophetes dwelt with him. And he sayde vnto his seruaunt. Set a great pot on the fyre, and make pottage for the chyldren of the prophetes.
And one went out into the felde, to gather herbes, Ꟶ founde a wilde vyne, and gathered therof wylde Coloquyntydas his lappe full, Ꟶ came, Ꟶ shred them into the potte of potage: for they knewe it not.
So they powred out for the men to eate. And it fortuned, that when they tasted of the pottage, they cryed out, and sayde: O thou man of God there is deeth in the pot: and they coulde not eate therof.
But he sayde: brynge meale. And he cast it into the pot, Ꟶ sayde: fyll for the people, that they maye eate, and there was no more harme in the pot.
There came a man from Baal Salisa, Ꟶ brought the man of God bread of the fyrst frutes, euen .xx. loafes of barlye, and newe corne which was yet in his bagges. And he sayde: Geue vnto the people, that they maye eate.
And his mynister answered: why, shall I set this before an hundred men? He sayde agayne: geue it vnto the people that they maye eate. For thus sayth the Lorde they shall eate, and ther shalbe left ouer.
And so he sett it before them, Ꟶ they dyd eate, and left ouer, accordynge to the worde of the Lorde.
Naaman, captayne of the Hoste of the kynge of Siria, was a greate man, and honorable in the syght of his master: because that by him the Lorde had geuen health vnto Siria. He was also a myghtie man, and experte in warre, but he was a leper.
And the Syrians had gone out by companies, Ꟶ had brought out of the contreye of Israel a lytle mayde, Ꟶ she was with Naamans wyfe.
And she sayde vnto her ladye: I wold to God my Lorde were with the prophet that is in Samaria: for he wolde delyuer him of his leprosie.
And he went in, and tolde his Lorde, sayinge: thus and thus sayde the mayde, that is of the lande of Israel.
And the kynge of Syria sayde: Come and entre in and I wyll sende a letter vnto the kynge of Israel. And he came, and toke with him ten talentes of syluer, and .vj. thousande peces of golde, Ꟶ ten chaunge of raymentes,
and brought the letter to the kynge of Israel contaynynge this tenoure: Nowe when this letter is come vnto the: Beholde, I haue therwith sent Naaman my seruaunt to the, that thou mayest rydde him of his leprosie.
And it fortuned, that when the kynge of Israel had redde the letter, he rent his clothes, and sayde: am I God, that I shulde slaye, Ꟶ make alyue? For he doth sende to me that I shulde delyuer a man from his leprosie. Wherfore consyder (I praye you) and se howe he seketh a quarell agaynst me.
which when Elisa the man of God had hearde, howe that the kynge of Israel had rent his clothes, he sent to the kynge, sayinge. Wherfore hast thou rent thy clothes? let him come nowe to me Ꟶ he shall know, that there is a prophet in Israel.
And so Naaman came wt his horsses and with his charettes, and stode at the dore of the housse of Elisa.
And Elisa sent a messenger vnto him, sayinge: go and washe the in Iordan seuen tymes, Ꟶ thy fleshe shall come agayne to the, Ꟶ thou shalt be cleansed.
But Naaman was wroth, Ꟶ went a waye, Ꟶ sayde. Beholde I thought wt my selfe: he wolde surely come out, and stande Ꟶ call on the name of the Lorde his God, and put his hande on the place that he maye heale the leprosie.
Are not Abana Ꟶ Pharphar, ryuers of Damasco, better then all the waters of Israel? Yf I washe me also in them, shall I not be clensed? And so he turned him, and departed with displeasure.
And his seruauntes came, Ꟶ commoned with hym, and sayde: Father, yf the prophete had bydd the do some great thinge, oughtest thou not to haue done it? How moch rather then, whan he sayth to the: wasshe, and be cleane?
Then went he downe, Ꟶ wasshed him selfe seuen tymes in Iordan, accordynge to the sayinge of the man of God, Ꟶ his flesshe chaunged, like vnto the flesshe of a lytle chylde, Ꟶ he was cleansed.
And he turned agayne to the man of God, he and all his companie, and stode before him, and sayde: Beholde, I knowe nowe that there is no God in all the worlde, but in Israel. Nowe therfore take a blessinge of thy seruaunt.
But he sayde: as surely as the Lorde liueth (before whom I stande) I will receaue none. And whan the other wolde haue constrayned hym to receaue it, he wolde not.
And Naaman sayde: Shall there not be geuen to thy seruaunt as moch of this erthe as two mules maye beare? For thy seruaunt will here forth offer nether burnt sacrifyce nor offeringe vnto any other God, saue vnto the Lorde.
But herin the Lorde be mercyfull to thy seruaunt, that when my master goeth into the house of Rimmon, Ꟶ doth worshyppe there, Ꟶ leaneth on my hande, and I also worshyppe in the house of Rimmon. (Whan I do worshyppe I saye) in the house of Rimmon, the Lorde be mercyfull vnto thy seruaunt because of thys thinge.
Unto whom he sayde: go in peace. And when he was departed from him as it were a furlonge of grounde,
Gehezi the seruaunt of Elisa the man of God, sayde: beholde, my master hath spared Naaman thys Syrian, that he wolde not receaue of hys hande those thynges that he offered. As surely as the Lorde lyueth, I wyll runne after him, Ꟶ take some what of him.
And so Gehezi folowed Naaman. And when Naaman sawe him runninge after him, he lyght downe from the charet, to mete him, and sayde: is all well?
He answered: All is well. Beholde, my master hath sent me, sayinge: se, there be come to me euen nowe from mount Ephraim two yonge men of the chyldren of the prophetes: geue them I praye the, one talent of syluer and two chaunge of garmentes.
And Naaman sayde: With a good will. Take two talentes: Ꟶ he compelled him to bynde two talentes of syluer in two bagges, with two chaunge of garmentes, and layed them vpon two of his seruauntes, to beare them before him.
And whan he came in to a secrete place, he toke them from their hande, Ꟶ bestowed it in the house, Ꟶ the men were let go,
and they departed. But he went in, and stode before his master. And Elisa sayde vnto him: whence commest thou Gehezi? He sayde: thy seruaunt went no whether.
But he sayde vnto hym: went not myne hert with the, when the man turned agayne from his charet to mete the? Is it nowe a tyme to receaue moneye, to receaue garmentes, olyue trees, vyneyardes, shepe and oxen, men seruauntes Ꟶ mayde seruauntes?
The leprosye therfore of Naaman shall cleaue vnto the, and vnto thy seed for euer. And he went out from his presence a leper, as whyte as snowe.
The chyldren of the prophetes sayde vnto Elisa: Beholde, the place where we dwell with the, is to lytle for vs.
We wyll therfore go vnto Iordane, and take thence euery man a beame, and buylde vs a place, to dwell in. And he answered: goo.
And one sayde: be content I praye the, and come with thy seruauntes. And he answered: I wyll come,
and so he went with them. And when they came to Iordan, they cutt downe wood.
But it fortuned, that as one was fellinge downe of a tre, the axe heed fell into the water. And he cryed, Ꟶ sayde: Alas master, it was lent me.
And the man of God sayde. Where fell it? And he shewed him the place. And he cut downe a stycke, Ꟶ cast it in thither, Ꟶ immediatly the yron dyd swymme.
Therfore sayde he: take it vp. And he stretched out his hande, and toke it vp.
But the kynge of Siria warred agaynst Israel, Ꟶ toke councell with his seruauntes, and sayde: In yonder secrete place shalbe my remayninge.
And the man of God sent vnto the kynge of Israel, sayinge: Beware, that thou go not ouer to soch a place, for there the Sirians are lurkynge.
Therfore the kynge of Israel sent to the place which the man of God tolde him, and warned him of, and saued him selfe from it, not once nor twyse.
And the hert of the kynge of Siria was troubled for this thinge, and he called for his seruauntes and sayde vnto them: wyll ye not shewe me, which of oure men to the kynge of Israel?
And one of his seruauntes sayde: none my Lorde o kynge. But Elisa the prophet, that is in Israel, telleth the kinge of Israel, yea euen, the wordes that thou speakest in thy preuye chambre.
He sayde: go, Ꟶ spie where he is, that I maye sende and fett him. And one tolde him, sayinge: beholde, he is in Dothan.
Therfore sent he thither horses and charettes, and a myghtye Hoste. And they came by nyght, Ꟶ compassed the citie about.
And when the seruaunt of the man of God rose vp early to go out: Beholde, there was an Host round about the towne with horses and charettes. And his seruaunt sayde vnto him: Alas master, what shall we do?
He answered feare not, for they that be with vs, are moo then they that be wyth them.
And Elisa prayed and sayde: Lorde (I beseche the) open hys eyes, that he maye se. And the Lorde opened the eyes of the yonge man. And beholde, the mountayne was full of horses, and charettes of fyre rounde aboute Elisa.
And when they came downe to hym, Elisa prayed vnto the Lorde, and sayde: Smyte thys people (I praye the) with blindnesse. And he smote them with blindnes, accordinge to the desyre of Elysa.
And Elisa sayde vnto them this is not the waye, nether is this the towne: folowe me, and I wyll bringe you to the man whom ye seke. But he ledd them to Samaria.
And it fortuned, that when they were come to Samaria, Elisa sayde: Lorde, open their eyes that they maye se. And the Lorde opened their eyes, and they sawe. And beholde, they were in the myddes of Samaria.
And the kynge of Israel sayde vnto Elisa, when he sawe them: My father, shall I smyte them:
And he answered: Thou shalt not smyte them. But smyte those that thou hast taken with thyne awne swerde, and wt thyne awne bowe. But rather set bread and water before them, that they maye eate and drincke, and go to their master.
And he prepared a great refeccyon for them. And when they had eaten and droncke, he sent them a waye and they went to their master. And so the soudyoures of Syria came nomore into the lande of Israel.
After thys it chaunced, that Benhadad kynge of Siria gathered all his Hoste Ꟶ went vp, and beseged Samaria.
But there was a greate derth in Samaria: and beholde, they beseged it, vntyll an Asses heed (was solde) for foure skore syluer pens, and the fourth part of a Cab of doues donge for fyue sicles.
And as the kynge of Israel was goinge vpon the wall, there cryed a woman vnto him sayinge: helpe, my Lorde O kynge.
He sayd: yf the Lord do not succoure the: wherwith can I helpe the: wt the barne, or wt the wyne presse?
And the kynge sayde vnto her: what wilt thou? She answered: yonder woman sayde vnto me: brynge thy sonne, that we maye eate him to daye, and we wyll eate myne to morowe.
And so we dressed my sonne and dyd eate him. And I sayde to her the other daye: brynge thy sonne that we maye eate hym, and she hath hyd her sonne.
And it came to passe, that when the kynge hearde the wordes of the woman, he rent his clothes, and went vp on the wall. And the people loked: and beholde he had a sack cloth vnder, vpon hys flesshe.
Then he sayde: God do so Ꟶ so to me, yf the heed of Elisa the sonne of Saphat shall stande on him this daye.
But Elisa satt in his house and the elders satt by him, Ꟶ the kynge sent a man before him. But yer the messenger came to him, he sayde to the elders haue ye not sene, howe that the sonne of this murtherar hath sent, to take awaye myne heed? be circumspect when the messenger commeth, and shut the dore, and holde him at the dore: is not the sounde of hys masters fete behinde him?
Whyle he yet talked with them: Beholde the messenger came downe vnto him, Ꟶ sayde beholde, this euell is of the Lorde, Ꟶ what more shall I loke for of the Lorde
Then Elisa sayde: heare ye the worde of the Lorde: thus sayth the Lorde. to morowe thys tyme shall a bousshell of fyne floure be solde for a Sicle, and two bousshelles of Barley for a Sycle in the gate of Samaria.
Then a certayne Lorde (on whose hand the kynge leaned) answered the man of God, and sayde: beholde, yf the Lorde wolde make wyndowes in heuen, myghte this sayinge come to passe? He sayde: Beholde, thou shalt se it wt thyne eyes, but shalt not eate therof.
And there were foure leperous men at the entringe in of the gate. And they sayde one to another, why sytt we here, vntill we dye?
Yf we saye: we will entre into the citie, beholde: the derth is in the cytie, and we shall dye therin. And yf we sytt styll here, we dye also. Nowe therfore come, and let vs fall vpon the hoste of the Sirians: If they saue oure lyues we shall lyue: Yf they kyll vs, then are we deed.
And so they arose in the nyght, to go to the hoste of the Sirians. And when they were come to the vttmost parte of the hoste of Siria: beholde, there was no man there.
For the Lorde had made the hoste of the Sirians to heare a noyse of charettes and a noyse of horsses, Ꟶ the noyse of a great hoste. In so moch that they sayde one to another, lo, the kynge of Israel hath hyred agaynst vs the kynges of the Hethites, and the kynges of the Egypcyans, to come vpon vs.
Wherfore they arose and fled in the nyght, and left their tentes their horsses, and their Asses, and the felde which they had pytched euen as it was, Ꟶ fled for their lyues.
And when these lippers came to the edge of the host, they went into a tent, Ꟶ dyd eate, Ꟶ dryncke, Ꟶ caryed thence syluer, Ꟶ gold and rayment, and went and hydd it: came agayne and entred into another tent, and caryed thence also, and went and hidd it.
Then sayde one to another: We do not well thys daye, for asmoch as it is a daye to bringe good tydinges, Ꟶ we holde oure peace Yf we tarye tyll the daye lyght, some mischeffe wyll come vpon vs. Nowe therfore come, that we maye goo, and tell the kynges housholde.
And so they came, Ꟶ called vnto the porter of the cytie, and tolde them sayinge: we came to the pauilions of the Syrians: Ꟶ se, there was no man there, nether voyce of man, but horsses and Asses tyed, and the tentes were, euen as they were wont to be.
And so the man called vnto the porters, Ꟶ they tolde the kynges house within.
And the kynge arose in the nyght, and sayde vnto his seruauntes. I wyll shewe you nowe, what the Syrians haue done vnto vs. They knewe that we be hungrye, Ꟶ therfore are they gone out of the pauylions, to hyde them selues in the felde, sayinge: Whan they come out of the cytie, we shall catch them alyue, and get into the cytie.
And one of his seruauntes answered, and sayde. Let men take (I praye you) fyue of the horsses that remayne, and are lefte in the multitude. Beholde they are euen as all the multitude of Israel that are lefte in the cytie: beholde (I saye) they are euen as all the multitude of the Israelytes that are consumed, Ꟶ we wyll sende, Ꟶ se.
They toke therfore the horsses of two charettes, and the kynge sent after the hoste of the Syrians, sayinge: go, Ꟶ se.
And they went after them, euen vnto Iordan: and lo, all the waye was full of clothes and vesselles which the Syrians had cast from them in their haste. And the messengers returned, and tolde the kynge.
And the people went out, Ꟶ spoyled the tentes of the Syrians. And so it came to passe, that a busshel of fyne flowre was sold for a sycle, and two busshelles of barley for a sycle accordynge to the worde of the Lorde.
And the kynge apoynted the Lorde (on whose hand he leaned) to be at the gate. And the people trode vpon him in the gate, and he dyed, accordynge to the worde of the man of God which he sayde, when the kynge came downe to him.
And so came the thynge to passe that the man of God had spoken to the kynge, saynge: two busshelles of barley for a sycle, Ꟶ a busshell of fyne floure for another, shalbe to morowe this tyme in the gate of Samaria.
Wher vnto that Lorde answered the man of God, and sayde. Yee, and yf the Lorde made wyndowes in heauen myght it come to passe? And he sayde: Beholde, thou shalt se it with thyne eyes, Ꟶ shalt not eate therof.
And euen so chaunced it vnto him: for the people troad vpon him in the gate, and he dyed.
Then spake Elisa vnto the woman (whose sonne he had restored to lyfe agayne) sayinge: vp and go, thou and thyne house, Ꟶ soiourne wheresoeuer thou canst, for the Lorde hath called for a derth, and the same shall come vpon the land seuen yeres.
And the woman arose, and dyd after the sayinge of the man of God, and went both she and her houshold, Ꟶ soiourned in the lande of the Philistines seuen yere.
And at the seuen yeres ende, it fortuned, that the woman came agayne out of the lande of the Philistines, and went out to call vpon the kynge for her house and for her land.
And the kynge talked with Gehezi the seruaunt of the man of God, sayinge: tell me I praye the all the great deades that Elisa hath done.
He tolde the kynge, howe he had restored a deed bodye to lyfe agayne: but in the meane tyme the woman (whose sonne he had raysed vp agayne) cryed to the kynge for her house Ꟶ for her lande. And Gehezi sayde: My Lorde O kyng, thys is the woman, and thys is her sonne whom Elisa raysed vp agayne.
And whan the kynge asked the woman, she tolde hym. And so the kynge delyuered her a chambrelayne, sayinge: restore thou vnto her all that are hers, and all the frutes of the felde, sence the daye that she left the lande, vnto this tyme.
And Elisa came to Damascon, Ꟶ Benhadad the kynge of Siria was sycke. And one tolde him sayinge. The man of God is come hither.
And the kynge sayde vnto Hazael: take a present in thine hande, and goo mete the man of God, that thou mayest aske the Lord by him, whether I shall recouer of this disease.
And so Hazael went to mete him and toke the present with him, and of euery good thinge of Damascon, euen as moch as fourtye Cameles coulde beare, and came Ꟶ presented hym selfe before hym, and sayde: Thy sonne Benhadad kynge of Siria hath sent me to the, sayinge, shall I recouer of this dysease?
And Elisa sayd vnto him: go Ꟶ saye vnto him: thou shalt recouer, howbeit the Lorde hath shewed me, that he shall surely dye.
And he loked asyde, and was asshamed, and the man of God wepte.
And Hazael sayde: why wepeth my Lord? He answered: for I know the euyll thinges that thou shalt do vnto the chyldren of Israel: for their stronge cyties shalt thou sett on fyre, and their younge men shalt thou sley with the swerde Ꟶ shalt dasshe out the braynes of their suckynge chyldren, Ꟶ all to teare their wemen with chylde.
But Hazael sayde: what is thy seruaunt, a dogge, that I shulde do this great thynge? And Elisa answered: the Lorde hath shewed me, that thou shalt be kynge of Siria.
And so he departed from Elisa, Ꟶ came to his master, which sayde to him. What sayde Elisa to the? He answered: he tolde me, that thou shuldest recouer.
And on the morowe it fortuned, that he toke a thicke cloth, and dypt it in water, and spred it on his face, and he dyed, and Hazael raygned in his steade.
The fyfte yeare of Iehoram the sonne of Ahab kynge of Israel, Iehosaphat beynge also kinge of Iuda, Iehoram the sonne of Iehosaphat kynge of Iuda, beganne to raygne.
.xxxii. yere olde was he, when he beganne to raygne, and he raygned eyght yere in Ierusalem.
And he walked in the wayes of the kinges of Israel, as they that were of the house of Ahab: for the daughter of Ahab was his wyfe, and he dyd euell in the syght of the Lorde.
And the Lorde wolde not destroye Iuda, and that because of Dauid hys seruaunt, as he promysed hym to geue hym all waye a lyght amonge hys chyldren.
In those dayes Edom dyd wickedly when he was vnder the hande of Iuda. For they made them a kynge of theyr awne.
So Iehoram went to zair, he and all his charettes with hym. And he rose by nyght, and smote the Edomites, which compassed hym in, with the captaynes of hys charettes, Ꟶ the people fledd into theyr tentes.
But Edom rebelled, so that he wold not be vnder the hande of Iuda vnto thys daye. And then Lobnah began to be disobedient euen that same tyme.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Ioram and all that he dyd, are they not wrytten in the boke of the chronicles of the kynges of Iuda?
And Ioram rested with hys fathers, and was buryed besyde his fathers in the citie of Dauid. And Ahaziahu his sonne raygned in his steade.
In the .xij. yere of Ioram the sonne of Ahab kynge of Israel, dyd Ahaziahu the sonne of Iehoram kinge of Iuda begynne to raygne.
Two Ꟶ twentye yere olde was Ahaziahu when he beganne to raygne, and he raygned one yere in Ierusalem, and hys mothers name was Athaliahu the daughter of Omri kynge of Israel.
But he walked in the waye of the house of Ahab, and dyd euell in the sight of the Lorde, euen as dyd the house of Ahab.
For he was the sonne in lawe of the house of Ahab. And he went with Ioram the sonne of Ahab to warre agaynst Hazael kynge of Siria, in Ramoth Gilead, Ꟶ the Sirians wounded Ioram.
And kynge Ioram went back agayne to be healed in Iesrahel of the woundes which the Sirians had geuen hym at Ramoth, when he fought agaynst Hazael king of Siria. And Ahaziahu the sonne of Iehoram kynge of Iuda went downe to se Ioram the sonne of Ahab in Iesrael, because he was sycke there.
And Elisa the prophete called one of the chyldren of the prophetes, Ꟶ sayd vnto him: gyrde vp thy loynes, and take thys boxe of oyle in thyne hande, and get the to Ramoth in Gilead.
And when thou commest thyther, loke where is Iehu the sonne of Iehosaphat, the sonne of Nimsi, and go to him, and make him aryse vp from amonge hys brethren, Ꟶ carye hym to a secret chambre.
Then take the boxe of oyle, and powre it on hys heed, and saye: thus sayth the Lorde: I haue anoynted the to be kynge ouer Israel. And then open the dore, and flee without any taryinge.
And so the seruaunt of the prophete gat him to Ramoth Gilead:
and when he came in, beholde, the captaynes of the hoost were syttynge togyther. And he sayde: I haue an errand to the, o captayne. And Iehu sayde: vnto which of all vs? He sayde: to the, o captayne.
And he arose, and went into the house. And he powred the oyle on hys heed, and sayde vnto hym: thus saythe the Lorde God of Israel: I haue anoynted the to be kinge ouer the people of the Lorde, euen ouer Israel.
Thou shalt smyte the house of Ahab thy master, that I maye aduenge the bloud of my seruauntes the prophetes, and the bloude of all the seruauntes of the Lorde, of the hande of Iezabel,
for the whole house of Ahab shalbe destroyed, and I wyll destroye from Ahab, euen hym that maketh water agaynst the wall, and him that is presoned and forsaken in Israel:
and I wyll make the house of Ahab lyke the house of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, and lyke the house of Baasa the sonne of Ahia.
And as for Iezabel the dogges shall eate her in the felde of Iezrael, and ther shalbe none to burye her. And he opened the dore, and fledd.
Iehu came out to the seruauntes of hys lorde, and one sayde vnto hym, is all well? Wherfore came thys madd felowe to the? And he sayde vnto them: ye knowe what maner of man it is, and what hys communicacyon is.
They sayde vnto hym agayne: it is not so, tell vs. He sayde: thus and thus spake he to me, sayinge: Thus sayth the Lorde: I haue anoynted the to be kynge ouer Israel.
Then they besyde the horologye hasted, and toke euery man hys garment, and put it vnder hym, and blewe with trompettes, sayinge: Iehu is kynge.
And so, Iehu the sonne of Iehosaphat the sonne of Nimsi conspyred agaynst Ioram. Ioram kepte Ramoth Gilead, he and all Israel because of Hazael kynge of Siria:
and kynge Ioram returned to be healed in Iezrahel, of the woundes which the Sirians had geuen him, when he fought with Hazael kynge of Siria. And Iehu sayde: If it be youre myndes, then let no man departe and scape out of the citye, to go, Ꟶ tell in Iezrahel.
So Iehu gatt vp into a charette, and wente to Iezrahel, where Ioram laye, Ꟶ Ahaziahu kyng of Iuda was come downe thither to se Ioram.
And the watchman that stode on the towre in Iezrael, spyed the company of Iehu as he came, and sayde: I se a companye. And Iehoram sayd: take an horsman, and sende to mete them, that he maye aske whether it be peace.
And so there went one on horsbacke to mete him, and sayde: thus sayth the kynge: is it peace? and Iehu sayde: what hast thou to do with peace? turne the behynde me. And the wathman tolde, sayinge: the messenger came to them, but he commeth not agayne.
Then he sent out another on horsbacke, which came to them, and sayde: thus saythe the kynge: is it peace? Iehu answered: what hast thou to do with peace? turne the behind me.
And the watchman tolde, sayinge: he came to them also, and commeth not agayne, and the driuynge is lyke the driuynge of Iehu the sonne of Nimsi: for he driueth the charet as he were madd.
And Iehoram sayde: make ready. And the charet was made ready. And Iehoram kinge of Israel, and Ahaziahu kynge of Iuda went out ether of them in hys charet agaynst Iehu, and met hym in the furlonge of Naboth the Iezraelite.
And it fortuned, that when Iehoram sawe Iehu, he sayde: is it peace Iehu? He answered: What peace shulde there be, so longe as the whordoms of thy mother Iezabel, and her witchcraftes are so great?
And Iehoram turned his handes, and fledd, and sayde to Ahaziahu: ther is falshed, o Ahaziahu.
And Iehu toke a bowe in hys handes, and smote Iehoram betwene the armes, Ꟶ the arowe went thorowe hys hert. And he fell downe flatt in hys charet.
Then sayde Iehu to Bidkar a captayne: take him, Ꟶ cast him in the platt of the grounde of Naboth the Iezraelite. For I remembre that whan I and thou roade together in a charet after Ahab his father, the Lorde layed this heuy burthen vpon hym.
I haue sene yesterdaye the bloud of Naboth, Ꟶ the bloude of his sonnes, sayde the Lord: Ꟶ I will quyte it the in this ground, sayth the Lorde. Nowe therfore take him, Ꟶ cast hym in the plat of ground, accordyng to the worde of the Lorde.
But when Ahaziahu the kynge of Iuda sawe this, he fledd by the waye of the garden house. And Iehu folowed after hym, Ꟶ sayde: smyte him also in the charet: in hys charet. at the goynge vp to Gur by Iiblean, Ꟶ he fleed to Magiddo, Ꟶ ther dyed.
And his seruauntes caried hym in a charet to Ierusalem, Ꟶ buryed hym there in his sepulchre, wt his fathers, in the citie of Dauid.
And in the .xi. yere of Ioram the sonne of Ahab, beganne Ahaziahu to raygne ouer Iuda.
And when Iehu was come to Iezrahel Iezabel hearde of it, Ꟶ starched her face, Ꟶ tired her heed, Ꟶ loked out at a windowe.
And as Iehu entred at the gate, she sayde: had zimri peace which slue hys master?
And he lyft vp his eyes to the windowe, and sayde: who is of my syde, who? And ther loked out to hym two or thre chamberlaynes.
And he sayde: throwe her downe. So they threwe her downe, and her bloude dasshed towarde the wall, Ꟶ toward the horses, and he troade her vnder fote.
And when he was come in, he dyd eate Ꟶ drincke, Ꟶ sayde: go Ꟶ vyset I praye you yonder cursed creature, and burie her: for she is a kynges daughter.
And so when they came to burye her, they founde nomore of her then the skulle, and the fete, and the palmes of her handes.
Wherfore they come agayne, Ꟶ told hym. And he sayde: thys is the worde of the Lorde, which he spake by the hande of his seruaunt Elia the Thesbite, sayinge: in the felde of Iezrahel shall dogges eate the flessh of Iezabel.
And so the carkas of Iezabel was euen as donge vpon the earth, in the felde of Iezrahel: so that no man myght saye: Thys was Iezabel.
Ahab had .lxx. sonnes in Samaria. And Iehu wrote letters, and sent to Samaria vnto the rulers of Iezrael, to the elders, and to them that brought vp Ahabs children, sayinge:
nowe whan thys letter commeth to you, ye that haue with you your masters sonnes, ye haue with you both charettes and horses: a strong citye haue ye also: and harnes,
loke which of your masters sonnes is best and most mete, and set hym on hys fathers seate, and fyght for youre Lordes house.
But they were exceadingly afrayde, Ꟶ sayde: se, two kinges were not able to stande before hym, how shall we then be able to stande?
And he that was gouerner of Ahabs house, and he that ruled the citye, the elders also, Ꟶ the tutours sent to Iehu, saieng: we are thy seruauntes, Ꟶ will do all that thou shalt byd vs: we wyll make no man kynge: therfore do thou what semeth good in thine eyes.
Then he wrote another letter to them, sayinge: If ye be myne, and wyll herken vnto my voyce, then take the hedes of the men that are youre masters sonnes, and come to me to Iezrahel by to morowe thys tyme. And the kynges sonnes were .lxx. personnes, and they were with the great men of the citye, which brought them vp.
And when the letter came to them, they toke the kynges chyldren, and slue them, euen .lxx. personnes, Ꟶ layed theyr heedes in baskettes, and sent them to him to Iezrahel.
And there came a messenger, and tolde hym, sayinge: they haue brought the heedes of the kynges sonnes. And he sayde: let them laye them on two heapes in the enterynge in of the gate, vntyll the mornynge.
And whan it was daye, he went out, and stode, Ꟶ sayde to all the folke: ye be ryghteous. Beholde, I conspired against my master, and slue him. But who slue all these?
Lerne here, that ther shall fall vnto the erth nothyng of the worde of the Lorde, which he spake concerning the house of Ahab. For the Lord hath brought to passe the thinges that he spake by the hande of his seruaunt Elia.
And so Iehu slue all that remayned of the house of Ahab, in Iezrahel: and all that were great wt him, Ꟶ his kynsfolkes and his prestes, so that he let nothing of him remayne.
And he arose, Ꟶ departed, Ꟶ came to Samaria. And whan Iehu was in the waye to the house where the shepherdes dyd shere their shepe,
he met wt the brethren of Ahaziahu king of Iuda, Ꟶ sayde: what are ye? They answered: the brethren of Ahaziahu are we, and go downe to salute the children of the kinge and of the quene.
And he sayde: take them alyue. Whom when they had taken them alyue, they slue them at the well which was besyde the house where the shepe are shoren, euen two and fourtye men, nether left he any of them.
And when he was departed thence, he met wt Iehonadab the sonne of Rechab commynge agaynst him. And he blessed him, Ꟶ sayde to hym: is thyne hert ryght, as myne hert is true wt thine? And Iehonadab answered: yea that it is, then geue me thyne hande. And whan he had geuen him his hand, he toke him vp to him into the charet,
Ꟶ sayde: come wt me, Ꟶ se the zeale that I haue for the Lord: Ꟶ so they made him ryde in hys charet.
And when he came to Samaria, he slue all that remayned vnto Ahab in Samaria, tyll he had wypte him out, accordyng to the saying of the Lorde which he spake to Elia.
And Iehu gathered all the people together and sayd vnto them: Ahab serued Baal a lytle. But Iehu shall serue hym more.
Nowe therfore call vnto me all the prophetes of Baal all soch as serue him, Ꟶ all his prestes, and let none be lackyng. For I haue a greate sacrifyce to do to Baal: Ꟶ therfore, whosoeuer is myssed, he shall not lyue. But Iehu dyd it for a sutteltye, to the intent that he might destroye the seruauntes of Baal.
And Iehu sayde: Proclayme an holy conuocacyon for Baal,
and Iehu sent vnto all Israel. And all the seruauntes of Baal came, that ther was not a man lefte behynde that came not. And they came into the house of Baal, Ꟶ the house of Baal was full from one ende to another.
And he sayde vnto hym that was the keper of the vestrye, bringe forth garmentes for all the seruauntes of Baal. And he brought them out garmentes.
And when Iehu went with Iehonadab the sonne of Rechab into the house of Baal, he sayde vnto the seruauntes of Baal: searche, and loke, that there be here wt you none of the seruauntes of the Lorde, but the seruauntes of Baal only.
And when they went in to offer sacrifice Ꟶ burntoffringe: Iehu appoynted .lxxx. men without, Ꟶ sayd: If any of the men whom I haue brought vnder youre handes, escape, he that letteth him go, shall dye for hym.
And it fortuned, that assone as he had made an ende of offering the burntsacrifyce, Iehu sayde to the men of warre and to the captaines: go in, and sleye them, let none come out. And they smote them with the edge of the swearde. And the men of warre and the captaynes cast them out, and went vnto the citye of the temple of Baal,
and fet the ymages out of the temple of Baal, and burnt them.
And they brake the ymage of Baal, Ꟶ brake the house of Baal, Ꟶ made a draft house of it vnto thys daye.
And so Iehu destroyed Baal out of Israel.
But from the synnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, which made Israel to synne: Iehu departed not, nether from folowing of them the golden calues that were in Bethel and in Dan.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Iehu: because thou hast done ryght well, in bryngynge to passe the thynge that is ryght in myne eyes, and hast done vnto the house of Ahab accordinge to all thinges that are in myne hert, therfore shall thy children vnto the fourth generacyon syt on the seate of Israel.
But Iehu cared not for this, to walke in the lawe of the Lord God of Israel with all his hert: for he departed not from the sinnes of Ieroboam, which made Israel to synne.
In those dayes the Lorde began to cut Israel short: and Hazael smote them in all the coastes of Israel,
from Iordan eastwarde: euen all the land of Gilead, the Gadites, the Rubenites, and them that were of Manasses, from Aroer vnto the ryuer of Arnon: euen Gilead Ꟶ Basan.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Iehu Ꟶ all that he dyd, and all his power, are they not written in the boke of the Chronycles of the kynges of Israel?
And Iehu slept wt hys fathers, Ꟶ they buryed him in Samaria, and Iehoahaz his sonne raygned in hys steade.
And the tyme that Iehu raygned vpon Israel in Samaria, is .xxviij. yeres.
And Athalia the mother of Ahaziahu, when she sawe that her sonne was deed, she arose, and destroyed all the kinges seede.
But Iehosaba the daughter of kynge Ioram, and syster of Ahaziahu, toke Ioas the sonne of Ahaziahu, and stale hym from amonge the kynges sonnes that were slayne, and his nource with hym, out of a slepynge chambre, and hyd hym from Athalia, that he was not slayne.
And he was with her hyd in the house of the Lorde .vj. yere. And Athalia did raigne ouer the lande.
And the .vij. yere Iehoiada sent and fet the rulers ouer hundredes, wt the captaynes, Ꟶ them of the garde, and toke them to hym into the house of the Lorde, and made a bonde wt them, and toke an othe of them in the house of the Lorde, and she wed them the kynges sonne.
And he commaunded them, saying: thys is it that ye must do: one thyrd parte of you, whose dewty is to come on the Sabboth daye, shall kepe the watch of the kynges house.
And another thyrde parte shall kepe the gate of Sur: and another thyrd parte shall kepe the gate, which is behynde them of the garde: and so shall ye kepe the watche of the house of Messah,
Ꟶ two partes of you, that is, all that go out on the Sabboth daye, shall kepe the watche of the house of the Lorde about the kynge,
and ye shall compasse the kynge rounde about, and euery man shall haue his weapen in his hande. And whosoeuer commeth with in the ranges, let hym be slayne. And se that ye be with the kynge as he goeth out and in.
And the captaynes ouer the hundredes dyd, according to all thinges that Iehoiada the preste commaunded: and they toke euery man hys men, that were to come in on the Sabboth daye with them that shuld go out on the Sabboth, and came to Iehoiada the preste.
And to the captaynes ouer hundredes, dyd the preste geue kinge Dauids speares Ꟶ shyldes that were in the temple.
And they of the garde stode, Ꟶ euery man had his weapen in hys hande rounde about the kynge, from the ryght corner of the temple to the left, alonge by the aultar and the temple.
And he brought out the kynges sonne, Ꟶ put the crowne vpon him: Ꟶ delyuered hym the witnesse, and made him kyng, Ꟶ anoynted hym. And they clapte their handes, and sayde: God saue the kyng:
And when Athalia heard the noyse of the runnynge of the people, she came to the people into the temple of the Lorde.
And when she loked, behold, the kyng stode by a piller, as the maner was, and the syngers Ꟶ the trompettes by the kynge, and all the people of the lande reioysed, and blewe wt trompettes. And Athalia rent her clothes and cryed: treason, treason.
But Iehoiada the preste commaunded the captaynes of the hundredes that had the rule of the hoost, and sayd vnto them: haue her out without the temple, that she maye be within the ranges, and yf any folowe her, kyll hym with the swearde: for the preste had sayd she maye not be slayne in the house of the Lord.
And they layde handes on her tyll she came into the waye, by the which the horses went into the kinges palace: Ꟶ there was she slayne.
And Iehoiada made a bonde betwene the Lorde and the kinge, and the people, that they shuld be the Lordes people, and also betwene the kynge and the people.
And all the people of the lande went into the house of Baal, and destroyed it, his aultars also, Ꟶ his ymages brake they downe lustely, and slue Mathan the preaste of Baal before the aultars. And the preste set a watch ouer the house of the Lorde,
and roke the rulars ouer hundredes, the captaynes Ꟶ them of the garde, and all the people of the lande. And they brought the kynge from the house of the Lorde: and came by the waye of the gate of them of the garde to the kynges palace. And he sat hym downe on the seate of the kynges.
And all the people of the lande reioysed, and the cytye was in quyet. And they slue Athalia wt the swearde besyde the kinges palace.
Seuen yeare olde was Iehoas, when he beganne to raygne.
And he beganne to raygne in the .vij. yeare of Iehu .xl. yeare raygned he in Ierusalem: Ꟶ his mothers name was zebiah of Berseba.
And he did that which was good in the syght of the Lorde, as longe as Iehoiada the preste enfourmed hym.
But the hylaultars were not taken a waye, for the people offered Ꟶ burnt incense yet vpon the hylaultars.
And Iehoas sayde to the prestes: all the syluer of dedicat thinges that be brought to the house of the Lorde in curraunt moneye, that is to saye, the money that euery man is set at, and all the money that euery man with a willing hert geueth Ꟶ bringeth into the house of the Lorde,
let the prestes take it to them, euery man of his aquayntaunce, to repayre the broken places of the house, wheresoeuer any decaye is founde.
And so it came to passe, that vnto the .xxiij. yere of king Iehoas, the prestes had mended nothing, that was decayed in the temple.
Then kyng Iehoas called for Iehoiada the bysshop, and the prestes, and sayde vnto them: why repayre ye not the broken places of the temple? Nowe therfore, se that ye receaue nomore money of your aquayntaunce, except ye delyuer it to repayre the temple withall.
And the prestes consented to receaue nomore money of the people: except to repayre the decayed places of the temple.
But Iehoiada the preast toke a chest and bored an hoale in the lyd of it, Ꟶ set it besyde the altare on the ryght syde, as euery man commeth into the temple of the Lorde. And the preastes that kepte the vessels, put ther in all the money that was brought into the house of the Lorde.
And it fortuned, that when they saw there was moche money in the chest, the kynges scribe and the hye preaste came, vp, and tolde the money that was founde in the house of the Lorde, and put it in to a bagg.
And they gaue the money sealed into the handes of them that executed the worcke, and that had the ouersyght of the house of the Lorde: and they brought it out to the carpenters and buylders (that wrought vpon the house of the Lorde)
and to masons and hewers of stone: And they bought tymbre and fre stone, to repayre the decay in the house of the Lorde, and to all that went out to mende the temple:
howebeit there was not made for the house of the Lorde, bowlles of syluer, instrumentes of Musicke, basens, trompettes or any vessells of golde, or vessell of syluer, of the money that was brought in to the house of the Lorde:
But they gaue that to the worckemen, and repayred therwyth the house of the Lord.
Moreouer, they rekoned not wyth the men, into whose handes they delyuered that money to be bestowed on worckemen: for they dyd their busynes faythfully.
Howbeit trespace money and synne money was not brought into the house of the Lorde, for it was the preastes.
Then came Hazael kynge of Siria vp, and fought agaynst Geth and toke it, Ꟶ Hazael set hys face to go vp to Ierusalem.
And Ichoas kynge of Iuda toke all the halowed thynges that Iehosaphat, Iehoram and Haziahu his fathers kynges of Iuda, had dedicat, and that he hym selfe had dedicated, and all the golde that was found in the treasures of the house of the Lorde and in the kynges house, and sent it to Hazael kynge of Siria: and so he departed from Ierusalem.
The remnaunt of the wordes that concerne Iehoas and all that he dyd, are they not written in the boke of the Chronycles of the kynges of Iuda?
And hys awne seruauntes arose, and wrought treason, and slue Iehoas in the house Millo, whan he came downe to Silla.
Iozabar the sonne of Semeath and Iehozabad the sonne of Somer hys seruauntes, smote hym, Ꟶ he dyed. And they buryed hym wyth his fathers in the cytie of Dauid. And Amaziahu hys sonne raygned in hys steade.
In the .xxiij. yeare of Ioas the sonne of Ahaziahu kynge of Iuda, Iehoahaz the sonne of Iehu beganne to raygne ouer Israel in Samaria seuentene yeare.
And he wrought that whych was euell in the syght of the Lorde, and folowed the synnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat whych made Israel to synne, and departed not ther from.
And the Lorde was angry wyth Israel, and delyuered them into the hand of Hazael kynge of Siria, and into the hande of Benhadad the sonne of Hazael all theyr dayes.
And Iehoahaz besought the Lorde, Ꟶ the Lorde heard him. For he considred the trouble of Israel, wher with the king of Siria troubled them.
And the Lorde gaue Israel a delyuerer, so that they went out from vnder the subieccyon of the Sirians. And the chyldren of Israel dwelt in theyr tentes as before tyme.
Neuerthelesse they departed not from the synnes of the house of Ieroboam, whych made Israel synne, but walked in them. And there remayned an Idols groue styll also in Samaria.
Neither dyd he leaue of the people to Iehoahaz, but fyftye horsemen ten charettes, Ꟶ ten thousande fotemen for the kynge of Siria destroyed them, and made them lyke thresshed dust.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Iehoahaz, and all that he dyd, and hys power, are they not wrytten in the boke of the Chronycles of the kynges of Israel?
And Iehoahaz slepte wyth hys fathers, and they buryed hym in Samaria, and Ioas his sonne raygned in hys steade.
In the .xxxvij. yeare of Ioas kynge of Iuda, beganne Iehoas the sonne of Iehoahaz to raygne ouer Israel in Samaria syxtene yeare,
and dyd that whych is euell in the syght of the Lord, and departed not from all the synnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, (that made Israel synne) for he walked therin.
The remnaunt of the wordes that concerne Ioas Ꟶ all that he dyd, Ꟶ hys power wher wyth he fought agaynst Amaziahu kyng of Iuda are they not wrytten in the chronycle boke of the kynges of Israel?
And Ioas slepte with his fathers, and Ieroboam sat vpon his seate. And Ioas was buried in Samaria amonge the kynges of Israel.
When Elisa was fallen sycke of hys sycknesse (wher of he dyed) Ioas the kinge of Israel came downe vnto hym, Ꟶ wepte before him, Ꟶ sayd: O my father, my father, the charet of Israel, Ꟶ the horsemen of the same.
Elisa sayde vnto hym: take bowe Ꟶ arowes.
And he toke vnto him bowe Ꟶ arowes. And he sayde to the kyng of Israel: put thine hand vpon the bowe, Ꟶ he put his hande vpon it. And Elisa put his handes vpon the kinges handes,
Ꟶ sayde: open a windowe eastward: Ꟶ whan he had opened it, Elisa sayde: shote, Ꟶ he shotte. And he sayd: the arowe of helth of the Lord: and the arowe of helth agaynst Siria, for thou shalt smyte Siria in Aphek, tyll thou haue made an ende of them.
And he sayd: take the arowes: Ꟶ he toke them: And he sayd vnto the kyng of Israel: smyte the grounde: Ꟶ he smote thrise and ceased.
And the man of God was angrie wt him, Ꟶ sayd: thou shuldest haue smyten fyue or syxe tymes Ꟶ then thou haddest smytten Siria tyll thou haddest made an ende of them: where nowe thou shalt smyte Siria but thrise.
And so Elisa dyed and they buryed hym, Ꟶ the soudiares of the Moabites came into the land, the same yeare.
And it chaunced as some of them were burienge a man, and spyed the soudyars, they cast the man into the sepulchre of Elisa. And whan the man was rolled downe, and touched the body of Elisa he reuyued, and stode vpon hys fete.
But Hazael vexed Israel, all the dayes of Iehoahaz.
And the Lord had mercye on them Ꟶ pitied them, Ꟶ had respecte vnto them, because of his appointment made wt Abraham, Isahac Ꟶ Iacob, and wolde not destroye them, nether cast he them from hym as yet.
So Hazael the kynge of Siria dyed and Benhadad his sonne raygned in his steade.
And Iehoas the sonne of Iehoahaz went agayne, and toke out of the hande of Benhadad the sonne of Hazael, the cyties which he had taken awaye out of the hande of Iehoahaz hys father, in warre: for thre tymes dyd Ioas beate him, and restored the cyties vnto Israel agayne.
The seconde yere of Ioas sonne of Iehoahaz kynge of Israel raygned Amaziahu the sonne of Ioas kynge of Iuda:
he was .xxv. yeare olde when he began to raygne, and raigned .xxix. yeare in Ierusalem, Ꟶ hys mothers name was Iehoadan, of Ieru salem.
And he dyd that which is good in the syght of the Lorde, yet not lyke Dauid his father: but dyd accordynge to all thynges as Ioas hys father dyd.
Nether were the hyllaulters taken awaye: For as yet the people dyd sacrifice Ꟶ burnt incense on the hyllaulters.
And assone as the kyngdome was setteled in hys hande it came to passe, that he slue hys seruauntes which had kylled the kynge hys father.
But the chyldren of those murtherars he slue not, accordynge vnto it that is written in the boke of the lawe of Moses: where in the Lorde commaunded, sayinge: let not the fathers dye for the chyldren, nor let the chyldren be slayne for the fathers: But let euery man be put to death for his awne sinne.
He slue of Edom in the salt valeye ten thousande, and toke the castell on the rock in the same battell, Ꟶ called the name of it Ioktheel vnto this daye.
Then Amaziahu sent messengers to Iehoas the sonne of Iehoahaz sonne of Iehu kynge of Israel, sayinge: come, let vs se eche other.
And Iehoas the kynge of Israel sent to Amaziahu kynge of Iuda, sayinge: dyd not a thystle that is in libanon, sende to a Cedre tre that is in Libanon, sayinge: geue thy daughter to my sonne to wyfe: And the wylde beaste that was in Libanon, went and troade downe the thistell.
Thou hast smytten Edom, thyne hart hath made the proude: Enioye thys glory, Ꟶ tarye at home. Why dost thou prouoke to mischeue, that thou shuldest be ouerthrowen, and Iuda wyth the?
But Amaziahu wolde not heare. And Iehoas kynge of Israel went vp, and he and Amaziahu kynge of Iuda sawe ether other at Bethsames whych is in Iuda.
And Iuda was put to the worse before Israel, and they fled euery man to theyr tentes.
And Iehoas kinge of Israel toke Amaziahu king of Iuda, the sonne of Iehoas the sonne of Ahaziahu, at Bethsames, and came to Ierusalem Ꟶ brake downe the wall of Ierusalem from the gate of Ephraim to the corner gate, foure hundred cubytes.
And he toke all the golde and syluer and all the vesselles that were founde in the house of the Lorde, Ꟶ in the treasures of the kynges house, and the chyldren toke he to be hys wardes Ꟶ returned to Samaria agayne.
The rest of the actes of Iehoas which he dyd, Ꟶ hys power, and howe he fought with Amaziahu kyng of Iuda, are they not written in the Chronycle boke of the kynges of Israel?
and Iehoas slepte with his fathers, and was buryed at Samaria, amonge the kynges of Israel: and Ieroboam hys sonne raygned in hys steade.
Amaziahu the sonne of Ioas kynge of Iuda, lyued after the deeth of Iehoas sonne of Iehoahaz kynge of Israel, fyftene yeare.
And the remnaunt of the wordes that concerne Amaziahu, are they not wrytten in the boke of the Chronycles of the kynges of Iuda?
But they conspired treason agaynst him in Ierusalem: and whan he fled to Lachis, they sent after him to Lachis, and slue hym there.
And they brought hym on horses, Ꟶ he was buryed at Ierusalem wyth hys fathers in the cytie of Dauid.
And all the people of Iuda toke Azaria, whych was .xvi. yere olde, and made hym kynge for hys father Amaziahu.
He buylt Elath, and brought it agayne to Iuda, after that the kynge was layde to rest wyth hys fathers.
In the .xv. yeare of Amaziahu the sonne of Ioas kyng of Iuda, was Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas made kynge ouer Israel in Samaria, and raygned .xli. yere,
and wrought that which was euell in the syght of the Lorde. Nether turned he awaye from all the sinnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat which made Israel to synne.
He restored the coaste of Israel from the enterynge of Hemath vnto the see of the wildernes, according to the worde of the Lorde God of Israel, which he spake by the hande of his seruaunt Iona the sonne of Amithai the prophete, which was of Geth hepher.
For the Lorde sawe howe that the afflyccyon of Israel was exceadynge bytter, in so moche that the presoned and the forsaken were at an ende. And ther was none to helpe Israel.
And the Lorde sayde not, that he wolde putt out the name of Israel from vnder heauen, but he helped them by the hande of Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Ieroboam, and all that he dyd, and hys strength, which he executed in the warres, and howe he restored Damasco, and Heniath to Iuda in Israel, are not they written in the boke of the chronycles of the kynges of Israel?
And Ieroboam slepte with hys fathers, euen wt the kynges of Israel, and zacharia his sonne raygned in hys steade.
In the .xxvij. yere of Ieroboam kinge of Israel, beganne Azaria sonne of Amazia kynge of Iuda to raygne.
Syxtene yeare olde was he when he was made king, and he raygned two and fyftye yeare in Ierusalem, and hys mothers name was Iecholeiahu of Ierusalem.
And he dyd that which was ryght in the syght of the Lorde, accordynge to all thynges as dyd hys father Amaziahu:
saue that the hylaultars. were not put awaye: for the people offered, and burned incense styll on the hylaultars.
And the Lorde smote the kynge, and he was a leper vnto the daye of his deeth, and dwelt in a seuerall house at libertye, and Iotham the kynges sonne gouerned the palace, and iudged the people of the lande.
The reste of the wordes that concerne Azaria and all that he dyd, are they not written in the boke of the chronicles of the kynges of Iuda?
And so Azaria slepte with his fathers, and they buryed him with hys fathers in the citye of Dauid, and Iotham hys sonne raygned in hys steade.
In the .xxxviij. yere of Azaria kynge of Iuda dyd zacharia the sonne of Ieroboam raigne vpon Israel in Samaria .vj. monethes:
and wrought that which was euell in the syght of the Lorde, as dyd hys fathers: and turned not awaye from the synnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, which made Israel to sinne.
And Sallum the sonne of Iabes conspyred against hym, Ꟶ smote hym in the syght of the people, Ꟶ kylled him, Ꟶ raygned in his steade.
The rest of the wordes that concerne zacharia, beholde, they are wrytten in the boke of the Chronycles of the kynges of Israel.
Thys is also the worde of the Lorde, which he spake vnto Iehu, sayinge: thy sonnes shall syt on the seate of Israel in the fourth generacion after the. And it came so to passe.
Sallum the sonne of Iabes beganne to raygne in the .xxxix. yere of Azaria kynge of Iuda: Ꟶ he raygned a moneth in Samaria.
For Menahem the sonne of Gadi went vp from Thirza, Ꟶ came to Samaria, Ꟶ smote Sallum the sonne of Iabes in Samaria, Ꟶ slue him, Ꟶ raygned in his steade.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Sallum, Ꟶ the treason which he conspired, beholde, they are wrytten in the boke of the chronicles of the kynges of Israel.
The same tyme Menahem destroied Thiphsah, Ꟶ all that were therin, Ꟶ the coastes therof from Therzahi. And (because they opened not to hym) he smote it, and rypte vp all their wemen with chylde.
The .xxix. yere of Azaria king of Iuda began Menahem the sonne of Gadi to raygne vpon Israel ten yeare in Samaria.
And he dyd euell in the syght of the Lorde, Ꟶ turned not awaye all his dayes from the synne of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, which made Israel to synne.
And Phul the kinge of Assiria came vpon the lande. And Menahem gaue Phul a .M. talentes of syluer, that his hand might be with him and stablyshe the kyngdome in his hande.
And Menahem made a proclamacion for the money in Israel, that all men of substaunce shulde geue the kynge of Assiria fyftye sycles of syluer a pece. And so the kyng of Assiria turned back agayne, and taryed not there in the lande.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Menahem, and all that he dyd, are they not wrytten in the boke of the chronicles of the kinges of Israel?
And Menahem slepte with his fathers, Ꟶ Pekahia his sonne dyd in his steade succede him in the kyngedome.
In the fyftyth yeare of Azaria kynge of Iuda, beganne Pekahia the sonne of Menahem to raygne ouer Israel in Samaria two yere,
Ꟶ dyd that which was euell in the sight of the Lorde: and lefte not of from the synnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, which made Israel synne.
But Pekah the sonne of Remaliahu, which was a captayne of his, conspired agaynst hym, and smote hym in Samaria, euen in the palace of the kynges house with Argob and Aria: and with him were fyftye men of the Gileadites: and he kylled hym, and raygned in hys rowme.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Pekahia, and all that he dyd, beholde, they are wrytten in the boke of the chronicles of the kynges of Israel.
In the .lij. yere of Azaria kynge of Iuda beganne Pekah the sonne of Remaliahu, to raygne ouer Israel in Samaria .xx. yeare,
Ꟶ dyd euell in the syght of the Lorde, and turned not awaye from the synnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, that made Israel synne.
In the dayes of Pekah kyng of Israel, came Thiglath Pelesar kynge of Assiria, and toke Iion, Abel, Bethmaacha, Ianoah, Kedes, Hazor, Gilead, Galile, and all the lande of Nephthali, Ꟶ caryed them awaye to Assiria:
And Hosea the sonne of Ela conspired treason agaynst Pekah the sonne of Remaliah, and smote him, and slue him: and raygned in hys steade in the .xx. yere of Iotham the sonne of Uziahu.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Pekah and all that he dyd, behold, they are wrytten in the boke of the chronycles of the kynges of Israel.
The seconde yeare of Pekah the sonne of Remaliahu kinge of Israel, beganne Iotham the sonne of Uziahu kynge of Iuda to raygne.
Fyue and twentye yere olde was he when he began to raygne: and he raygned syxtene yere in Ierusalem. Hys mothers name was Ierusa the daughter of zadok.
And he dyd that which is ryght in the syght of the Lorde: euen accordynge to all as dyd his father Uziahu, so dyd he.
But the hylaulters were nott put awaye: for the people offered and burnt incense styll in the hylaulters: he buylt the hygher dore of the house of the Lord.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Iotham, and all that he dyd, are they not written in the boke of the chronycles of the kynges of Iuda.
In those dayes the Lorde beganne to sende into Iuda, Rezin the kyng of Siria, and Pekah the sonne of Remaliahu.
And Iotham slepte wt his fathers, and was buried wt his fathers in the citye of Dauid hys father, and Ahaz hys sonne raygned in his steade.
The .xvij. yeare of Pekah the sonne of Remaliahu kynge of Israel, Ahaz the sonne of Iotham kynge of Iuda, beganne to raygne.
Twentye yere olde was he, when he was made kynge: and raygned syxtene yere in Ierusalem, and dyd not that which was ryght in the eyes of the Lorde hys God, lyke Dauid hys father:
But walked in the waye of the kynges of Israel, yee, and made hys sonne to go thorowe the fyer, after the abhominacyons of the Heythen, whom the Lorde cast out before the chyldren of Israel.
And he offered and burnt incense in the hilaulters and on the hylles, and vnder euery thick tree.
Then Rezin kynge of Siria and Pekah sonne of Remaliahu kynge of Israel came vp to Ierusalem to fyght. And they fought agaynst Ahaz, but could not ouercome hym.
At the same tyme Rezin kynge of Siria brought Elath agayne to Siria, and rydd the Iewes thence. And the Sirians came to Elath, and dwell therin vnto thys daye.
So Ahaz sent messengers to Thiglath Peleser kynge of Assiria, sayinge: I am thy seruaunt and thy sonne, come vp and deliuer me out of the hande of the kynge of Siria, Ꟶ out of the hande of the king of Israel, which ryse vp agaynst me.
And Ahaz toke the syluer and the golde that was founde in the house of the Lorde, and in the treasures of the kinges house, and sent a rewarde to the kyng of Assiria.
And the kynge of Assiria consented vnto hym. For the kynge of Assiria went vp agaynst Damasco. And when he had take it, he caryed the people awaye to Kyr, and slue Rezin.
And kynge Ahaz went to Damasco, to mete Thiglath Peleser king of Assiria. And when kynge Ahaz sawe an aulter that was at Damasco, he sent to Uria the preste the paterne of the aulter, Ꟶ the fassyon of it, and all the worckmanshyp therof.
And Uria the preste made an aulter in all poyntes lyke to the patern which kinge Ahaz had sent from Damasco: euen so dyd Uria the preste make it, agaynst king Ahaz came from Damasco.
And so, when the kyng was come from Damasco, he sawe the aulter, and the kyng went to it, Ꟶ offered theron.
And he burnt his burntofferinge, and hys meatofferinge, and powred hys drynckofferynge: and sprynckled the bloude of hys peace offerynges besyde the aulter,
that was by the brasen aulter which was before the Lord, and set it wtout the temple betwene the aulter and the temple of the Lord: and put it on the northsyde of the aultare.
And kynge Ahaz commaunded Uria the preste, and sayde: vpon the greate aulter set on fyer in the mornyng the burntofferinge, Ꟶ in the euen the meatoffering, and the kinges burntsacrifyce Ꟶ his meatofferinge, with the burntofferyng of all the people of the lande, and their meatofferinge, Ꟶ their drynckofferinges: Ꟶ powre therby, all the bloude of the sacrifyce offringes. But the brasen aulter will I come and se.
And Uria the preste dyd accordynge to all thynges as kynge. Ahaz commaunded hym.
And kynge Ahaz brake the sydes of the botomes, and toke the lauer from of them, and toke downe the Lauatorye from of the brasen oxen that were vnder it, Ꟶ put it vpon a pauement of stones.
And the veyle for the Sabboth (that they had made in the house) Ꟶ the kynges entrye without turned he to the house of the Lorde, for (feare of) the kynge of Assyria.
The reste of the wordes that concerne Ahaz, what he dyd, are they not written in the boke of the Chronicles of the kynges of Iuda?
And Ahaz slepte with hys fathers, and was buryed with hys fathers in the cytie of Dauid: and Hezekia his sonne raygned in hys steade.
In the .xii. yeare of Ahaz kynge of Iuda, beganne Hosea the sonne of Ela to raigne in Samaria vpon Israel .ix. yeare,
and dyd that which was euell in the syght of the Lorde, but not as the kynges of Israel that were before him.
And Salmanasar kyng of Assyria came vp agaynst him, and Hosea became hys seruaunt, and gaue hym presentes.
And the kynge of Assyria founde treason in Hosea: for he had sent messengers to So, kynge of Egypte, and brought no presente vnto the kynge of Assyria, from yeare to yeare: and therfore the kynge of Assyria toke hym: and put hym in pryson.
And then the kynge of Assyria came vp thorowout all the lande, Ꟶ gat vp against Samaria, and beseged it thre yeare.
In the nynth yeare of Hosea, the kynge of Assyria toke Samaria, and caryed Israel awaye vnto Assyria, and put them in Hala, in Habor by the ryuer of Goza, and in the cyties of the Medes.
For it came to passe, that the chyldren of Israel synned agaynst the Lorde theyr God, which had brought them out of the lande of Egypt, from vnder the hande of Pharao kynge of Egypte: and feared other Gods.
And they walked in the ceremonyes of the hethen, whom the Lorde cast out before the chyldren of Israel, Ꟶ in the ceremonies which the kynges of Israel had made.
And the children of Israel went about to hyde those thinges that were not well, from the Lorde theyr God. And they buylt them Hyllaulters in all theyr cyties, bothe in the towres where they kept watch, and also in the stronge townes.
And they made them ymages and groues in euery hye hyll, and vnder euery thyck tre.
And there they burnt incense in all the Hyllaulters, as dyd the hethen (whom the Lorde caryed awaye before them) and wrought wycked thynges to angre the Lorde withall:
For they serued most vyle Idoles, wherof the Lorde had sayde vnto them. Ye shall do no soche thynge.
And the Lorde testifyed in Israel, and in Iuda by all the prophetes and by all the sears, sayinge. Turne from youre wycked wayes and kepe my commaundementes and my statutes, accordinge to all the lawe which I commaunded youre fathers, and which I sent to you by my seruauntes the prophetes.
Notwithstandynge they wolde not heare but rather hardened theyr neckes, lyke to the stubburnesse of their fathers that dyd not beleue in the Lorde their God.
For they refused hys statutes, and hys appoyntment that he made with theyr fathers, Ꟶ the witnesses (wherwith he witnessed vnto them) Ꟶ they folowed vanyte, and became vayne, and went after the hethen that were rounde aboute them: concernynge whom, the Lorde had charged them, that they shuld not do lyke them.
But they left the commaundementes of the Lord theyr God and made them Images of metall euen two calues: and made Idole groues, Ꟶ worshypped all the Hoste of heauen, and serued Baall.
And they sacrifyced theyr sonnes Ꟶ theyr daughters in fyre, and vsed witchcraft and enchauntementes euen sellynge them selues to worke wyckednesse in the syght of the Lorde, and to angre hym.
And the Lorde was exceadinge wroth wt Israel and put them out of hys syght that there was lefte but the trybe of Iuda onely.
Neuertheles, Iuda also kept not the commaundementes of the Lorde theyr God, but walked in the ceremonies of Israel, which they made
And the Lorde cast vp all the seed of Israel, and vexed them, and delyuered them into the handes of spoylers, vntyll he had cast them out of hys syght.
For Israel deuyded them selues from the house of Dauid, Ꟶ made them a kinge, euen Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat. And Ieroboam drewe Israel awaye (that they shulde not folowe the Lorde) and made them synne a greate synne:
For the chyldren of Israel walcked in all the synnes of Ieroboam which he dyd, and departed not therfrom,
vntyll the Lorde put Israel awaye out of hys syght, as he had sayde by all hys seruauntes the prophetes. And so was Israel caryed awaye out of theyr awne lande to Assyria euen vnto thys daye.
And the kynge of Assyria brought men from Babylon, from Cutha, from Aua, from Hanath, and from Sepharuaim, and put them in the cyties of Samaria, in steade of the chyldren of Israel. And they possessed Samaria, and dwelt in the cyties therof.
And it fortuned, that at the begynnynge of theyr dwellinge there, they feared not the Lorde. And the Lorde sent lyons amonge them, which slue them.
Wherfore, men sayde to the kynge of Assyria. The nacyons which thou hast translated, Ꟶ put in the cyties of Samaria, knowe not the lawe of the God of the lande, therfore he hath sent lyons vpon them: and beholde they slaye them, because they knowe not the maner of worshyppyng of the God of the lande.
Then the kynge of Assyria commaunded sayenge: carye thether one or twayne of the Preastes, whom ye brought thence, and let them go, and dwell there, and teache them the fassyon howe to serue the God of the contreye.
And then one of the Preastes which they had caryed thence came, and dwelt in Bethel, and taught them howe they shulde feare the Lorde.
Howbeit euery nacyon made them Gods of theyr awne and put them in the houses of the Hyllaulters which the Samaritans had made, euery nacion in their cyties wherin they dwelt.
The men of Babilon made Socoth Benoth: and the men of Cuth made Nergal: and the men of Hamath made Asima.
The Auites made Nibbaz, and Tharthak. And the Sepharuites burnt theyr chyldren in fyre for Adramelech and Anamelech, the Gods of Sepharuaim.
And so they feared the Lorde, and made them Preastes of the Hyllaulters, which sacrifyced for them in the houses of the Hyllaulters.
And so they feared the Lorde, and serued theyr awne Gods after the maner of the people, whom they caryed thence.
And vnto this daye they do after the olde maner: and nether feare God, nether do after theyr ordinaunces and customes, and after the lawe and commaundement which the Lorde commaunded the chyldren of Iacob, whom he called Israel.
And the Lorde made an appoyntement wyth them, and charged them, sayenge: feare none other Goddes, nor bowe youre selues to them, nor serue them nor sacrifyce to them:
but feare the Lord which brought you out of the lande of Egypte with greate power and a stretched out arme: hym feare, and to hym bowe, and to hym do sacrifyce.
The statutes, ordinaunces, lawe and commaundement which he wrote for you, se that ye be diligent to do for euermore, Ꟶ feare not any other goddes.
And the appoyntement that I haue made with you, se ye forget not and feare none other goddes:
but the Lorde youre God ye shall feare, and he shall deliuer you out of the handes of all youre enemyes.
Howbeit, they dyd not herken, but dyd after theyr olde custome.
And so these nacions feared the Lorde, and serued theyr ymages also: lyke as dyd theyr chyldren and theyr chyldrens chyldren. Euen as dyd theyr fathers, so do they vnto thys daye.
In the thyrde yere of Hosea sonne of Ela kynge of Israel it came to passe, that Hezekia the sonne of Ahaz kyng of Iuda dyd raynge.
Twentye and fyue yere olde was he, when he beganne to raygne, and raygned .xxix. yere in Ierusalem. His mothers name also was Abi the daughter of zacharia,
and he dyd that which is ryght in the syght of the Lorde accordyng to all as dyd Dauid hys father.
He put awaye the hyllaulters, and brake the ymages and cut downe the groues, and all to brake the brasen serpent that Moses had made: For vnto those dayes the chyldren of Israel dyd burne sacrifice to it, Ꟶ he called it Nehustan.
He trusted in the Lorde God of Israel, so that after hym was none lyke him amonge all the kynges of Iuda, nether were there anye soche before hym.
For he claue to the Lorde; and departed not from hym, but kepte hys commaundementes, which the Lorde commaunded Moses.
And the Lorde was with hym: so that he prospered in all thynges which he toke in hande. And he rebelled agaynst the kynge of Assyria, and serued him not.
He smote the Philistines euen vnto Aza and the coastes therof, both castels where they kepte watches: and stronge cyties.
And in the fourth yeare of kynge Hezekia, (which was the seuenth yeare of Hosea sonne of Ela kynge of Israell) it fortuned, that Salmanazar kyng of Assyria came vp agaynst Samaria, Ꟶ beseged it.
And after thre yeres they toke it euen in the syxte yere of Hezekia: that is to saye, the nynth yere of Hosea kynge of Israel. And Samaria was wonne.
And the kynge of Assyria, dyd carye awaye Israel vnto Assyria, and put them in Halah and in Habor by the ryuer of Gozan, and in the cyties of the Medes:
because they wolde not herken vnto the voyce of the Lorde theyr God: but transgressed hys appoyntment, and all that Moses the seruaunt of the Lord commaunded, Ꟶ wolde nether heare them nor do them.
Therfore in the .xiiii. yeare of kynge Hezekia dyd Sennacherib kynge of Assyria come vp agaynst all the stronge cytyes of Iuda, and toke them.
And Hezekia kynge of Iuda sent to the kynge of Assyria to Lachis, saying: I haue offended: departe from me, and all that thou puttest on me, that will I beare. And the kynge of Assyria appoynted vnto Hezekia kynge of Iuda thre hundred talentes of syluer, Ꟶ thirtye talentes of gold.
And Hezekia gaue him all the syluer that was founde in the house of the Lorde, Ꟶ in the treasures of the kynges house.
At the same ceason dyd Hezekia rent of the dores of the temple of the Lorde Ꟶ the pillers (whych the sayde Hezekia kynge of Iuda had couered ouer) Ꟶ gaue them to the kynge of Assyria.
And the kynge of Assyria sent Tharthan and Rabsaris and Rabsake from Lachis to kynge Hezekia with a great Hoste agaynst Ierusalem. And they went vp, and came to Ierusalem, Ꟶ gat them vp, Ꟶ stode by the conduyte of the vpper pole which is in the waye of the fullers felde.
And whan they had called to the kynge, there came out to them, Eliakim the sonne of Elkia which was stuarde of housholde, and Sobna the scribe, Ꟶ Ioah the sonne of Asaph, the recorder.
And Rabsake sayde vnto them: Tell ye Hezekia I praye you: thus sayth the great kynge, euen the kynge of Assyria: What confidence is this that thou hast? Dost thou speake soche a lyght worde in dede?
By councell and power I wilbe ready to make warre. On whom then doest thou trust, that thou rebellest agaynst me?
dost thou truste to the staffe of this broken rede Egypte, on which yf a man leane, it wyll go into his hande, and pearce it. Euen so is Pharao kynge of Egypte vnto all that trust on him.
If ye saye vnto me, we trust in the Lorde oure God: Is not that he whose hilaulters and his other aulters, Hezekia hath put downe, and hath sayde to Iuda Ꟶ Ierusalem, ye shall worshyppe before this aulter here in Ierusalem.
Nowe therfore delyuer wardes to my Lorde the kynge of Assyria, that ye rebell not, Ꟶ I wyll delyuer the two thousande horses, yf thou be able to sett ryders vpon them:
Why thynkest thou scorne at the presence of one of the leest Dukes of my masters seruauntes, Ꟶ trustest to Egypte for charettes and horsmen?
Moreouer, am I come now without the byddinge of the Lorde to this place, to destroye it? the Lorde sayde to me: go vp to this lande, and destroye it.
And Eliakim the sonne of Helkia Ꟶ Sobna, Ꟶ Ioab sayde vnto Rabsake: speake (I praye the) to thy seruauntes in the Syrians language, for we vnderstande it: Ꟶ talke not wt vs in the Iewes tonge, in the eares of this people that are on the wall.
And Rabsake sayde vnto them: hath my master sent me to thy master and to the, to speake these wordes? Hath he not sent me because of the men which sytt on the wall, that they maye eate their awne donge, Ꟶ dryncke their awne pisse with you?
And so Rabsake stode, and cryed with a lowde voyce in the Iewes language, and spake sayinge: heare the sayinge of the great kynge of Assyria.
Thus sayth the kynge: let not Hezekia begile you, for he shall not be able to delyuer you out of myne hande:
nether let Hezekia make you to trust in the Lorde, sayinge: the Lorde shall surely delyuer vs, and this cytie shall not be geuen ouer into the hande of the kynge of Assyria.
Herken not vnto Hezekia, for thus sayth the kynge of Assyria. Deale kyndely with me, Ꟶ come out to me. And then eate euery man of his awne vyne, and of his awne fygge tree, Ꟶ dryncke euery man of the water of his awne well,
tyll I come, and fett you to as good a lande as youres is: a lande of corne and wyne, a lande of bread and vyneyardes, a lande of oyle, of olyue trees, and of hony: that ye maye lyue, and not dye. And herken not vnto Hezekia, for he begyleth you, sayinge: the Lorde shall delyuer vs.
Hath euery one of the Gods of the nacyons deliuered his lande, out of the hande of the kynge of Assyria?
where is the God of Hamath, Ꟶ of Arphad? and where is the God of Sepharuaim, Hena Ꟶ Iua? dyd they delyuer Samaria out of myne hande,
Ꟶ what God is it amonge all the goddes of the nacyons, that hath delyuered his lande out of myne hande, Shall the Lorde deliuer Ierusalem out of myne hande?
But they that were of the people helde their peace, and answered not him a worde: for the kynge had commaunded, sayinge: answere him not.
Then Eliakim which was the stuard of housholde, and Sobnah the scribe, and Ioah the sonne of Asaph the recorder, came to Hezekia with their clothes rent, and tolde him the wordes of Rabsake.
So it came to passe, that when kynge Hezekia hearde it, he rent hys clothes, and put on sacke, and came into the house of the Lorde,
and sent Eliakim which was the stuard of housholde, and Sobna the Scribe, Ꟶ the elders of the preastes clothed in sacke, to Isay the prophete the sonne of Amoz.
And they sayde vnto him, thus sayth Hezekia this daye is a daye of tribulacyon and of rebuke and blasphemy. For the chyldren are come to the byrth, and there is no strength to be delyuered.
Paraduenture the Lorde thy God wyll heare all the wordes of Rabsake, whom the kynge of Assyria his master hath sent, to rayle on the lyuynge God, and to rebuke him with wordes, which the Lorde thy God hath hearde: And lyfte thou vp thy prayer for the remnaunt that are lefte.
So the seruauntes of kynge Hezekia came to Isay:
And Isaie sayd vnto them: So shall ye saye to youre master: Thus sayth the Lorde: be not afrayde of the wordes which thou hast heard, with which the younge men of the kynge of Assyria haue rayled on me.
Beholde, I will put him in another mynde, and he shall heare tydinges, and so returne to hys awne lande: And I will bringe to passe, that he shall fall vpon the swerde euen in his awne lande.
And Rabsakeh went backe agayne, and founde the kynge of Assyria fyghting agaynst Libna: for he had hearde, howe that he was departed from Lachis.
And when he hearde men saye of Thirhaka kynge of the blacke Mores: Beholde, he is come out to fyght agaynst the,
he departed, Ꟶ sent messengers vnto Hezekia sayinge. Thus speake to Hezekia kynge of Iuda, sayinge: let not thy God disceaue the, in whom thou trustest, sayinge: Ierusalem shalt not be delyuered into the hande of the kynge of Assyria.
Beholde, thou hast heard, what the kynges of Assyria haue done to all landes, howe they haue vtterly destroyed them. And shalt thou escape?
Haue the Gods of the hethen delyuered them, which myne aunsetries haue destroyed? As Gozan, Ꟶ Haran, Rezeph, Ꟶ the chyldren of Eden which were in Bithlasar?
where is the kynge of Hamath, and the kyng of Arphad, the kynge of the cytie of Sepharnaim, Ꟶ of Hena Ꟶ Iua?
So Hezekia receaued the letter of the hande of the messengers, and redd it: And Hezekia went vp into the house of the Lorde, Ꟶ layde it abroade before the Lorde.
And Hezekia prayed before the Lorde, and sayde: O Lord God of Israel, which dwellest betwene the Cherubs, thou art God alone ouer all the kyngdomes of the erth, thou hast made heauen Ꟶ earth Lord,
bowe downe thine eare, Ꟶ heare: Open Lorde thyne eyes (I beseche the) Ꟶ se: and heare the wordes of Sennacherib which hath sent thys man to rayle on the lyuynge God.
Of a truthe Lorde, the kinges of Assyria haue destroyed nacyons and their landes,
and haue sett fyre on their Gods. For they were no Gods, but the worcke of the handes of man: euen of wood Ꟶ stone. And they destroyed them.
Nowe therfore, O Lorde oure God, I beseche the, saue thou vs out of hys hande, that all the kyngdomes of the earth maye knowe, that thou onely art the Lorde God.
And Isay the sonne of Amoz sent to Hezekia, sayinge: thus sayth the Lord God of Israel: that which thou hast prayed me, concernynge Sennacherib kynge of Assyria, I haue hearde it.
This is therfore the worde that the Lord hath sayde of him: The virgin euen the daughter of Sion hath despysed the, and laughed the to scorne (o thou kynge of Assyria) the daughter of Ierusalem hath shaken her head at the.
Whom hast thou rayled on, Ꟶ whom hast thou blasphemed? Agaynst whom hast thou exalted thy voyce, and lyfted vp thyne eyes so hye. Euen agaynst the holy of Israel.
By the hande of thy messengers thou hast rayled on the Lorde and sayde: wt the multitude of my charettes I am come vp to the toppes of the mountaynes, euen alonge by the sydes of Libanon, and I wyll cut downe the hye Cedar trees and the lustie fyrre trees therof: and I will go into the lodging of his nest, Ꟶ into the wood of his playne.
I haue digged Ꟶ droncke straunge waters, and wt the steppe of my goynge will I drye all the water poles that are beseaged.
Hast thou not hearde, howe I haue ordeyned soch a thinge a great whyle a goo, Ꟶ haue prepared it from the begynninge? And shall I not nowe bringe it forth, that it maye destroye, and to brynge stronge cyties into wast heapes of stones?
And the enhabiters of them shalbe of lytle power, Ꟶ faynt herted, and confounded, and shalbe lyke the grasse of the felde, or grene herbe, or as the heye on the toppes of the houses: or as the corne that is vnripe, Ꟶ smytten wt blastinge.
I knowe thy dwellinge, thy commynge out, and thy goynge in, Ꟶ thy furye agaynst me.
And because thou ragest agaynst me, and thynckest thy selfe so blessed: this is come vp vnto myne earis, Ꟶ I will put my hoke in thy nastrels, and my bytt in thy lyppes, and will bringe the backe agayne, the same waye thou camest.
And this shalbe a sygne vnto the (O Hezekia) Ye shall eate this yere of soch thynges as growe of them selues, and the next yeare soch as come vp of those that dyd growe of their awne accorde. And the thirde yere sowe ye and reape, plant vyneyardes and eate the frutes therof.
And it that is escaped Ꟶ lefte, of the daughter of Iuda, shall yet agayne take rotinge downe warde and beare frute vpwarde.
For out of Ierusalem shall go a remnaunt, and a nombre that shall escape out of mount Sion: the zele of the Lorde of Hostes shall brynge thys thynge to passe.
Wherfore, thus sayth the Lorde, concerninge the kinge of Assyria: he shall not come to this cytie, nor shote an arowe into it, nor come before it with shilde, nor cast bancke agaynst it:
but shall go backe agayne the waye he came, Ꟶ shall not come into this cytie sayeth the Lorde.
For I will defende this cytie, to saue it, for myne awne sake, and for Dauid my seruauntes sake.
And so it came to passe that the selfe same nyght the angell of the Lorde went out Ꟶ smote in the Hoste of the Assyrians an hundred foure skore and fyue thousande. And when the remnaunt were vp erlye in the mornynge: they sawe, they were all deed coarsses.
And so Sennacherib kynge of Assyria auoyded and departed, and went agayne, Ꟶ dwelt at Niniue.
And it fortuned, that as he was in a temple worshyppynge Nisroch hys God, Adramelech Ꟶ Sacesar his awne sonnes smote hym with the swerde. And they escaped into the lande of Armenia, and Asarhaddon his sonne raygned in his steade.
About that tyme was Hezekia sycke vnto the deeth. And the prophete Isay the sonne of Amoz came to him, and sayde vnto hym. Thus sayth the Lorde: put thyne housholde in an ordre, for thou shalte die, and not lyue.
And Hezekia turned his face to the wall, Ꟶ prayed vnto the Lorde, sayenge:
I beseche the nowe, O Lorde, remembre howe I haue walked before the in trueth and with a perfecte herte, and haue done that which is good in thy syght, and Hezekia wepte sore.
And it fortuned that afore Isay was gone out into the myddle of the courte, the worde of the Lorde came to him, sayinge:
turne agayne, and tell Hezekia the captayne of my people: Thus sayth the Lorde God of Dauid thy father: I haue herde thy prayer, and sene thy teares. And beholde, I wyll heale the, so that on the thyrde daye thou shalt go vp into the house of the Lorde.
And I wyll adde vnto thy dayes yet fyftene yere, and will delyuer the and this cytie out of the hande of the kynge of Assyria, and wyll defende thys cytie for myne awne sake, and for Dauid my seruauntes sake.
And Isay sayde. Take a lompe of fygges. And they toke and layed it on the sore, and he recouered.
And Hezekia sayde vnto Isay what shalbe the signe, that the Lorde wyll heale me, and that I shall go vp into the house of the Lord the thyrde daye?
Isay answered: thys sygne shalt thou haue of the Lorde, that the Lorde will do that he hath spoken. Shall the shadowe go forwarde ten degrees, or go backe agayne ten degrees?
Hezekia answered it is a lyght thynge for the shadowe to go downe ten degrees. but yf the shadow go backewarde ten degrees, it is no lyght thynge.
And Isay the prophete called vnto the Lorde, and he brought the shadow ten degrees backwarde by which it had gone downe in the dyall of Ahaz.
The same ceason Berodach Baladan the sonne of Baladan kynge of Babilon sent letters and a present vnto Hezekia, for he had hearde, howe that Hezekia was sycke.
And Hezekia was glad of them, and shewed them all hys treasure house syluer, golde, odoures, preciouse oyntmente, all the house of hys armorye, and all that was founde in hys treasures: there was nothinge in hys house, Ꟶ in all his realme, that Hezekia shewed them not.
And Isay the prophete came vnto kynge Hezekia, and sayde vnto hym. What sayed these men, and from whence came they to the? And Hezekia sayde: they be come from a farre countree, euen from Babilon.
And he sayde agayne: what haue they sene in thy house? Hezekia answered: all the thynges that are in my house haue they sene: there is nothynge amonge my treasures, that I haue not shewed them.
And Isay sayde vnto Hezekia: heare the worde of the Lorde:
Beholde, the dayes come, that all that is in thy house, and whatsoeuer thy fathers haue layde vp in store vnto thys daye shalbe caryed into Babylon, and nothynge shalbe lefte sayth the Lorde.
And of thy sonnes (that shall proceade oute of the, and which thou shalt begette) shall they take awaye, and they shalbe chambrelayns in the palayce of the king of Babilon.
And Hezekia sayde vnto Isay: wellcome be the worde of the Lorde which thou hast spoken: And he sayde: shall ther not be peace and truthe in my dayes?
The remnaunt of the wordes that concerne Hezekia, and all hys power, and howe he made a pole and a conduyte, and brought water into the cytie, are they not written in the boke of the Chronicles of the kynges of Iuda?
And Hezekia slepte wt his fathers, and Manasse hys sonne raygned in hys steade.
Manasse was twelue yere olde, when he beganne to raygne and raygned fyfty Ꟶ fyue yere in Ierusalem: hys mothers name also was Hephziba.
And he dyd euell in the syght of the Lorde, euen after the abhominacyons of the Hethen whom the Lorde cast out before the chyldren of Israel.
For he went and buylt vp the hyllaulters, which Hezekia hys father had destroyed. And he reared vp aulters for Baal, and made Idoll groues (as dyd Ahab kynge of Israel,) and worshypped all the Hoste of heauen, and serued them.
And he buylt aulters in the house of the Lorde, of which the Lorde sayde: in Ierusalem wyll I put my name.
And he buylt aulters for all the Host of heauen, euen in two courtes of the house of the Lorde.
And he offered hys sonnes in fyre, and gaue hede vnto witchcraft and sorcery, and mayntened workers with spretes, and tellers of fortunes: and brought moche wyckednesse in the syght of the Lorde to angre hym.
And he put an ymage of a groue (that he had made) euen in the temple, of which the Lorde had sayde to Dauid and to Salomon his sonne, in thys house and in Ierusalem (which I haue chosen out of all trybes of Israel) wyll I put my name for euer.
Nether will I make the fete of Israel moue any moare out of the lande, which I gaue theyr fathers: so that they wyll obserue and do all that I haue commaunded them, and accordynge to all the lawe that my seruaunt Moses commaunded them.
But they herkened not: and Manasse ledd them out of the waye to do more wyckedlye then dyd the hethen people, whom the Lord destroyed before the chyldren of Israel.
And the Lorde spake by his seruauntes the prophetes, sayinge:
because Manasse kynge of Iuda hath done soche abhominacions, and hath wrought more wyckedlye then all that the Amorites (which were before hym) dyd: Ꟶ hath made Iuda synne also with hys Idoles.
Therfore thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel. Beholde, I wyll brynge soche euell vpon Ierusalem and Iuda, that who so heareth of it both his eares shall tyngle.
And I wyll stretch ouer Ierusalem the squaryng lyne of Samaria, and the plommeth of the house of Ahab. And I wyll wype out Ierusalem, as a man wypeth a disshe, and when he hath wyped it, turneth it vp syde downe.
And I wyll leaue the remnaunt of myne enheritaunce, and delyuer them into the hande of theyr enemies, and they shalbe robbed and spoyled of all their aduersaries:
euen because they haue done euell in my syght, Ꟶ haue angred me, sence the tyme theyr fathers came out of Egypte vnto this daye.
And Manasse shedd innocent bloude exceadynge moche, tyll he replenisshed Ierusalem from corner to corner, besyde hys synne wherwith he made Iuda to synne, and to do euell in the syght of the Lorde.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Manasse, and all that he dyd, and hys synne that he synned, are they not written in the boke of the chronicles of the kynges of Iuda?
And Manasse slepte with hys fathers, and was buryed in his awne house, euen in the garden of Uza: Ꟶ Amon his sonne raygned in hys steade.
Amon was .xxii. yeare olde when he beganne to raygne, and he raygned two yeare in Ierusalem. Hys mothers name also was Mesulemeth the daughter of Harum of Iotba.
And he did euell in the syght of the Lorde (as his father Manasse dyd,)
and walked in all the waye that his father walked in: Ꟶ serued the ydoles that his father serued, Ꟶ worshypped them.
And he forsoke the Lorde God of hys fathers, Ꟶ walked not in the waye of the Lorde.
And the seruauntes of Amon conspyred agaynst hym, and slue the kyng in hys awne house.
And the people of the lande slue all them that had conspyred agaynst kynge Amon, Ꟶ the people made Iosia hys sonne kynge, in hys steade.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Amon, what thynges he dyd, are they not wrytten in the boke of the chronicles of the kynges of Iuda?
And they buryed hym in hys sepulchre, in the garden of Uza: Ꟶ Iosia hys sonne raygned in hys steade.
Iosia was eyght yere olde when he beganne to raygne, and he raygned .xxxi. yere in Ierusalem. His mothers name also was Iedida the daughter of Adaia of Bozcath.
He dyd that which is ryght in the syght of the Lorde, and walked in all the wayes of Dauid his father, and bowed nether to the ryght hande or to the lefte.
And it came to passe, that in the .xviii. yeare of the raygne of kynge Iosia, the kynge sent Saphan the sonne of Azalia the sonne of Mesulam the scribe, to the house of the Lorde, sayenge:
go vp to Helkia the hye Preast, that he maye somme the syluer which is brought into the house of the Lorde, which the kepers of the porche haue gathered of the people,
and let them delyuer it into the hande of them that do the worcke, and that haue the ouersyght of the house of the Lorde: and let them geue it to them that worke in the house of the Lorde (to repayre the decayed places of the temple,)
euen vnto carpenters Ꟶ masons, and workers vpon the walles, and for to bye tymbre and fre stone to repayre the temple.
Howbeit, let no rekonynge be made with them of the moneye that is delyuered into their hande, for their vse is to deale faithfully.
And Helkia the hye preste sayd vnto Saphan the scribe: I haue founde the boke of the lawe in the housse of the Lorde, and Helkia gaue the boke to Saphan, and he red in it.
And Saphan the scrybe came to the kynge, and brought him worde agayne, and sayde: thy seruauntes haue bestowed the money (that was founde in the temple) Ꟶ haue delyuered it vnto them that do the worke, Ꟶ that haue the ouersyght of the house of the Lorde.
And Saphan the scrybe shewed the kynge, sayeng: Helkia the preaste hath delyuered me a boke. And Saphan red in it before the kynge.
And it fortuned, that whan the kynge had hearde the wordes of the boke of the lawe, he rent his clothes.
And the kyng commaunded Helkia the Preast, Ꟶ Ahikam the sonne of Saphan, and Achbor the sonne of Michaia, and Saphan the scrybe, and Asahia a seruaunt of the kynges, sayenge:
go ye and enquyre of the Lorde for me and for the people, and for all Iuda, concernynge the wordes of thys boke that is founde. For great is the wrath of the Lorde that is kendled agaynst vs, because oure fathers haue not herkened vnto the wordes of thys boke, to do accordinge vnto all that which is written therin for vs.
So Helkia the hye preaste and Akikam, Achbor, and Saphan, and Asahia went vnto Hulda the prophetisse the wyfe of Sullam the sonne of Thikua the sonne of Harham keper of the wardrope: whyche prophetisse dwelt in Ierusalem in the house of the doctrine, and they commoned with her.
And she answered them: thus sayth the Lord God of Israel. Tell the man that sent you to me:
thus sayth the Lord: beholde, I wyll brynge euell vpon thys place, and on the inhabiters therof. (euen all the wordes of the boke which the kynge of Iuda hath red)
because they haue forsaken me, and haue burnt incense vnto other Gods, to angre me with all the workes of theyr handes: My wrath also shalbe kyndled agaynst thys place, and shall not be quenched.
But to the kynge of Iuda (which sent you to aske councell of the Lorde,) so shall ye saye: thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel as touchynge the wordes which ye haue heard:
Because thyne herte dyd melt, and because thou hast humbled thy selfe before me the Lorde, when thou heardest what I spake agaynst thys place, and agaynst the enhabiters of the same (howe that they shulde be destroyed and acursed:) and hast rent thy clothes and wepte before me: of that also haue I hearde, sayth the Lorde.
Beholde therfore, I wyll receaue the vnto thy fathers, and thou shalt be put into thy graue in peace, and thyne eyes shall not se all the euell, which I wyll bringe vpon this place. And they brought the kyng worde agayne.
And then the kynge sent, and there gathered vnto hym all the elders of Iuda and of Ierusalem.
And the kyng went vp into the house of the Lorde, with all the men of Iuda and all the enhabitoures of Ierusalem, with the preastes, and prophetes and all the people both small and greate. And he red in the eares of them all the wordes of the boke of the couenaunt, which was founde in the house of the Lorde.
And the kynge stode by a pyler and made a couenaunt before the Lorde, that they shulde walke after the Lord, and kepe his commaundmentes, hys wytnesses, Ꟶ hys statutes with all theyr herte, and all theyr soule, and make good the wordes of the sayde appoyntment that were wrytten in the forsayde boke. And all the people consented to the appoyntment.
And the kynge commaunded Helkia the hye preaste, and the inferioure preastes and the kepers of the ornamentes, to brynge out of the temple of the Lorde, all the vesselles that were made for Baal, for the Idole groues Ꟶ for all the Hoste of heauen. And he burnt them without Ierusalem in the feldes of Cedron, and caryed the asshes of them into Bethel.
And he put downe the ministers of Baal whom the kynges of Iuda had founded to burne incense in the hyllaulters and cyties of Iuda, that were rounde aboute Ierusalem, and also them that burnt incense vnto Baal, to the sonne, to the mone, to the planetes, and to all the Hoste of heauen.
And he brought out the groue from the temple of the Lorde without Ierusalem vnto the broke Cedron, and burnt it there at the broke Cedron, and stampte it to pouldre, and cast the duste therof vpon the graues of the chyldren of the people.
And he brake downe the celles of the male stues that were by the house of the Lorde, where the wemen woue hangynges for the Idole groue.
And he brought all the preastes out of the cyties of Iuda, and defyled the hyllaulters, where the preastes had burnt incense: euen from Geba to Beerseba, and destroied the aulters of the Gates, that were in the enterynge in of the gate of Iosua the gouernoure of the citie which were (as a man goeth in) on the lefte hande of the gate of the cytie.
Neuerthelesse the preastes of the hyllaultares came not vp to the aulter of the Lorde in Ierusalem, saue onlye they dyd eate of the swete breade among theyr brethren.
And he defyled Topheth, which is in the valeye of the chyldren of Hinnom, because no man shulde offer hys sonne or hys daughter in fyre to Molech:
he put downe the horses that the kynges of Israel had geuen to the sonne at the entrynge in of the house of the Lorde, by the chambre of Nathanmelech the chamberlaine which was ruler of the suburbes, and burnt the charettes of the sonne with fyre.
And the aulters that were on the toppe of the parloure of Ahaz (which the kynges of Iuda had made) and the aulters which Manasse had made in the two courtes of the house of the Lorde, dyd the kynge breake downe, and ranne thence, and cast the dust of them into the broke Cedron.
And the hyllaulters that were before Ierusalem on the ryght hande of the mounte Oliuete (which Salomon the kynge of Israel had buylded for Astaroth the Idoll of the zidons, and for Chamos the Idoll of the Moabites, and for Milchom the abhomynable Idoll of the children of Ammon) those the kinge defyled:
and brake the ymages, and cut downe the Idoll groues, and fylled theyr places with the bones of men.
Moreouer the aulter that was at Bethel, the hyllaulter made by Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat (which made Israel synne) bothe the aulter and also the hyll, he brake downe and burnt the hyll alter and stampte it to powder, and burnt the Idole groue.
And as Iosia turned hym selfe, he spyed the graues that were in the mount, and sent and fett the bones out of the graues, and burnt them vpon the aulter, to polute it, accordynge to the worde of the Lord that the man of God proclaymed which tolde the same wordes.
Then he sayde: what graue stone is younder that I se? And the men of the cytie tolde hym, it is the sepulchre of the man of God, whych came from Iuda, and tolde the selfe same thynges that thou hast done to the aulter of Bethel.
And he sayd let hym be: se that no man moue hys bones. And so hys bones were saued with the bones of a prophete that came out of Samaria.
And all the houses of the hyllaulters in the cyties of Samaria which the kynges of Israel had made, to angre withall: those Iosia put out of the waye, and dyd to them according to all the actes that he had done in Bethel.
And he sacrifyced all the preastes of the hylaulters that were ther euen vpon the aulters, and burnt mennes bones vpon them, and returned to Ierusalem.
And the kynge commaunded all the people, sayeng: kepe the feast of passeouer vnto the Lorde youre God as it is wrytten in the boke of thys couenaunt.
There was no Passeouer holden lyke that, from the dayes of the iudges that iudged Israel, and in all the dayes of the kynges of Israel and of the kynges of Iuda.
In the .xviii. yere of kynge Iosia was this Passouer holden to the Lorde in Ierusalem.
And therto workers with spretes, Ꟶ sothsayers, ymages, ydoles, and all the abhominacyons that were spyed in the lande of Iuda and in Ierusalem, those did Iosia put out of the waye, to perfourme the wordes of the lawe, which were wrytten in the boke, that Helkia the preaste founde in the house of the Lorde:
lyke vnto him was there no kyng before hym, that turned to the Lorde with all hys herte, with all his soule Ꟶ all hys myght accordynge to all the lawe of Moses, nether after hym arose there any soche as he.
Not withstandinge the Lorde turned not from the fearcenesse of hys great wrath (wherwith he was angrie agaynst Iuda) because of all the prouocacions that Manasse had prouoked hym withall.
And the Lorde sayde: I wyll put Iuda also, out of my syght, as I haue done awaye Israel, and wyll cast of thys cytie Ierusalem which I haue chosen, and the house of whyche I sayde: my name shalbe there.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Iosia and all that he dyd, are they not wrytten in the boke of the Chronycles of the kynges of Iuda?
In hys dayes Pharao Necho kyng of Egypte went vp agaynst the kynge of Assyria to the ryuer of Euphrates. And kynge Iosia went agaynst hym, and was slayne of hym at Magiddo, when he had sene hym.
And hys seruauntes caryed hym deed from Magiddo, and brought hym to Ierusalem Ꟶ buryed hym in hys awne sepulchre. And the people of the lande toke Iehoahaz the sonne of Iosia, and anoynted hym, and made hym kynge in hys fathers steade.
Iehoahaz was .xxiii. yere olde when he beganne to raygne, and raygned thre monethes in Ierusalem. Hys mothers name also was Hamiel the daughter of Ieremia of Libna.
And he dyd euell in the syght of the Lorde, accordinge to all thynges as his fathers had done.
And Pharao Necho put hym in bondes at Ribla in the lande of Hamath that he shulde not raygne in Ierusalem, and put the lande to a trybute of an hundred talentes of syluer and a talent of golde.
And Pharao Necho made Eliakim the sonne of Iosia kyng in the rowme of Iosia his father, and turned hys name to Iehoakim, and toke Iehoahaz awaye, whych when he came to Egypte, dyed there.
And Iehoakim gaue the syluer and the golde to Pharao: Ꟶ taxed the lande, to geue the moneye accordinge to the request of Pharao: requyringe of euery man (accordynge to theyr abylite) syluer and golde: euen of the people of the lande, to geue vnto Pharao Necho.
Iehoakim was .xxv. yere olde when he beganne to raygne, and he raygned a .xi. yere in Ierusalem. Hys mothers name also was zebuda the daughter of Pedaia of Ruma.
And he dyd that which was euell in the syght of the Lorde, accordynge to all thinge as his fathers had done.
In hys dayes came Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babylon vp, and Iehoakim became hys seruaunt thre yere, and then turned, and rebelled agaynst hym.
And the Lorde sent vpon him men of warre from amonge the Caldeys, from amonge the Syrians, out of the Moabites, and from the chyldren of Ammon: and sent them agaynst Iuda, to destroye it, accordynge to the sayinge of the Lorde, which he spake by hys seruauntes the prophetes.
Onely, at the byddynge of the Lorde happened it so to Iuda, to put them out of his syght, for the synnes of Manasse, accordynge to all that he dyd:
and for the innocent bloude that he shed, and fylled Ierusalem with innocent bloude: and the Lorde wolde not be reconcyled.
The rest of the wordes that concerne Iehoakim, Ꟶ all that he dyd, are they not written in the boke of the chronycles of the kynges of Iuda?
And so Iehoakim slepte wt hys fathers: and Iehoachin hys sonne raygned in hys steade.
And the kynge of Egipt came nomore out of his lande: for the kynge of Babylon had taken from the ryuer of Egipt vnto the ryuer of Euphrates, all that pertayned to the kynge of Egipte.
Iehoachin was .xviij. yere olde, Ꟶ raygned in Ierusalem thre monethes. His mothers name also was Nehusta, the daughter of Elnathan of Ierusalem.
And he dyd that which was euell in the sight of the Lorde, according to all as hys father had done.
In that tyme came the seruauntes of Nabuchadnezar kyng of Babilon vp against Ierusalem, Ꟶ the citye was beseged.
And Nabuchadnezar the king of Babylon came agaynst the citye: Ꟶ his seruauntes dyd besege it.
And Iehoachin the kyng of Iuda came out to the kynge of Babylon he and hys mother, hys seruauntes, hys lordes, and hys chamberlaynes. And the kyng of Babilon toke him, in the eyght yere of hys raygne.
And he caryed out thence all the treasures of the house of the Lorde, Ꟶ the treasure of the kynges house: and brake all the vessels of golde, which Salomon kynge of Israel had made in the temple of the Lorde, as the Lorde had sayde.
And he caryed awaye all Ierusalem, and all the lordes, and all the strong men of warre, euen .x.M. into captiuite: and all craftes men and kepers, none remayning saue the poore commen people of the lande.
And he caryed awaye Iehoachin to Babylon, and the kynges mother, and the kynges wyues, his chamberlayns, and them that were myghty in the lande: those caryed he awaye into captiuyte from Ierusalem to Babilon.
And all the actiue men of warre, euen .vij.M. and craftesmen, and porters .M. all that were stronge and apte for warre, dyd the kinge of Babilon bryng to Babilon captyue.
And the kynge of Babylon made Mathania hys fathers brother, kynge in his steade, Ꟶ chaunged hys name to zedekia.
zedekia was .xxj. yere olde when he beganne to raygne, and he raygned eleuen yere in Ierusalem. Hys mothers name also was Hamital the daughter of Ieremia of Libna.
And he dyd euell in the syght of the Lord, accordynge to all as Ichoachin had done.
For the wrath of the Lorde was moued agaynst Ierusalem and Iuda, vntyll he cast them out of hys syght. And zedekia rebelled agaynst the kynge of Babylon.
And it fortuned, that in the nynth yere of hys raygne, the tenth daye of the tenth moneth: Nebuchadnezar kynge of Babilon came, he and all his hoost agaynst Ierusalem: and pitched agaynst it, and made engynes agaynst it on euery syde.
And the citye was beseged vnto the eleuenth yere of kinge zedekia.
And the nynth daye of the moneth, there was so greate hongre in the citye, that there was no breed for the people of the lande.
And the citye was broken vp: and all the men of armes fledd by nyght, by a waye thorowe a gate which is betwene two walles, by the kynges garden: the Chaldees lyinge about the citye. And the kynge went the waye towarde the playne.
And the soudyers of the Chaldees folowed after the kynge, and toke him in the playne of Iericho, and all hys armye were scatered awaye from hym,
So they toke the kynge, and brought hym to Nebuchadnezar the kynge of Babylon to Ribla, where they reasoned wt hym.
And they slue the sonnes of zedekia before hys eyes: and he put out the eyes of zedekia, and fettered him with two chaynes, and caryed hym to Babylon.
And the .vij. daye of the .v. moneth which is the .xix. yere of king Nabuchadnezer king of Babylon, came Nebusaradan a seruaunt of the kynge of Babylon, and chefe captayne of the men of warre, vnto Ierusalem:
Ꟶ burnt the house of the Lorde, and the kynges house, and all the houses of Ierusalem, Ꟶ all great houses burnt he wt fyre.
And all the soudiers of the Chaldees that were with the chefe captayne of the men of warre, broke downe the walles of Ierusalem rounde about.
But the rest of the people that were left in the citye, and them that were fledd to the kyng of Babylon, wt the remnaunt of the comen people, dyd Nabusaradan the chefe captayne of the men of warre carye awaye:
but the captayne of the souldyers lefte of the poore of the lande, to dresse the vynes, and to tyll the grounde.
And the pyllers of brasse that were in the house of the Lord, and the sockettes, and the brasen lauatory that was in the house of the Lorde dyd the Chaldees breake, and caryed all the brasse of them to Babylon.
And the pottes, shouelles, dressynge knyues, spones, and all the vessels of brasse that they minystred in, toke they awaye.
And the fyer pannes, and basens, and soch thinges as were of golde, Ꟶ of siluer,
then toke the chefe captayne awaye: euen two pyllers, one lauatory, and the sokettes which Salomon had made for the house of the Lord. The brasse of all these vesselles was without waight.
The heygth of the one pyller was .xviij. cubytes, and the heed theron was brasse, and thre cubytes hye and vpon the heed was there a wrethen worke and pomegranates rounde aboute, all of brasse. And of the same fassyon was the seconde pyller, with a wrethen worke.
And the chefe captayne of the men of warre toke Saraia the chefe preste, and zephoniah the hyest preste saue one, and the thre kepers of the holy thynges.
And out of the citye he toke a chamberlayne, that had the ouersight of the men of warre, and .v. men of them that were euer in the kynges presence, which were founde in the cytie: and him that was scrybe to the captayne of the hoost, which brought out the people of the lande to warre, and thre skore men of the people of the lande, that were founde in the citye.
And Nebusaradan the chefe captayne of the men of warre toke these, and brought them to the kynge of Babylon to Ribla.
And the kynge of Babylon smote them, and slue them at Ribla in the hande of Hanath. And so Iuda was caryed awaye out of theyr lande.
Howebeit, there remayned people in the lande of Iuda, whom Nebuchadnezar kyng of Babylon lefte, Ꟶ made Gedalia the sonne of Ahikam the sonne of Saphan ruler ouer them.
And all the captaynes of the souldyers, and other men hearde, that the kynge of Babilon had made Gedalia gouerner: and there came to Gedalia to Mazphah: Ismael the sonne of Nethania, Iohannan the sonne of Karea, Saraia the sonne of Thanhumeth the Netophathite, and Iazaania the sonne of Maachati, Ꟶ theyr men.
And Gedalia sware to them and to the men whom they had with them, and sayde vnto them: feare not ye because ye are the seruauntes of the caldees, dwell in the lande, and serue the kinge of Babilon, and ye shalbe well.
But it chaunced in the seuenth moneth, that Ismael the sonne of Nethania the sonne of Elisama, of the kynges bloude, came, and ten men with hym, and smote Gedalia, that he dyed: and so dyd he the Iewes and the Chaldees that were with hym at Mizpa.
And all the people, bothe small and greate, and the captaynes of warre arose, and came to Egipte: for they were afrayd of the Chaldees.
Notwithstandyng yet in the seuen and thyrtye yere after Iehoachin kynge of Iuda was caryed awaye the seuen and twentye daye of the twelueth moneth, Euilmerodach kynge of Babylon, the same yeare that he beganne to raygne, dyd lyfte vp the heade of Iehoachin kynge of Iuda out of the preson,
and spake kyndely to hym, and set hys seate aboue the seate of the kynges that were with hym in Babylon:
and chaunged hys preson garmentes. And he dyd euer eate breed before hym, all the dayes of hys lyfe.
Hys porcyon was a contynuall porcyon that was assigned hym of the kyng, euery daye a certayne, as longe as he lyued.
Adam, Seth, Enos,
Kenan, Mahalehel, Iared,
Henoch, Methusalah, Lameth,
Noah, Sem, Ham, Ꟶ Iapheth.
The sonnes of Iapheth, Gomer, Magog, Madai, Iauan, and Thubal, Mesech, and Thiras.
The sonnes of Gomer, Aschenaz, Diphath and Thogarma.
And the sonnes of Iauan, Elisa, and Tharsisa, Citim and Dodanim.
The sonnes of Ham, Chus, and Mizraim, Phut, and Chanaam.
The sonnes of Chus, Siba, and Hauila, Sabbetha, and Rahma, and Sabtheca. And the sonnes of Rahma, Seba, and Dedan.
And Chus begat Nimrod: and he beganne to be myghtye vpon the earth.
Mizraim begat Ludin, and Anamin, Lahabim, and Naphthnim,
Phatrusim, and Cassuim, of which came the Philistines and the Caphthorites.
Canaam begat zidon hys eldest sonue, and Heth,
Iebusi also and Amori, and Girgasi,
Heui, Araki, and Sini,
and Aruadi, zamari and Hemathi.
The sonnes of Sem, Elam, and Assur, Arphacsad, Lud, and Aram, and Uz, Hul, and Gether, and Masech.
Arphacsad begat Selah, and Selah begat Eber.
And vnto Eber were borne two sonnes: the name of the one was Peleg, because that in hys dayes the lande was deuyded. And hys brothers name was Ioktan.
Ioktan begat Almodad, and Saleph, Hazermaneth and Ierah,
Haboram also and Usal, and Dikla,
Ebal and Abimael, and Seba,
and Ophir, Hauila and Iobab. All these were the sonnes of Ioktan,
Sem, Arphacsad, Selah,
Eber, Peleg, Rehu,
Serug, Nahor, Therah,
Abram other wyse called Abraham.
The sonnes of Abraham, Isahac and Ismael.
And these are theyr generacyons: the eldest sonne of Ismael was Nabaioth, then Kedar, Adbeel, and Mibsam,
Misma, and Dumah, Maska Hadad, and Thema,
Ietur, Naphis, and Kedma. These are the sonnes of Ismael.
The chyldren of Ketura Abrahams concubyne: she bare zimram, Ioksan, Medan, Midian, Iisbok, and Suah. The chyldren of Ioksan: Seba, and Dedan.
The chyldren of Midian, Epha, Ꟶ Ephar, Henoch, Abida and Eldaa. All these are chyldren of Ketura.
And so Abraham begat Isahac. The sonnes of Isahac, Esau and Israel.
The sonnes of Esau: Eliphaz, Rehuel, Iehus, Iaelam, and Korah.
The chyldren of Eliphaz: Theman, Omer, zephi, Ꟶ Gathan, Kenas, Thimna, Ꟶ Amalek.
The children of Rehuel: Nahath, zerah, Samma, and Miza.
The sonnes of Seir: Lotan, Sobal, zibeon, and Ana, Dison, Ezer, and Disan.
The chyldren of Lotan: Hori, and Homan: Ꟶ Thimna was Lotans syster.
The chyldren of Sobal: Alian, Manahath, Ebal, Sephi, and Onam. The sonnes of zibeon: Aia, Ꟶ Ana.
And the sonnes of Ana: Dison. The sones of Dison: Hanran, Esban, Iithran, and Cheran.
The sonnes of Ezer: Bilhan, zaeuan, and zakan. The sonnes of Disan: Uz, and Aran.
These are the kynges that raygned in the lande of Edom, before any kynge raygned ouer the chyldren of Israel: Bela the sonne of Beor and the name of hys citye was Dinhaba.
And Bela dyed, and Iobab the sonne of zerah of Bozra raygned in his steade.
And when Iobab also was deed, Husam of the lande of the Themanytes raygned in hys steade.
And whan Husam was deed, Hadad the sonne of Bedad which smote Midian in the felde of Moab, raygned in hys steade, and the name of hys citye was Auith.
So Hadad dyed, and Samla of Masreka raygned in hys steade.
And Samla dyed, and Saul of Rehoboth by the ryuer syde, raygned in hys steade.
And whan Saul was deed, Baalhanan the sonne of Achbor raygned in hys steade.
And Baalhanan dyed, and Hadad raygned in his steade, Ꟶ the name of hys citye was Pahi, and hys wyues name was Mehetabeel the daughter of Matred the daughter of Mesahab.
Hadad died also, and there were dukes in Edom: Duke Thimna, Duke Aliah, and Duke Ietheth,
Duke Apholibama, Duke Ela, Duke Pinon,
Duke Kenaz, Duke Themam, Duke Mibzar,
Duke Magdiel, and Duke Iram. These are the Dukes of Edom.
These are the sonnes of Israell: Ruben, Simeon, Leui, Iuda, Isachar, and zabulon,
Dan, Ioseph, Beniamin, Nephtali, Gad, and Asser.
The sonnes of Iuda: Er, Onan, and Sela. These thre were borne vnto hym of Bath, Sua the Cananytesse. And Er the eldest sonne of Iuda was euell in the syght of the Lorde, and he slue hym.
And Thamar hys daughter in lawe bare hym Pharez, and zara: and so all the sonnes of Iuda were fyue.
The sonnes of Pharez: Hezron and Hamul.
The sonnes of zarah: zimri, Ethan, Heman, Chalchol, and Dara: which were fyue in all.
And the sonnes of Charmi, Achar that troubled Israel, transgressynge in the thing, that was damned.
The sonnes of Ethan: Azaria.
The sonnes also of Hezron that were borne vnto him: Ierhameel, Ram and Chelubat.
And Ram begat Aminadab: and Aminadab begat Nahson a lord of the children of Iuda.
And Nahson begat Salma: and Salma begat Boaz:
Boaz begat Obed: and Obed begat Isai:
And Isai begat hys eldest sonne Eliab: and Aminadab the seconde, and Simaa the thyrde,
Nathanael the fourth, and Radai the fyfte,
Ozem the syxte, and Dauid the seuenth.
Whose systers were zeruia and Abigail. The sonnes of zeruia: Abisai, Ioab, Ꟶ Azahel, thre.
And Abigail bare Amaza: the father of which Amaza was Iether an Ismaelite.
And Caleb the sonne of Hezron begat Asuba, of hys wyfe Asuba, and Ierihoth, whose sonnes are these: Ieser, Sobab, and Ardon.
And when Asuba was deed, Caleb toke Ephrata, which bare hym Hur.
And Hur begat Uri, and Uri begat Bezaleel.
Afterward came Hezron to the daughter of Machir the father of Gilead, and toke her when he was thre skore yeare olde. And she bare hym Segub:
and Segub begat Iair, which had thre and twentye cityes in the lande of Gilead.
And he ouercame Gessur and Aram, the townes of Iair from them which dwell in them: and Kenath and the townes therof: euen thre skore townes. All these were the sonnes of Machir the father of Gilead.
And after that Hezron was deed at Caleb in Ephrata, Abia Esrons wife, bare him Ashur the father of Thekoa.
And the sonnes of Ierhameel the eldest sonne of Hezron were: Ran the eldest, Buna, Oren, Ozen, and Ahia.
And Ierhmeel had yet another wyfe named Atara which was the mother of Onam.
And the sonnes of Ram the eldest sonne of Ierhameel were: Maaz, Iamin, and Ekar.
The sonnes of Onam were: Samai, and Iada. The sonnes of Sammai: Nadab and Abisur.
And the wyfe of Abisur was called Abihail, and she bare hym Ahban and Molid.
The sonnes of Nadab: Seled and Appaim. And Seled dyed without chyldren.
The sonne of Appaim: Iesei. And the sonne of Iesei: Sesan. And the sonnes of Sesan: Ahlai.
And the sonnes of Iada the brother of Samai: Iether and Ionatham. And Iether dyed without chyldren.
The sonnes of Ionatham: Peleth and zaza. These were the sonnes of Ierhameel.
Sesan had no sonnes: but daughters. And Sesan had a seruaunt that was an Egipcian named Iarha:
to whom he gaue his daughter to wyfe: and she bare hym Athai.
And Athai begat Nathan. And Nathan begat zabad.
And zabad begat Aphlal. And Aphlal begat Obed.
Obed begat Iehu. And Iehu begat Azaria.
Azaria begat Aalez. And Halez begat Elasa:
Elasa begat Sisamai. And Sisamai begat Sallum:
Sallum begat Iecamia: Iecamia begat Elisamah.
The sonnes of Caleb the brother of Ierhameel: Mesa hys eldest sonne which was the father of ziph. And the sonnes of Maresa the father of Hebron.
The sonnes of Hebron: Corah, Ꟶ Tapuah, Rekem Ꟶ Sama.
Sama begat Raham the father of Ierkoam. And Rekem begat Sammai.
The sonne of Sammai was Maon. And Maon was the father of Bethzur.
And Epha a concubine of Calebs bare Haran, and Mosa, and Gazez. Haran begat Gazez.
The sonnes of Iahdai were: Regem, Iothan, Gesan, Pellet, Epha, and Saaph.
And Maacha was Calebs concubyne, of whom he begat Semer and Thirhana.
And she bare also Saaph the father of Madmanna, and Seua the father of Machbena and the father of Gibea. And Achsa was Calebs daughter.
These were the sonnes of Caleb the sonne of Hur the eldest sonne of Ephrata: Sobal the father of Kiriath Iearim,
Salma the father of Bethlehem, and Hareph the father of Beth Gader,
and Sobal the father of Kiriath Iearim had sonnes, and he sawe the halfe of the countrey of the mansions.
The kyndredes of Kiriath Iearim are these: the Iithrites, the Happuthites, the Hassumathites, and the Hamisraites. And of them came the zarathites Ꟶ the Esthaulites.
The sonne of Salma: the Bethlehemites, and Netophathites the glory of the house of Ioab, and halfe the countrey of the mansions gat the zaraites.
The kindredes of the writers dwelt at Iabes, the Tirathites, the Simeathites, the Suchathites, which are the Kenites, that came of Hemath the father of the house of Rechab.
These were the sonnes of Dauid which were borne vnto hym in Hebron the eldest, Ammon of Ahinoam the Israelitesse. The seconde Daniel of Abigail the Carmelitesse.
The thyrde Absalom the sonne of Maacha daughter of Thalmai kinge of Gesur. The fourth Adonia the sonne of Haggith.
The fyft Sephatia of Abital. The syxte Iethream by Egla hys wyfe.
These .vi. were borne vnto him in Ebron, Ꟶ there he raygned .vii. yeare Ꟶ syxe monethes. And in Ierusalem he raygned .xxxiij. yeare.
And these were borne vnto hym in Ierusalem: Simeia, Sobab, Nathan Ꟶ Salomon .iiij. of Bathsua the daughter of Ammiel,
Ibhar also Ꟶ Elisama, Elipalet,
Noga, Nepheg, Ꟶ Iaphia,
Elisama, Eliada, and Eliphelet: nyne in nomber.
These are all the sonnes of Dauid, besyde the sonnes of the concubynes, and Thamar was ther syster.
Salomons sonne was Rehoboam, whose sonne was Abia: and Asa was hys sonne, and Ichosaphat his sonne:
whose sonne was Ioran: and hys sonne was Ahazia: and Ioas was hys sonne.
Amazia hys sonne, Azariah hys sonne, and Iotham hys sonne.
Ahaz was hys sonne, Hezekia hys sonne, and Manasse hys sonne.
And Amon was hys sonne, and Iosia was hys sonne.
And the sonnes of Iosiah were: the eldest sonne Iohanan, the seconde Iehoakim, the thyrde zedekia, and the fourth Sallum.
The sonnes of Iehoakim were, Ieconiah his sonne, and zedekiah hys sonne.
The sonne of Ieconia: Assir, and Schealthiel hys sonne.
Malchiram also and Phedaia, Senazer, Iecamia, Hosama and Nedabia.
The sonnes of Pedaia were: zurobabel and Simehi. The sonnes of zurobabel, Mesulam, Hanania, and Selumith their syster,
and Hasubah, Ohel, Berechia, Hasadia, and Iusabhesed, fyue in nombre.
The sonnes of Hanania: Pelatia, and Iesaia, whose sonne was Rephaah, and his sonne Arnan, and hys sonne was Obadia, and hys sonnes Sechania.
The sonne Sechaniah was Semaiah. And the sonnes of Semaia were Hatus, Igeal, Bariah, Naariah and Saphat, and Sesa, syxe.
And the sonnes of Naariah were Elioenai, Hezezia, and Azricam, thre.
And the sonnes of Elioenai were Hodaiah, Eliasib, Pheleia, Akub, Iohanam, Dealaia Ꟶ Anani, seuen.
The sonnes of Iuda: Pharez, Hezron, Carmi, Hur and Sobal.
And Reaia the sonne of Sobal begat Iahath. And Iahath begat Ahumai and Lahad: and these are the kinredes of the zoreathites.
And of these came the father of Etham, Iezrael, Iisma and Iidbas, and the name of theyr syster was Hazlelpeni.
Penuel was the father of Gedor. And Eser the father of Husa. And these are the sonnes of Hur the eldest sonne of Ephrata the father of Bethlehem.
And Ashur the father of Thekoa had two wyues: Heleah and Naara.
And Naara bare hym Ahusam, Hepher, Themni and Hahastari. These were the sonnes of Naarah.
And the sonnes of Heleah were zareth, Iezoar and Ethnan.
And Coz begat Anub and zobeba, and the kynred of Aharhel the sonne of Harum.
And Ioabes was more honorable then his brethren. And hys mother called his name Iabes, sayinge. because I bare hym with sorowe.
And Iabes called on the God of Israel, sayinge: If thou wylt blesse me in dede, and enlarge my coastes, and shalt let thyne hande be with me. and wylt kepe me from euell that it hurt me not? And God graunted hym hys desyre.
Chelub the brother of Suah begat Mehir, whych was the father of Esthon.
And Esthon begat Bethrapha, and Paseha, and Thehinna the father of the citye of Nahas: these are the men of Recha.
The sonnes of Kenas: Othniel and Saraia. And the sonnes of Othniel were Hathath.
And Meonothi begat Ophran. And Seraia begat Ioab the father of the valeye of craftes men (so called) because they were craftes men.
And the sonnes of Caleb the sonne of Iephune were: Iru, Ela and Naan. And the sonne of Ela was Kenas.
And the sonnes of Iehalelel were ziph, and ziphah, Thiria and Asarel.
And the sonnes of Ezra: were: Iether, and Mered, Epher, Ialon, Thahar, and Miriam, and Sammai, and Iisbah the father of Esthemoa.
And hys wyfe Iehudia bare Iered the father of Gedor, and Heber the father of Socho, and Ieruthiel the father of zanoah. And these are the sonnes of Bithiah the daughter of Pharao, whych Mered toke.
The sonnes of the wyfe of Hodia the syster of Nahan the father of Keilah were: Barmi, and Esthemoa. the Maachathite.
The sonnes of Symon were: Ammon, and Rimna, Benhanan and Thilon. And the sonnes of Iissi were: zoheth, and Benzoheth.
The sonnes of Selah the sonne of Iuda were: Er the father of Lecha, and Laada the father of Maresa, and the kynredes of the housholdes of them that wrought linnen in the house of Asbea.
And Iokim and the men of Chozebah, and Ioas, and Saraph, whych had the dominyon in Moad, and Iasubi Lehem. These also are wordes of olde.
These were potters, and dwelt there amonge trees Ꟶ hedges, nye vnto the kynge: because of hys worke.
The sonnes of Simeon were: Nemuel, Iamin, Iarib, zerah and Saul:
whose sonne was Sallum: and the sonne of hym was Mibsam, and hys sonne was Misma.
And the sonne of Misma was Hamuel, and hys sonne was zachur, and the sonne of hym was Simehi.
Semehi had syxtene sonnes Ꟶ syxe daughters. But hys brethren had nott manye chyldren, neyther was all the kynred of them lyke to the chyldren of Iuda in multytude.
And they dwelt at Beerseba, Molada, and at Hazar Sual,
at Bilha, at Ezem, and at Tholad,
at Bethuel, at Horma, and at ziklag,
at Bethmarcaboth, Hazar Susun, at Bethbirei, and at Saaraim. These were theyr cityes vnto the raygne of Dauid.
And theyr vyllages were: Etan, and Ain, Rimmon, Tochen and Asan, fyue townes;
and all theyr vyllages that were rounde aboute the same cytyes vnto Baal. Thys is the habitacyon of them, and theyr genealogie.
Mosobab and Iamlech, and Iosa the sonne of Amasia:
and Ioel and Iehu the sonne of Iosibia, the sonne of Saraia, the sonne of Asiel:
and Elioenai, and Iaakoba, Isohaia and Asaiah, Adiel, Isimiel and Benaia:
and ziza the sonne of Schibhi, the sonne of Allon, the sonne of Ieoaia, the sonne of zemri, the sonne of Semaia.
These are famouse captaynes in their kynredes, setting vp greatly the house of theyr fathers.
And they went to the entryng in of Gedor, euen vnto the east syde of the valeye, to seke pasture for ther shepe.
And they founde fatt pasture and good, and a wyde lande, quyet and frutefull: for they of Ham had dwelt ther before.
And these now afore written by name, came in the dayes of Hezekia kynge of Iuda, and smote the tentes of them, and the habitacions that were founde there, and destroyed them vtterly vnto this daye, Ꟶ dwelt in theyr rowmes: because there was pasture there for theyr shepe.
And some of the chyldren of Symeon went to mount Seyr, euen fyue hundred men, hauynge for theyr captaynes, Phelathia, Nearia, Raphaia and Uziel the sonnes of Isi:
and smote the reste of the Amalekites that were escaped, and they dwelt there vnto thys daye.
The sonnes of Ruben the eldest sonne of Israel: for asmoche as he was the eldest, and had defyled hys fathers bedd, his byrthryght was geuen vnto the sonnes of Ioseph the sonne of Israel. Howbeit, the genealogy is not rekoned after this byrthryght.
For Iuda, he preuayled aboue hys brethren, and of this trybe came the chefe, and the byrthryght was geuen to Ioseph.
The sonnes then of Ruben the eldest sonne of Israel were: Henoch, Phalu, Hezron and Charmi.
The sonnes of Ioel: Samaiah: hys sonne, Gog hys sonne, and Semhi hys sonne,
Micah hys sonne, Reaia hys sonne, and Baal hys sonne,
Beera hys sonne. Whome Thiglath Pylneser kynge of Assyria caryed awaye: for he was a great lorde among the Rubenites.
And when hys brethren in theyr kynredes, rekoned the genealogye of theyr generacyons: Ieiel and zachariah were the chefe.
And Baal the sonne of Azan, the sonne of Sema, the sonne of Ioel, dwelt in Aroer: and so forthe vnto Nebo and Baalmeon.
And eastwarde, he enhabited vnto the entrynge in of the wyldernesse, from the ryuer Euphrates: for they had moche catell in the lande of Gilead.
And in the dayes of Saul, they warred with the Hagarites, which were ouerthrowen into theyr hande. And they dwelte in theyr tentes thorowout all the east lande of Gilgal.
And the chyldren of Gad dwelte ouer against them in the lande of Basan, euen vnto Salcha.
And in Basan, Ioel was the chefest, and Sapham the nexte, then Ianai and Saphat.
And theyr brethren of the housholde of theyr fathers, were Michael, Meosuesam, Seba, Iorai, Iahcan, zia, Eber, Senen.
These are the chyldren of Abihail the sonne of Huri, the sonne of Ieroah, the sonne of Gilead, the sonne of Michael, the sonne of Iesisai, the sonne of Iahdo, the sonne of Buz.
Ahi (the sonne of Abdiel, the sonne of Guni) was a captayne of the housholde of theyr fathers.
And they dwelt in Gilead, in Basan, and in her townes, and in all the suburbes of Saron, and in theyr borders.
All these were rekoned by kynredes in the dayes of Iotham kynge of Iuda, and in the dayes of Ieroboam kyng of Israel.
The sonnes of Ruben, and of Gad, and of halfe the trybe of Manasse, were fyghtynge men, and able to beare shylde and swearde, and to shote with bowe, excercysed in warre, euen foure and fourtye thousande, seuen hundred and threskore, that wente out to the warre.
And they fought with the Hagarites, with Ietur, Nephis and Nodab.
And they were helped of the Lorde against them, and the Hagarites were deliuered into their hande, and so were all that were with them. For they cryed to God in the battayll, and he hearde them, because they put theyr trust in hym.
And they toke of theyr catell and of theyr camels fyftye thousande, and two hundred and fyftye thousande shepe, and two thousande asses, and of the soules of men, an hondred thousande:
and there fell many wounded, because the warre was of God. And they dwelt in theyr steades, vntyll the tyme that they were caryed awaye.
And the chyldren of the halfe tribe of Manasse dwelt in the lande, from Basan vnto Baal Hermon, and Semir, and vnto mount Hermon:
for they were growne to a greate multitude. And these were the heedes of the housholdes of theyr fathers: Epher, and Iesi, Eliel and Azriel, Ieremia and Hodauia, and Iaohdiel, stronge men and valeaunt, famouse men, and heedes of the housholdes of theyr fathers.
And they transgressed agaynste the God of theyr fathers, and went a whorynge after the goddes of the people of the land, whom God destroyed before them:
and God stered vp the sprete of Phul kynge of Assiria, and the sprete of Thiglath Pilneser kynge of Assiria, and caryed them awaye: euen the Rubenytes, the Gaddites, and the halfe trybe of Manasse, and brought them vnto Halah, Habor, Hara: and to the ryuer Gozan, vnto thys daye.
The sonnes of Leui: Gerson, Cahath and Merari.
The sonnes of Cahath: Amram, Izahar, Hebron and Uziel.
The chyldren of Amram: Aaron, Moses and Miriam. The sonnes also of Aaron: Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar Ꟶ Ithamar.
Eleazar begat Phinehes. Phinehes begat Abisua.
Abisua begat Boki: Boki begat Uzi.
Uzi begat zarahia. zarahia begat Meraioth.
Meraioth begat Amaria, and Amaria begat Ahitob.
Ahitob begat zadoc, and zadoc begat Ahimaaz.
Ahimaaz begat Azaria, and Azaria begat Iohanam.
Iohanam begat Azaria, which minystred in the temple that Salomon buylte in Ierusalem.
Azaria begat Amaria, Amaria begat Ahitob.
Ahitob begat zadoc, and zadoc begat Sallum.
Sallum begat Helkia, and Helkia begat Azaria.
Azaria begat Saraia, and Saraia begat Iehozedech.
And Iehozedech departed, when the Lorde caryed awaye Iuda and Ierusalem by the hande of Nebuchadnezar.
The sonnes of Leui: Gersom, Cahath and Merari.
And these be the names of the sonnes of Gersom: Libni and Simhi.
And the sonnes of Cahath were: Amram, Izahar, Hebron and Uziel.
The sonnes of Merari: Mahli Ꟶ Musi, and these are the kynreddes of Leui, concernynge theyr fathers.
The sonne of Gersom was Lobni, whose sonne was Iahath, and hys sonne zemma,
and hys sonne Ioah, and hys sonne Iddo, and his sonne zerah, and his sonne Ieathrai.
The sonnes of Cahath: Aminadab and hys sonne Korah, and hys sonne Assyr,
and hys sonne Elcana, and hys sonne Ebiasaph, and hys sonne Assyr,
Ꟶ Thahath was his sonne, and Uriel his sonne, and Uzia his sonne, and Saul was hys sonne.
The sonnes of Elcana: Amasai, Ꟶ Ahimot
Ꟶ Elcana. The sonnes of Elcana, zophai, whose sonne was Nahath,
Ꟶ hys sonne Eliab, and Ieroham hys sonne, and Elcana hys sonne,
and Samuel the sonne of hym. And the sonnes of Samuel: the eldest Uasni, and Abia.
The sonnes of Merari: Mahli, and hys sonne Libni, and hys sonne Simhi, and hys sonne Uza,
and hys sonne Simha, and hys sonne Hagia, and hys sonne Asaia.
And these be they, whom Dauid set for to singe in the house of the Lorde, after that the Arcke had reste.
And they mynistred before the dwellynge place, and the Tabernacle of wytnesse wyth synginge, vntyll Salomon had buylt the housse of the Lorde in Ierusalem. And then they wayted on theyr offyces, accordynge to the order of them.
These are they that wayted with theyr children, of the sonnes of Cahath: Heman a synger, which was the sonne of Ioell, the sonne of Semuel,
the sonne of Elcana, the sonne of Ieroham, the sonne of Eliel: the sonne of Thoah,
the sonne of zuph, the sonne of Elcana, the sonne of Mahath, the sonne of Amasai,
the sonne of Elcana, the sonne of Ioel, the sonne of Asaria, the sonne of zephania,
the sonne of Thahath the sonne of Assyr, the sonne of Ebiasaph, the sonne of Korah,
the sonne of Izahar, the sonne of Cahath, the sonne of Leui, the sonne of Israel.
And his brother Asaph stode on his ryght hande, and Asaph was the sonne of Barachia, the sonne of Simha,
the sonne of Michael, the sonne of Baasaia, the sonne of Melchia,
the sonne of Atham, the sonne of zarah, the sonne of Adaia,
the sonne of Ethan, the sonne of zima, the sonne of Simhi,
the sonne of Iahath, the sonne of Gersom, the sonne of Leui.
And theyr brethren the sonnes of Merari stode on the lefte hande: euen Ethan the sonne of Kysi, the sonne of Abdi, the sonne of Maluch,
the sonne of Hasabia, the sonne of Amazia, the sonne of Helkia,
the sonne of Amzi, the sonne of Bani, the sonne of Samer,
the sonne of Mahli, the sonne of Musi, the sonne of Merari, the sonne of Leui.
Theyr brethren also the Leuites were appoynted vnto all maner of seruice of the tabernacle of the house of God.
But Aaron Ꟶ hys sonnes burnt incense vpon the aulter of burntofferynge Ꟶ on the aulter of incense (and were apoynted) for all that was to do in the place moste holy, and to make an attonement for them of Israel, accordynge to all that Moses the seruaunt of God had commaunded.
These are the sonnes of Aaron: Eleazar, whose sonne was Phinehes, Ꟶ his sonne Abisua:
Ꟶ his sonne Boki, whose sonne was Uzi, and hys sonne zerahia:
and the sonne of hym Meraioth, and hys sonne Amaria, and the sonne of hym, Ahitob:
and zadoc hys sonne, and Ahimaaz hys sonne.
And these are the dwellynge places of them (thorowe out theyr townes Ꟶ coastes) euen of the sonnes of Aaron thorow out the kynredde of the Caathites, for so the lot fell for them.
And they gaue vnto them Hebron in the lande of Iuda Ꟶ the Suburbes therof rounde aboute it.
But the felde of the cytie, Ꟶ the villages pertaynynge therto they gaue to Caleb the sonne of Iephune.
And to the sonnes of Aaran they gaue the cyties of refuge: euen Hebron and Libna, with theyr Suburbes: Iathyr Ꟶ Esthemoa wyth their Suburbes:
and Hilen wyth her Suburbes, and Debit wyth her Suburbes:
Afan and her Suburbes, Bethsemes and her Suburbes.
And out of the trybe of BenIamin, Geba and her Suburbes, Alemeth and her Suburbes, Anathoth and her Suburbes, all theyr cytyes thorowe out theyr kynreddes were .xiij.
And vnto the sonnes of Cahath the remnaunt of the kynne of the trybe, were cyties geuen out of the halfe trybe of Manasse by lotte: euen ten cyties.
And the sonnes of Gersom thorowe out theyr kynreddes, had out of the trybe of Isacar, out of the trybe of Asser, and out of the trybe of Nephthali: and out of the trybe of Manasse in Basan, thyrtene cytyes.
And vnto the sonnes of Merari were geuen by lot thorowe out theyr kynreddes out of the trybe of Ruben, and out of the trybe of, Gad, and out of the trybe of zabulon, twelue cyties.
And the chyldren of Israel gaue the Leuytes cytyes wyth theyr Suburbes,
Ꟶ that by Lott, out of the trybe of the chyldren of Iuda, and out of the trybe of the chyldren of Symeon, and out of the trybe of the children of BenIamin these cyties which they called by theyr names.
And they that were of the kynreds of the sonnes of Cahath, had cyties and theyr coastes out of the trybe of Ephraim.
And they gaue vnto them cyties of refuge: Sichem in mount Ephraim and her Suburbes, Gaser and her Suburbes,
Iocmeam and her Suburbes, Bethhoron and her Suburbes,
Aialon and her Suburbes, Geth Rimmon and her Suburbes.
And out of the halfe trybe of Manasse, Aner and her Suburbes, and Bileam and her Suburbes for the kyndred of the remnaunt of the sonnes of Cahath.
And vnto the sonnes of Gerson were geuen out of the kyndred of the halfe trybe of Manasse: Golon in Basan and her Suburbes, and Astharoth and her Suburbes.
Out of the trybe of Isacar, Kedes Ꟶ her Suburbes, Dabrath and her Suburbes,
Ramoth also and her Suburbes, Anem and her Suburbes.
And out of Asser, Masal Ꟶ her Suburbes. Abdon and her Suburbes,
Hukok and her Suburbes, Rehob and her Suburbes.
Out of the trybe of Nephthali, Kedes in Galilea and her Suburbes, Hammon and her Suburbes, Kiriathaijm Ꟶ her Suburbes.
And vnto the rest of the chyldren of Merari were geuen out of the trybe of zabulon. Rimmon and her Suburbes. Thabor and her Suburbes.
And on the other syde Iordan by Iericho, euen on the east syde of Iordan, were geuen them out of the trybe of Ruben: Bezer in the wyldernesse wyth her Suburbes: Iahzah with her Suburbes:
Kedemoth wyth her Suburbes. Mephath wyth her Suburbes.
Out of the trybe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead wyth her Suburbes, Mahanaim wyth her Suburbes,
Hesebon with her Suburbes, and Iezer wyth her Suburbes.
The sonnes of Isacar: Thola, Phua, Iasub, Simron, foure.
And the sonnes of Thola: Uzi, Rephaia, Ieriel, Iamai, Iebsam and Sehmuel, whych were heedes in the housholdes of theyr fathers of Thola, men of myghte theyr kynreddes: whose nombre was in the dayes of Dauid, two and twentye thousande and syxe hundred.
The sonnes of Uzi: Izrahia. The sonnes of Izrahia: Michael, Obadia, Ioel, and Iesiah, fyue men, all captaynes.
And wyth them, in theyr generacyons after the housholde of their fathers, were syxe and thyrtye thousande soudyers and valeaunt men of warre: For they had many wyues and sonnes.
And theyr brethren amonge all the kynreddes of Isacar were valeaunt men of warre rekoned in all: foure skore and seuen thousande.
The sonnes of BenIamin: Bela: Bether and Iediel: thre.
The sonnes of Bela: Ezbon, Uzi, Uziel, Ierimoth and Iri, fyue heedes of the housholde of theyr fathers, men of myghte, and were rekoned by the genealogies .xxij. thousande and .xxxiiij.
The sonnes of Becher: zemira, Ioas, Eliezer, Elioenai, Omri, Ieremoth, Abia, Anathoth and Alamath. All these are the chyldren of Becher,
and the nombre of them after theyr genealogye and generacyons, and captaynes of the housholdes of their fathers men of myght, twentye thousande and two hundred.
The sonnes of Iediel: Bilhan. The sonnes of Bilhan: Ieus, BenIamin, Ehud and Canaana, zethan, Tharsis and Ahilahar.
All these are the sonnes of Iediel, auncient heedes and men of warre .xvij. thousande and two hundred that went out harnessed to battell.
And Suppim and Hupim were the chyldren of Ir. And the Husites were the chyldren of Aher.
The sonnes of Nephthali: Iahziel, Guni, Iezer and Salum, the chyldren of Bilha.
The sonnes of Manasse: Azriel whom (hys wyfe) bare vnto hym: But Aramiah hys concubine bare Machir the father of Gilead.
And Machir toke wyues for Hupim Ꟶ Supim. And the name of hys syster was Maaca. And the name of another sonne was zelophahad And zelophahad had daughters.
And Maaca the wyfe of Machir bare a sonne, and called hys name Pherez, and the name of his brother was zeres, and his sonnes were Ulam and Reken.
The sonnes of Ulam: Bedan: These are the sonnes of Gilead the sonne of Machir the sonne of Manasse.
And hys syster Molecath bare Ieshud, Abieser and Mahelah.
And the sonnes of Semida were: Ahiam, Sechem, Likchi and Aniham.
The sonnes of Ephraim: Suthalah, whose sonne was Bered, and Thahath hys sonne, and hys sonne Eladah, and Thahath his sonne:
and Sabad his sonne, and Suthelah his sonne, and Eser and Elead. And the men of Gath that were borne in that lande, slue them, because they were come downe to take awaye theyr catell.
And Ephraim theyr father mourned many a daye, and hys brethren came to conforte hym.
And whan he went into hys wyfe, she conceaued and bare hym a sonne, and he called the name of it Beria, because it went euell wyth hys housholde.
And his daughter was Scera, whych buylt Bethoron the nether Ꟶ also the vpper, and Uzan Seera.
And Raphah was hys sonne: whose sonne was Reseph, and Thelah, whose sonne was Thaham,
and hys sonne Ladan, and hys sonne. Amihud, and his sonne Elisama,
and hys sonne Nun and his sonne Iehosua.
Their possessions Ꟶ habitacion was in Bethel, and the townes that longed therto, and vnto the Eest of Naeran, Ꟶ on the west syde of Gazer with the townes therof, Sechem and the townes therof, Adaia Ꟶ the townes therof,
and a longe by the borders of the children of Manasse, Bethsean and her townes, Thaanach and her townes, Magiddo Ꟶ her townes, and Dor and her townes. In those dwelt the chyldren of Ioseph the sonne of Israel.
The sonnes of Aser: Iimna, Iesua, Isuai, Ꟶ Beria, Ꟶ Serah their syster.
The sonnes of Beria: Ieber and Melchiel, which is the father of Birsaith.
And Hepher begat Iaphlet, Somer, Hotham, Ꟶ Sua was their syster.
The sonnes of Iaphlet: Pasah, Bimhal and Asuah. These are the children of Iaphlet.
The sonnes of Semer: Ahi, Rohga, Iehubba and Aram.
And the sonnes of hys brother Helem: zophah, Iimna, Seles and Amal.
The sones zophah. Suah, Harnepher Sual, Beri, and Iimrah,
Bezer, Hod, Samma, Silsa, Iethran and Beera.
The sonnes of Iether, Iephune, Pispa, Ꟶ Ara.
The sonnes of Ola: Areh, Haniel Ꟶ Rezia.
All these were the chyldren of Asser, and heedes of their fathers houses, noble men, and myghtye head captaynes. The nombre thorowe out the genealogy of them that were apte to the warre and battell was .xxvj. thousande men.
Beniamin begat Bela hys eldest sonne, Asbel the seconde, Ꟶ Aharah the thirde,
Nohah the fourth and Raphah the fyfte.
And the sonnes of Bela were: Adar, Gera, Abihud,
Abisna, Naaman, and Ahoha,
Gera, Sephuphan and Huran:
And these are the sonnes of Ehud and these are auncient heedes amonge the inhabiters of Geba: and they caryed them to Manahath:
Naaman, Ahia Ꟶ Gera, which Gera caryed them awaye and begat Uza Ꟶ Ahihud.
And he begat Saharaim in the felde of Moab, after he had sent them awaye. Husim also Ꟶ Baarah were his wyues.
And he begat of Hodes his wife, Iobab and zibia, Mesa, and Malcham,
Ieuz, and Sachia Ꟶ Mirma. These were his sonnes and auncient fathers.
And of Husim he begat. Ahitob and Elpaal.
The sonnes of Elpaal were: Eber, Misaham, and Samed, which built Ono, Lod, and the townes therof.
Beria Ꟶ Sema were auncient fathers amonge the inhabiters of Aialon, and they draue awaye the enhabiters of Geth.
And Aio, Sasac, Ꟶ Ierimoth,
Sebadia, Ared, and Adar,
Michael, and Iispa, and Ioha, the sonnes of Beria,
zebadia, Mesullam, Hezeki, and Heber,
Ismerai also and Iesliah, Ꟶ Iobab the sonnes of Elpaal.
Iakim, and zicri, Ꟶ Sabdi,
Elienai, zilthai, and Eliel,
Adaia, Ꟶ Beraia, Ꟶ zimreth the sonnes of Simhi,
Iispan, Eber, and Eliel,
Abdon and zicri, and Hanan,
Hanania, Elam Ꟶ Anthothia,
Iephdeia and Phenuel the sonnes of Sasac.
And Samserai, Seharia and Athaliah,
Iaresia, Elia and zichri the sonnes of Ieroham.
These were auncient fathers and captaynes in their kynredes, and these dwelt in Ierusalem.
And at Gibeon dwelt Abi Gibeon whose wyfe was called Maacah.
And his eldest sonne was Abdon, then zur, Cis, Baal, and Nadab.
Gedor, Ahio and zacher.
And Mikloth begat Simea. And these also dwelt with their brethren in Ierusalem ouer agaynst them.
Ner begat Cis, and Cis begat Saul, Ꟶ Saul begat Iehonathan, Malchisua, Abinadab and Esbaal.
And the sonne of Iehonathan was Meribbaal, and Meribbaal begat Micah.
And the sonnes of Micah were Pithon, Melech, Tharea Ꟶ Ahaz.
And Ahaz begat Iehoiada. And Iehoiada begat Alemeth, Asmaueth and zimri. zimri begat Moza.
Moza begat Binea, whose sonne was Rapha, and hys sonne was Easa, and hys sonne Azel,
And Azel had syxe sonnes, whose names are these: Esricam, Bochri, Ismael, Scaria, Obadia, Ꟶ Hanan. All these were the sonnes of Azel.
And the sonnes of Esek his brother, were: Ulam his eldest, Iehus the seconde Ꟶ Eliphelet the thirde:
And the sonnes of Ulam were myghtie men Ꟶ stronge archers, Ꟶ bowemen, and had many sonnes Ꟶ sonnes sonnes, an hundred Ꟶ fyftie. All these are of the sonnes of Beniamin.
And so all Israel numbred by kynreddes: beholde, they are wrytten in the boke of the kynges of Israel and of Iuda, and were caryed awaye to Babylon for their transgressyon:
Euen the olde enhabiters, that dwelt in their awne possessions Ꟶ cyties, the Israelites, the preastes, Leuites Ꟶ Nethenei.
And in Ierusalem dwelt of the children of Iuda, of the chyldren of Beniamin, Ꟶ of the children of Ephraim Ꟶ Manasse.
Uthai the sonne of Amihud, the sonne of Omri the sonne of Imri, the sonne of Beni, of the chyldren of Pharez, the sonne of Iuda.
And of Siloni, Asaia the eldest and his sonnes.
And of the sonnes of zerah, Iehuel Ꟶ their brethren .vj. hundred Ꟶ nynetye.
And of the sonnes of Beniamin: Salu the sonne of Mesullam the sonne of Hodauia, the sonne of Senua:
Ꟶ Iibneia the sonne of Ieroham. And Ela the sonne of Uzi the sonne of Michri. And Mesullam the sonne of Sephatia the sonne of Rehuel, the sonne of Iibnia.
And their brethren accordinge to their kynredes, nyne hundred fyftie and syxe. All these were principall men, and auncient in the housholdes of their fathers.
And of the preastes: Iedaia, Iehoiarib Ꟶ Iachin:
Azaria the sonne of Aelkia the sonne of Mesullam, the sonne of zadoc, the sonne of Maraioth, the sonne of Ahitob the chefest in the house of God.
And Adaiah the sonne of Ieroham the sonne of Phashur, the sonne of Melchia. And Maasi the sonne of Adiel, the sonne of Iehezrah, the sonne of Mesullam, the sonne of Mesillomith, the sonne of Immor.
And their brethren which were heedes of the auncient housholdes of their fathers, a thousande seuen hundred Ꟶ thre skore actiue men, for the worcke of the seruice of the house of God.
And of the Leuytes: Semeia the sonne of Aasub, the sonne of Asricam, the sonne of Hasabaia of the sonnes of Merari.
And Bacbakar Ꟶ Heres and Galal. And Mathania the sonne of Micah, the sonne of zicri, the sonne of Asaph.
And Obadia the sonne of Semeia the sonne of Galal, the sonne of Iduthun. And Berechia the sonne of Aza the sonne of Elcana that dwelt in the villages of the Netophathites.
The porters were Sallum. Acub, Talmon Ꟶ Ahiman and their brother, Sallum was the chefe.
For they watched hytherto, euen vnto the kynges gate eastwarde, thorowe out the tentes of the chyldren of Leuy.
And Sallum the sonne of Corah the sonne of Abiasaph the sonne of Corah, and his brethren the Corahites (of the house of their father) had their busynesse and offyce to kepe the porches of the tabernacle: and their fathers the Hoste of the Lorde, kepte the enterynge.
And Phinces the sonne of Eleazar was their foregyde, and the Lorde was with him.
And zacharia the sonne of Meselemia kepte the watche before the dore of the tabernacle of witnesse.
All these were chosen men, to kepe the thresholdes, euen two hundred Ꟶ twelue, and thorowe out all the genealogy were they numbred in their villages. And them dyd Dauid Ꟶ Samuel the sear institute, because of their fidelite.
So they Ꟶ their children had the ouersyght of the gates of the house of the Lorde, euen of the tabernacle, to kepe them.
In foure quarters dyd they kepe the watche: towarde the east, west, north, Ꟶ south.
And their brethren remayned in the countre and came after seuen dayes from tyme to tyme with them.
For the Leuites (which had the ouersyght of the vestryes Ꟶ treasures of the house of God) were vnder the custody of foure notable porters:
Ꟶ they laye rounde aboute the house of God: because the kepynge therof pertayned to them, and they had the keyes to open euery mornynge.
And certen of them had the rule of the mynistringe vessels, Ꟶ brought them in and out by tale.
Some of them were appoynted to ouerse the vesselles, and all the ornamentes of the Sanctuary, and the floure, wine, oyle, frankincense and swete odoures.
And certayne of the sonnes of the prestes made oyntmentes of the swete odoures.
And Mathathia one of the Leuites which was, the eldest sonne of Sallum: the Corathite, had the ouersyght of the thynges that were made in the fryenge panne.
And other of their brethren the sonnes of Cahath had the ouersyght of the shewbred which they prepared euery Sabboth.
These are the syngers: euen auncient fathers of the Leuites, which dwelt in separate chambres: Ꟶ were fre, for they had to do in the temple bothe daye and nyght.
These were auncient fathers of the Leuites in their generacions, Ꟶ dwelt at Ierusalem.
And in Gibeon dwelt Abi Gibeon Ꟶ Iehiel, whose wife was called Maacha,
his eldest sonne was Abdon, then zur, Cis, Baal Ner and Nadab:
Gedor, Ahio, zacharia and Mikloth.
And Mikloth begat Simean. And they also dwelt wt their brethren at Ierusalem, euen harde by them.
And Ner begat Cis, Ꟶ Cis begat Saul. And Saul begat Iehonathan, Malchisua, Abinadab and Esbaal.
And the sonne of Iehonathan, was Meribbaal. And Meribbaal begat Micah,
and the sonnes of Micah were, Pithon, Melech and Thahrea.
And Ahaz begat Iahra. Iahra begat Alameth, Asmaneth, zimri. zimri begat Moza.
Moza begat Binea whose sonne was Rephaia, Ꟶ his sonne was Elasa, Ꟶ his sonne Azel.
And Azel had syxe sonnes, whose names are these: Azricam, Bochru, Ismael, Searia, Obadia and Hanan. These are the sonnes of Azel.
And the Philistines fought agaynst Israel. And the men of Israel fled before the Philistines, Ꟶ were ouerthrowen Ꟶ wounded in Mounte Gilboa.
And the Philistines folowed, Ꟶ were fearce after Saul Ꟶ his sonnes, Ꟶ the Philistines smote Ichonathan Ꟶ Abinadab Ꟶ Malchisua the sonnes of Saul:
And the battell went sore agaynst Saul, Ꟶ the archers founde hym, and he was wounded of shoters.
Then sayde Saul to his wepon bearer drawe thy swerde, and thrust me thorow therwith, that these vncircumcised come not and do me shame. But hys wepon bearer wolde not, for he feared excedynglye. So Saul caught a swerde, and fell vpon it.
And when his harnesbearer sawe that Saul was deed, he fell on a swerde also and dyed.
And thus Saul and his thre sonnes, and all they of hys house dyed together.
And when all the men of Israel that were in the valeye, sawe howe they fled, and that Saul and his sonnes were deed, they forsoke theyr cyties and ranne awaye, and the Philistines came, and dwelt in them.
And it fortuned that on the morowe when the Philistines came (to stripe the deed bodies) they founde Saul Ꟶ hys sonnes ouerthrowen in mount Gilboe.
And when they had stript hym, they toke hys heed, and hys harnesse, and sent them into the lande of the Philistines rounde aboute to shewe them vnto theyr Idols, and to the people.
And they put his harnesse in the house of theyr God, Ꟶ set vp hys heade in the temple of Dagon.
And when all they of Iabes in Gilead hearde all that the Philistines had done to Saul:
they arose (all the strongest of them) and fet awaye the body of Saul, and the bodyes of his sonnes, and brought them to Iabes, and buryed the bones of them vnder an oke in Iabes and fasted seuen dayes.
So Saul dyed for hys trespace that he trespaced agaynst the Lorde, in that he kept not the worde of the Lorde, and in that he sought and asked councell of a woman that wrought with a sprete,
and asked not of the Lorde. And therfore he slue hym, and turned the kyngdome vnto Dauid the sonne of Isai.
Then all Israel gathered them selues to Dauid vnto Hebron sayenge: Behold, we be thy bones and thy flesshe.
And moreouer in tyme past, euen when Saul was kynge, thou leddest Israel out Ꟶ in. And the Lorde thy God sayde vnto the: thou shalt fede my people Israel, and thou shalt be captayne ouer my people Israel.
Therfore came all the elders of Israel to the kynge, to Hebron, and Dauid made a couenaunt with them in Hebron, before the Lorde. And they annoynted Dauid kynge ouer Israel, accordyng to the worde of the Lorde by the hande of Samuel.
And Dauid and all Israel went to Ierusalem, which is Iebus: where as were the Iebusytes, the enhabiters of the lande.
And the enhabiters of Iebus sayde to Dauid: thou commest not here. Neuerthelesse, Dauid wanne the castell of Syon, which is called the cytie of Dauid.
And Dauid: sayde, whosoeuer smyteth the Iebusytes fyrst, shalbe the principall captayne and a Lorde. So, Ioab the sonne of zaruia went fyrst vp, and was made the chefe captayne.
And Dauid dwelt in the castell Syon, and therfore they called it the cytie of Dauid.
And he buylt the cytie on euery syde, euen from Millo rounde about, and Ioab repared the rest of the cytie.
And Dauid prospered, and waxed greate, and the Lorde of Hostes was with hym.
These are the principall men of power whom Dauid had, and that claue to hym in hys kyngdome with all Israel, to make hym kynge, accordynge to the worde of the Lorde vnto Israel.
And this is the nombre of the myghtye men whom Dauid had: Iosobeam the sonne of Hachmoni the chefe amonge thirtye: he lyfte vp hys spere agaynst, thre hundred, and wounded them at one tyme.
After him was Eleazar his vncles sonne an Ahothite, which was one of the thre myghtyest.
He was with Dauid at Pasdammin, Ꟶ there the Philistines were gathered together to battell. And there was there a parsell of grounde full of barleye, and the people fled before the Philistines.
And they, the thre afore sayde, stept forth into the middes of the felde, and saued it from burnynge and slue the Philistines. And the Lorde gaue a great victorye.
And the thre of the thyrtye chefe captaynes went to a rocke to Dauid, into the caue Adullam. And the Hoste of the Philistines abode in the valey of Rephaim.
And whan Dauid was in the holde, the Philistines watch was at Bethlehem that same time.
And Dauid longed, Ꟶ sayde: Oh that one wolde geue me dryncke of the water of the well that is at the gate at Bethlehem.
And the thre brake thorowe the Host of the Philistines, and drewe water out of the well, that was by the gate at Bethlehem Ꟶ toke it, and brought it to Dauid. Neuerthelesse, Dauid wolde not drynke of it, but rather offered it to the Lorde,
and sayde: my God forbyd it me, that I shulde do thys thynge. Shall I dryncke the bloude of these men, that haue put theyr lyues in Ieopardye: (for with the Ieopardye of theyr lyues they brought it) therfore he wolde not drincke it. And this did these thre myghtyest.
And Abisai the brother of Ioab: he also was captayne amonge thre: for he lyfte vp hys spere agaynst thre hundred, Ꟶ wounded them, and had a name amonge the thre:
Yee amonge thre, he was more honorable then the two, for he was their captayne. Howbeit, he attayned not vnto the thre.
Banaia the sonne of Iehoiada (the sonne of a very stronge man) dyd greater actes then Cabzeel: for he slue two strong lyons of Moab, and went downe, and slue a Lyon in a pyt in time of snowe.
And he slue an Egipcian, whose stature was euen fyue cubytes longe, Ꟶ in the Egypcians hande was a speare lyke a weauers beame. And the other went downe to hym with a waster, and plucked the speare out of the Egypcians hande, and slue him wt his awne speare.
Soche thynges dyd Banaia the sonne of Iehoiada, Ꟶ had the name amonge the thre myghtyest,
Ꟶ was honorable among thirtie: but attayned not vnto the (first) thre. And Dauid made him of hys councell.
The other men of armes were these: Asahel the brother of Ioab, Elhanan hys vncles sonne of Bethlehem.
Sammoth the Harodite, Helez the Pelonite:
Ira the sonne of Ickes the Thekoite, Abieser the Anatothite:
Sibacai the Husathite, Ilai the Ahohite:
Maharai the Nethophathite, Heled the sonne of Baana the Nethophatite.
Ithai the sonne of Ribai of Gibea that pertayneth to the children of Beniamin: Benaia the Phirathonite:
Hurai of the ryuers of Gaas, Abiel the Arbathite:
Azmaneth the Baharumite, Elihaba the Saalbonite.
The sonnes of Hassem the Gezonite, Ionathan the sonne of Sage, an Haraite.
Ahiam the sonne of Sacar the Haraite, Eliphal the sonne of Ur.
Hepher the Mecherathite, Ahia the Pelonite:
Hezro the Carmelite, Naari the sonne of Ezbai:
Ioel the brother of Nathan: Mibhar the sonne of Hari:
zelegam the Ammonite, Naharai a Berothite the bearer of the Harnesse of Ioab the sonne of zeruia:
Ira the Iithrite, Ꟶ Gared a Iethrite.
Uria the Hethite, and zahad the sonne of Ahlai.
Adina the sonne of Siza a Rubenite, a captayne of the Rubenites, and thyrtie wt him.
Hanan the sonne of Maacah, and Iosaphat a Mithanite:
Uzia an Astherathite: Sama and Iehiel the sonnes of Hothan an Aroerite:
Iediel the sonne of zimri, and Ioha hys brother an Hathizite.
Eliel a Mahanyte, Ieribai Ꟶ Iosaia the sonnes of Elnaam, and Iithma a Moabite.
Eliel and Obed, and Iasiel a Mesobaite.
These are they that came to Dauid to ziklag, whyle he yet kept hym selfe close, because of Saul the sonne of Cis: and they were very stronge helpers in battell.
They were weapened with bowes, Ꟶ coulde hurlle stones with the ryght hande and with the lyft and shote arowes oute of a bowe, Ꟶ were of Sauls brethren, euen of Beniamin.
The chefest were Ahiezer, and Ioas the sonnes of Simaa a Gibeonite, and Ieziel and Pelet the sonnes of Asmaneth. Beracah and Iehu of Anathoth.
And Ismaia a gilbeonite a mightie man amonge thyrtie, and more then the thyrtie. Ieremiah, Iehaziel, Iohanan, Ꟶ Iosabad of Gedor.
Eleusai, Ierimoth Bealia Semaria, and Seaphatia, the Haraphites.
Elcana, Iesia, Azarael, Ioezer, Iosebeam Hakorim.
Ioela and zebadiah the sonnes of Ieroam of Gedud:
And of the Gadites there separated them selues, some vnto Dauid into the holde of the wyldernesse, men of myghte, and men apte for warre, Ꟶ that coulde handle shylde and speare, whose faces were lyke the faces of Lions, and they were as swyfte as the Rooes in the mountaynes:
Ezer the fyrst, Obdia the seconde, Ꟶ Eliab the thyrde,
Masinana the fourth, Ieremia the fyfte.
Atthai the syxte, Eliel the seuenth,
Iohanan the eyght, Elsabath the nynth,
Ieremia the tenth, and Machbaonai the eleuenth.
These were of the sonnes of Gad, and were captaynes ouer the men of warre, the small pursued an hundred, and the great a thousande.
These are they that went ouer Iordan in the fyrst moneth when he had fylled ouer all hys banckes. And they put to flyght all them of the valeye both towarde the East and Weste.
And there came of the chyldren of Beniamin and Iuda to the holde vnto Dauid.
And Dauid went out to mete them and answered, and sayde vnto them, If ye be come peasablye vnto me, to helpe me, myne hert shalbe knytt vnto you. But and yf you come to betraye me to myne aduersaryes (seynge ther is no wyckednes in myne handes) the God of oure fathers loke theron and rebuke it.
And the spiryte came vpon Amasai which was the chefe amonge thyrtye, and he sayde, thyne are we Dauid, and on thy syde thou sonne of Iesai: Peace, peace be vnto the, and peace be to thyne helpers, for thy God is thine helpe. Then Dauid receaued them, and made them heedes of companyes of the men of warre.
And there fell some of Manasse to Dauid when he came with the Philistines agaynst Saul to battell, but they helped them not For the Lordes of the Philistiues toke advysement and sent hym awaye agayne sayinge he wyll fall to hys Master Saul to the ieopardie of oure heedes.
As he went to ziklag, there fell to hym of Manasseh: Adna Iozadad, Iediel, Michael, Iozabad, Elihu and zilthai, heedes of the thousandes that were of Manasse.
And they holpe Dauid agaynst the rouers. For they were all myghtie men of warre, and captaynes in the hoost.
For at that tyme there came one or other to Dauid daye by daye to helpe hym: vntyll it was a greate hoost, lyke the hooste of God.
And this is the nombre of the chefe captaynes that were prepared to battell, and came to Dauid to Hebron, to turne the kyngdome of Saul to hym, accordynge to the worde of the Lorde.
The chyldren of Iuda that bare shylde Ꟶ speare, were syxe thousande and eyght hundred ready prepared to the warre.
Of the chyldren of Simeon, men of myght to warre, seuen thousande and one hundred.
Of the chyldren of Leui, foure thousande and syxe hundred.
And Iehoiada was the chefe of them of Aaron, and with him thre thousande and seuen hundred.
And zadock a younge man strong and valeaunt Ꟶ of his fathers housholde .xxii. captaynes.
And of the children of Beniamin the brethren of Saul, thre thousande. And a greate parte of them dyd (vnto that tyme) folowe the house of Saul.
And of the children of Ephraim .xx. thousande Ꟶ eyght hundred mightye men of warre and famous men in the housholde of their fathers.
And of the halfe trybe of Manasseh .xviii. thousande, which were appoynted by name to come and make Dauid kynge.
And of the chyldren of Isacar, which were men that had understandynge in the ryght tyme, to knowe what Israel ought to do. The heedes of them were two hundred and all their brethren were at their wyll.
And of zabulon that went out to the battayll and proceded forth to the warre, wt all maner of instrumentes of warre, fyftye thousand that were prepared to the warre, without anye dublenesse of hart.
And of Nephthali a thousande captaynes, and with them (with shyld Ꟶ speare) .xxxvii. thousande.
And of Dan prepared to battel .xxviii. thousande Ꟶ syxe hundred.
And of Asser that went out to the warre Ꟶ kepte the forefront of the batell, fourtye thousand.
And of the other syde of Iordan, of the Rubenites, and Gaddites Ꟶ of the halfe tribe of Manasse, with all maner of instrumentes of warre, an hundred Ꟶ twentye thousande.
All these were men of warre, kepynge the forefront of the batell with perfect hart, and came to Hebron to make Dauid kynge ouer all Israel. And all the rest of Israel was of one accorde, to make Dauid king.
And there they were with Dauid thre dayes, eatynge and drincking: for theyr brethren had prepared for them.
Moreouer they that were nye them, vntyll Isacar, zabulon and Nephtali, brought breade on Asses, Camels, Mules, Ꟶ oxen, and meate: floure, fygges, reasyngs, wyne and oyle, oxen, and shepe aboundantlie. For there was ioye in Israel.
And Dauid counceled with the capitaynes of thousandes and hundredes, Ꟶ with all the Lordes,
and sayd vnto all the congregacyon of Israel: If it seme you good, and to be of the Lorde oure God, we wyll take and sende vnto oure brethren that are left in all the lande of Israel, Ꟶ with them also, to the preastes and Leuites which are in their cyties Ꟶ Suburbes, togather them together vnto vs.
And we wyll brynge agayne the Arcke of the Lorde to vs: for we regarded it not in the dayes of Saul.
And all the congregacion was content that he shulde do so, for the thyng semed good in the eyes of all the people.
So Dauid gathered all Israel together from Sihor in Egypte, vnto the entrynge of Hemath, to bringe the arcke of the Lorde from kyriath Iearim.
And Dauid went vp Ꟶ all Israel to an hye place towarde kyriath Iearim, that was in Iuda, to fet thence the arcke of the Lord God, that dwelleth betwen the Cherubes: where hys name is called on.
And they caryed the Arcke of God in a newe carte out of the house of Abinadab. And Uza Ꟶ hys brother guyded the carte.
And Dauid Ꟶ all Israel played before the arcke of God wt all theyr myght, with syngyng, and harpes, psalteries Ꟶ tymbrelles and trompettes.
And when they came vnto the threshynge flowre of Chidon, Uza put forth his hande to holde the arcke, for the oxen stombled.
And the Lorde was wroth with Uza, and smote hym, because he put hys hande to the arcke. And there he dyed before God.
And Dauid was out of quyete, because the Lorde had rent a rent in Uza, Ꟶ he called the name of that place: the rentyng of Uza vnto this daye
And Dauid was afrayde of God that daye saying: howe shall I bringe the arcke of God home to me?
And so Dauid brought not the arcke home to hym to the cytie of Dauid: But caried it into the house of ObedEdom a Gethite.
And the arcke of God remayned with ObedEdom, euen in hys house, thre monethes. And he blessed the house of ObedEdom and all that he had.
So Hyram the kynge of Tyre sent messengers to Dauid Ꟶ tymbre of Cedar trees, with masons and carpenters, to buylde hym an house.
And Dauid perceaued, that the Lorde had confirmed hym kynge vpon Israel, and that hys kyngdome was lyfte vp on hye, because of hys people Israel.
And Dauid toke yet mo wyues at Ierusalem, and begat mo sonnes and daughters.
These are the names of hys chyldren, which were borne vnto him at Ierusalem: Samua, Sobab, Nathan and Salomon:
Iibhar, Elisua and Elipalet,
Noga, Nepheg and Iaphia,
Elisama, Beeliada and Eliphalet.
And when the Philistines heard that Dauid was anoynted kynge vpon all Israel, all the Philistines went vpto seke Dauid. And Dauid hearde of it, and went oute agaynst them.
And the Philistines came in, Ꟶ praunsed thorowe the valey of Rephaim.
And Dauid asked councell at God saying: shall I go against the Philistines, and wylt thou delyuer them into myne hande? And the Lorde sayde vnto hym: go vp, for I wyll delyuer them into thine hande.
And so they came vp to Baal Perazim Ꟶ Dauid smote them there. And Dauid sayd: God hath deuided myne enemies with myne hande, as a man wolde deuyde water. And therfore they called the name of that place Baal Perazim.
And whan they had lefte theyr gods there, Dauid gaue a commaundment, and they were burnt with fyre.
And the Philistines came together agayne Ꟶ russhed into the valley.
And Dauid asked agayne at God. And God sayde to hym: go not vp after them, but turne awaye from them, that thou mayest come vpon them ouer agaynst the peeretres.
And when thou hearest a sound go in the toppes of the peretrees, then go out to battell: for God is gone forth before the, to smyte the hoste of the Philistines.
Dauid therfore dyd as God commaunded him: Ꟶ they smote the hoste of the Philistines, from Gibeon to Gazer.
And the fame of Dauid went out into all landes, and the Lorde made all nacyons feare hym.
And Dauid made hym houses in the cytie of Dauid, and prepared a place for the arcke of God, pytched for it a tent.
Then Dauid sayde the arcke of God ought not to be caryed but of the Leuites. For them hath the Lord chosen to beare the arcke of the Lorde, and to minister vnto hym for euer.
And Dauid gathered all Israell together to Ierusalem, to fetche the arcke of the Lorde vnto hys place which he had ordeyned for it.
And Dauid brought togeather the chyldren of Aaron and the Leuites.
Of the sonnes of Cahath was Ariel the chefe, and of hys brethren there were an hundred and .xx.
Of the chyldren of Merari: Asaia the chefe, and of hys brethren two hundred and .xx.
Of the sonnes of Gersom: Ioel the chefe, and of hys brethren an hundred and thyrtye.
Of the chyldren of Elizapan: Semaia the chefe, and of hys brethren two hundred.
Of the sonnes of Hebron: Eliel the chefe, and of hys brethren .lxxx.
Of the sonnes of Uziel: Aminadab the chefe, and of hys brethren an hundred and twelue.
And Dauid called zadock and Abiathar the preastes, and the Leuites, Uziel, Asaia Ioel, Semaia, Eliel and Aminadab:
Ꟶ sayde vnto them: ye that are the princypall fathers of the Leuites, se that ye be holy with youre brethren, that ye maye bringe in the Arcke of the Lorde God of Israel, vnto the place that I haue prepared for it.
For because ye were not there at the fyrst, the Lord oure God made a rent amonge vs, for that we sought hym not as the fasshyon ought to be.
So the preastes and the Leuites sanctifyed them selues, to fett the Arcke of the Lord God of Israel.
And the children of the Leuites bare the Arcke of God, vpon theyr shulders with staues theron, as Moses commaunded accordynge to the worde of the Lorde.
And Dauid spake to the chefe heedes of the Leuites, that they shulde appoynte certayne of theyr brethren to synge with instrumentes of Musicke, psalteries, harpes and symbales that they might make a sounde, and to synge on hye with Ioyfulnesse:
And the Leuites appoynted Heman the sonne of Ioel: and (of his brethren) Asaph the sonne of Berechia. And of the sonnes of Merari and of theyr brethren Ethan the sonne of Cusaiahu.
And with them theyr brethren of the seconde degree: zacharia, Ben, Iaaziel, Semiramoth, Iehiel, Unni, Eliab, Benaiahu, Maasiah, Mathathiahu, Eliphalehu, Mikniahu, Obed Edom, Ꟶ Iaiel, porters.
So Heman, Asaph Ꟶ Ethan the syngers made a sounde with symbales of brasse
And zacharia, Aziel, Semiramoth, Iehiel, Unni, Eliab, Maasaiahu and Banaiahu played with psalteries on an Alamoth.
Mathatiahu, Eliphalehu, Mikniahu, Obed Edom, Ieiel, and Azaziah played vpon harpes an eyght aboue, with courage.
And Chenaniahu the chefe of the Leuites, was master of the songe, for he taught other to synge, because he was a man of vnderstandynge.
Berecia and Elcana kepte the dore of the Arcke.
And Secamahu, Iehosaphat, Nethanael, Amasai, zachariahu, Banaiahu Ꟶ Eliezeer the preastes dyd blowe with trompettes before the Arcke of God. And Obed Edom and Iehia were kepers of the dore of the arcke.
And Dauid and the elders of Israel and the capitaynes ouer thousandes, went to fet the Arcke of the appoyntment of the Lorde out of the house of ObedEdom with gladnes.
And when God helped the leuites, that bare the Arcke of the appoyntement of the Lorde, they offered seuen oxen, and seuen rammes.
And Dauid had on hym a lynnen garment, lyke as had also all the Leuites that bare the Arcke, and so had the syngers, and Chenania the ruler of the songe, with the syngers. And Dauid had vpon hym an Ephod of lynen.
And all they of Israel brought the Arcke of the Lordes couenaunt with showtynge, and blowyng of the shawme and trompettes: makynge a noyse with symbales, psalteryes, and harpes.
And as the Arcke of the appoyntment of the Lorde came into the cytie of Dauid, Michol the daughter of Saul, lokynge out at a wyndowe, sawe kyng Dauid daunsyng and playinge, and she despysed hym in her herte.
So they brought in the arcke of God and set it in the myddes of the tent that Dauid pytched for it. And they offered burnt sacrifyces and peace offerynges before God.
And when Dauid had made an ende of offerynge the burnt offerynges and peace offerynges, he blessed the people in the name of the Lorde.
And he dealt to all Israel (both man Ꟶ woman) a cracknell of breade, and a good pece of flesshe, and a flacket of wyne.
And he appoynted certen of the Leuites to ministre before the Lorde, Ꟶ to repete, Ꟶ to thanke and prayse the Lorde God of Israel.
And Asaph was the chefe, Ꟶ next to hym zacharia, Ieiel, Semiramoth, Iehiel, Mathathia, Eliab, Benaia, Obed Edom, Ꟶ Ieiel with psalteries Ꟶ harpes. But Asaph made a sounde with symbales.
Banaiahu Ꟶ Iahaziel preastes blewe wt trompettes continuallye before the Arcke of the couenaunt of God.
And that same tyme Dauid did appoynte chefelye to thanke the Lorde, by Asaph Ꟶ his brethren.
O geue thankes vnto the Lorde, call vpon hys name, make hys actes knowen amonge the people.
Synge vnto him Ꟶ playe vnto him: talke of all hys wonderfull dedes.
Reioyce in hys holy name: let the hertes of them that seke the Lorde, be glad.
Seke the Lorde and hys strengthe: Seke hys presence allwaye.
Remembre his maruelles which he dyd, and hys wonders, Ꟶ the iudgementes of hys mouth.
The seed of Israel are hys seruauntes: the chyldren of Iacob are hys chosen.
He is the Lorde oure God: in all landes are hys iudgementes.
Thynke on hys appoyntment for euer, (and on the worde which he commaunded to a thousande generacions.)
Which he made with Abraham, and of hys othe to Isahac:
which he set before Iacob for a decree, and to Israel for an euerlastynge couenaunt,
sayinge: to the wyll I geue the lande of Canaan to be the porcyon of youre enheritaunce.
When you were fewe and smalle in nombre, and sogeourners therin.
And they walked from nacyon to nacyon, and from one kyngdome to another people.
He suffered no man to do them wronge: but rebuked, euen kynges for theyr sakes.
Touche not myne anoynted, and do my prophetes no harme.
Synge vnto the Lorde all the erthe: and shewe from daye to daye hys Saluacyon.
Tell of hys glorye amonge the heithen: his wonderfull dedes amonge all nacyons.
For greate is the Lorde, and worthy to be praysed exceadyngly: he is to be feared aboue all Gods.
For all the Gods of the people are of no value: But the Lorde made heauen.
Prayse and honoure are in hys presence: strength and gladnes are in hys place.
Asscrybe vnto the Lorde ye kynredes of people, Asscrybe to the Lorde, glorye and domynion.
Asscrybe vnto the Lorde, the glorye due vnto hys name: brynge sacrifyces, and come before hym, and worshyppe the Lorde with holy honoure.
Let all the erth feare hym, all though the compase of the erth be so stablysshed that it cannot be moued:
let the heauens reioyse, and let the erth be glad, and lett men tell among the nacyons, that the Lorde is kynge.
Let the see thunder and the fulnesse therof lett the feldes reioyse, and all that is therin.
Then shall the trees of the wood reioyse at the presence of the Lorde, because he commeth to iudge the erth.
O geue thankes vnto the Lorde, for he is good, for hys mercye endureth euer:
and saye ye: saue vs (o God) of oure saluacion, geather vs to gether, and delyuer vs from amonge the hethen, that we maye geue thankes to thy holy name, Ꟶ triumphe in the prayse of the.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for euer Ꟶ euer, and let all people saye Amen, and prayse the Lorde.
And so, he lefte there before the arcke of the Lordes couenaunt, Asaph Ꟶ hys brethren, to ministre before the Arcke continually, in soch thynges as were to be done daye by daye,
And Obed Edom Ꟶ hys brethren, threskore and eyght, and Obed Edom the sonne of Iedithun, and Hosa were apoynted to be porters.
And zadock the preast and hys brethren the preastes, were before the tabernacle of the Lorde, in the hye place that was at Gibeon,
to offer burntofferynges vnto the Lorde, vpon the burntoffering aultare perpetuallye, in the mornyng and euenyng, accordyng to all that which is written in the lawe of the Lorde, which he commaunded Israel.
And with them were Heman Ꟶ Ieduthun, Ꟶ other that were chosen (whose names were expressed) to geue thankes to the Lorde, that his mercye lasteth euer.
And with them dyd Heman and Ieduthun, synge with the trompettes Ꟶ symbales makynge a swete melody with instrumentes of Musycke and godly songes. And the sonnes of Ieduthun were porters.
And all the people departed, euery man to hys house: and Dauid returned to blesse hys house.
And it fortuned that whan Dauid dwelt in hys house, he sayde to Nathan the prophete: lo, I dwell in an house of Cedar tree: but the Arcke of the Lordes couenaunt remayneth vnder curtaynes.
And Nathan sayd to Dauid: do all that is in thyne herte, for God is with the.
And the same nyght it fortuned that the worde of God came to Nathan, sayinge:
go and tell Dauid my seruaunt, thus sayth the Lorde, thou shalt not buylde me an house to dwell in.
For I haue dwelt in no house sence the daye that I brought out the chyldren of Israel vnto thys daye: but haue gone from tent to tent, and from one habitacyon to another.
And whersoeuer I haue walked wyth all Israel, spake I euer one worde to anye of the iudges of Israell (whom I commaunded to fede my people,) sayinge: why haue ye not buylt me an house of Cedar tree?
Nowe therfore, thus shalt thou saye vnto my seruaunt Dauid: thus sayth the Lorde of Hostes: I toke the out of the pastures whan thou wentest after shepe, that thou shuldest be captayne ouer my people Israel.
And I haue bene wt the whither soeuer thou hast walked, Ꟶ haue weded out all thyne enemyes out of thy sight Ꟶ haue made the a name, lyke the name of the greatest men that are in the erthe.
And I haue ordeyned a place for my people Israel and made it faste, so that nowe they maye dwell in theyr place, and moue nomore. Nether shall the chyldren of wyckednesse vexe them any moare as at the begynnynge.
And sense the tyme that I commaunded iudges to be ouer my people Israel, I haue subdued all thyne enemies, and I tolde the, that the Lorde wolde buylde the an house.
Thys also shall come to passe: when thy dayes be expired, that thou must go vnto thy fathers, I wyll rayse vp thy sead after the which shalbe of thy sonnes, and I wyll prepare for hym the kyngdome.
He shall buylde me an house, and I wyll stablishe his seate for euer
I wylbe hys father, and he shalbe my sonne, and I wyll not take my mercy awaye from hym, as I toke it from hym that was before the.
But I wyll sett hym in myne house and in my kyngdome for euer, and hys seate shalbe sure for euermore
According to all these wordes, and accordyng to all thys visyon, dyd Nathan tell kinge Dauid.
And Dauid the kynge came Ꟶ sat before the Lorde, Ꟶ sayde: what am I (O Lord God,) and what is mynehoushold, that thou hast promoted me thus farre?
And yet thys semed lyttel in thyne eyes, O God: But thou hast also spoken of thy seruauntes house for a greate whyle to come: and hast loked vpon me as vpon a man of hye degree (O Lorde God.)
What shall Dauid desyre more of the for the honoure of thy seruaunt? For thou hast knowen thy seruaunt:
O Lorde for thy seruauntes sake, euen accordynge to thyne awne hert hast thou done all thys magnifycence, to shewe all great thinges.
Lorde, there is none lyke the, nether is there anye God saue thou, accordinge to all that we haue hearde wt oure eares.
Moreouer, what nacion on the erth is lyke thy people Israel, to whom God hath vouchsafed to come and redeme them to be hys awne people, and to make the a name of excellency and terriblenesse, with castyng out nacyons from before thy people, whom thou hast delyuered out of Egypte?
Thy people of Israel dyddest thou make thyne awne people for euer, and thou becamest theyr God.
Therfore nowe Lorde, let the thynge that thou hast spoken concernynge thy seruaunt and hys house, be true for euer, that thou do as thou hast sayde: let it come to passe,
that thy name maye be magnifyed for euer, that it maye be sayde: the Lorde of Hostes is the God of Israel (euen the God of Israel) Ꟶ the house of Dauid thy seruaunt endureth stable before the.
For thou (O my God) hast tolde thy seruaunte, that thou wylt buylde him an house. And therfore thy seruaunt hath founde in hys hert to praye before the.
And nowe Lord, thou art God, and hast promised thys goodnesse vnto thy seruaunte.
Nowe therfore, let it be thy pleasure to blesse the house of thy seruaunt, that it maye contynue before the for euer. For whom thou blessest (O Lorde) the same is blessed for euer.
And after this it fortuned, that Dauid smote the Philistines, and subdewed them, Ꟶ toke Geth Ꟶ the townes that longed therto, out of the hande of the Philistines.
And he smote Moab, and the Moabites became Dauids seruauntes, and payde hym tribute.
And Dauid smote Hadarezer kynge of zoba vnto Hanath, as he went to stablisshe hys dominion by the ryuer Euphrates,
And Dauid toke from hym a thousande charettes, Ꟶ seuen thousande horse men, Ꟶ twentye thousand fotemen, Ꟶ lamed all the charett horses, Ꟶ reserued of them an hundred charettes.
And when the Syriens of Damasco came to helpe Hadadezer kynge of zoba, Dauid slue of the Syriens .xxii. thousande,
and Dauid subdued Syria Damasco: And the Syriens became Dauids seruauntes, Ꟶ brought hym trybute. And the Lorde preserued Dauid in all that he went to.
And Dauid toke the shyldes of golde that were on the seruauntes of Hadadezer, and brought them to Ierusalem.
And from Tebhath Ꟶ from Chun (cyties of Hadarezer) brought Dauid exceadynge moche brasse. Wher wt Salomon made the brasen lauatorye, the pillers, Ꟶ the vesselles of brasse.
And when Tou Kynge of Hemath, heard how Dauid had beaten all the strength of Hadarezer kynge of zoba,
he sent Haduran his sonne to kynge Dauid, to make peace wt hym Ꟶ to blesse hym, because he had fought agaynst Hadarezer, Ꟶ beaten him (for Tou had warre wt Hadarezer) Ꟶ Dauid brought, all maner of Iewelles of golde, syluer and brasse wt hym.
And kynge Dauid dedicated them vnto the Lorde, with the syluer Ꟶ gold that he brought from all nacyons, from Edom, from Moab, from the chyldren of Ammon, from the Philistines, Ꟶ from Amalec.
And Abisai the sonne of zeruia slue of the Edomites in the salte valeye .xviii. thousande,
and put Soudiars in Edom, and all the Edomites became Dauids seruauntes. Thus the Lorde kepte Dauid in all that he toke in hande.
And Dauid raygned ouer all Israel, Ꟶ executed iudgement and ryghteousnes amonge all his people.
And Ioab the sonne of zaruia was ouer the hoste, and Iehosaphat the sonne of Ahilud recorder,
and zadock the sonne of Ahitub and Abimelech the sonne of Abiathar were the preastes, and Sauesa was scribe,
and Banaiahu the sonne of Iehoiada was ouer the Crethites, and the Phelethites, Ꟶ the eldest sonnes of Dauid were nexte vnto the kynge.
After this, it chaunced that Nahas the kynge of the chyldren of Ammon dyed, Ꟶ his sonne raygned in his steade.
And Dauid sayde, I wyll shewe kyndnesse vnto Hanon the sonne of Nahas, because hys father dealt kyndelye with me: And Dauid sent messengers to comforte hym ouer the deeth of hys father. And the seruauntes of Dauid came into the lande of the chyldren of Ammon to Hanon, to comforte hym.
But the Lordes of the chyldren of Ammon sayde to Hanon: thynkest thou that Dauid doth honoure thy father in thy syght, that he hath sent conforters vnto the? Are not hys seruauntes come to searche, to loke, and to spye out the lande?
Wherfore Hanon toke Dauids seruauntes and shaued them, and cut of their cootes harde by their buttokes, and sent them awaye.
And there went certayne and tolde Dauid, howe the men were serued. And the kynge sent to mete them (for the men were exceadynglye ashamed) and the kynge sayde: tarye at Iericho, vntyll youre beardes be growen, and then returne.
And when the chyldren of Ammon sawe that they stanke in the syght of Dauid. Hanon Ꟶ the chyldren of Ammon sent a thousande talentes of syluer to hyre them charettes Ꟶ horsemen, out of Mesopotamia, and out of Syria Maacha Ꟶ out of zoba.
And they hyred .xxxii. thousande charettes, and the kynge of Maacha Ꟶ his people, which came, and pytched before Meoba. And the chyldren of Ammon gathered them selues togeather from their cyties, Ꟶ came to battel.
And whan Dauid heard of it, he sent Ioab and all the hoste of stronge men.
And the chyldren of Ammon came out, and put them selues in araye to battel before the gate of the cytie. And the kynges that were come, kepte them by them selues backe in the felde.
When Ioab also sawe that the fronte of the battell was agaynst him before Ꟶ behynde, he chose out of all the chosen men of Israel, and put them in araye agaynst the Syrians.
And the rest of the people he delyuered vnto the hande of Abisai his brother, Ꟶ they put them selues in araye agaynst the chyldren of Ammon.
And he sayde: If the Sirians be to strong for me, thou shalt succoure me: Ꟶ yf the chyldren of Ammon preuayle agaynst the, I will helpe the.
Plucke vp thine hert, Ꟶ let vs playe the men, for oure peoples sake Ꟶ for the cyties of oure God, Ꟶ the Lorde shall do that which is good in his awne syght.
So Ioab Ꟶ the people that were wt him, drue nye before the Syrians vnto the battayll, Ꟶ they fled before him.
And when the chyldren of Ammon sawe that the Syriens were fled, they ranne awaye lykewise before Abisai his brother, and gat them into the cytie. And Ioab came to Ierusalem.
And when the Siriens sawe that they were put to the worse before Israel, they sent messengers Ꟶ fet out the Siriens that were beyond the ryuer, Ꟶ Sophach the capitayne of the Host of Hadadezer went before them.
And it was tolde Dauid, Ꟶ he geathered all Israel, Ꟶ went togeather ouer Iordan, Ꟶ came, and set vpon them. And whan Dauid had put him selfe in araye agaynst the Siriens they fought with him.
But the Siriens fled before Israel. And Dauid destroyed of the Siriens seuen thousande charettes, Ꟶ .xl. thousand fote men, and kylled Sophach the captayne of the hoste.
And when the seruauntes of Hadarezer, sawe, that they were put to the worse before them of Israel, they made peace wt Dauid, Ꟶ became his seruauntes. Nether wolde the Siriens helpe the chyldren of Ammon any more.
And it came to passe, that after the yere was expyred (aboute the tyme that kynges go out a warrefare.) Ioab caryed out the armye of the hoste, and destroyed the contreye of the chyldren of Ammon, Ꟶ came, Ꟶ beseged Rabba, Ꟶ destroyed it: But Dauid taryed at Ierusalem whyle Ioab smote Rabba and destroyed it:
And Dauid toke the croune of their kynge: from of hys heed, Ꟶ founde that it had the wayght of a talent of golde, and there were preciouse stones in it, and it was ordeyned for Dauids heed. And he brought also exceadynge moche spoyle out of the cytie.
And he brought out the people that were in it, and tormented them with sawes and harowes of yron, and with other sharpe instrumentes, and so dealte Dauid with all the cyties of the chyldren of Ammon. And Dauid Ꟶ all the people came agayne to Ierusalem.
After this it fortuned, that there arose warre at Gazer with the Philistines. At which tyme Sobocai the Husathite slue Sippai, that was of the chyldren of Rephaim, and they were subdewed.
And there was battell agayne with the Philistines, and Elhanan the sonne of Iair, slue Lahemi the brother of Goliath the Gethite, whose speare was lyke a weauers beame.
And there chaunced yet agayne warre at Geth, where as was a man of a great stature wt .xxiiii. fyngers, Ꟶ toes .vi. on euery hande, and .vi. on euery fote, Ꟶ was the sonne of Raphah. But whan he defyed Israel,
Iehonathan the sonne of Simea Dauids brother slue hym.
These were borne vnto Raphah at Geth, Ꟶ were ouerthrowen in the hande of Dauid, Ꟶ in the hande of his seruauntes.
And Satan stode vp agaynst Israel, Ꟶ prouoked Dauid to nombre Israel.
And Dauid sayde to Ioab and to the rulers of the people. Go ye and nombre Israel from Beer Seba to Dan, and brynge it to me that I maye know the nombre of them.
And Ioab answered: the Lorde make hys people an hundred tymes so manye mo as they be. But my Lorde O king, are they not all my Lordes seruauntes? why then doth my Lorde requyre thys thynge? why wyll my Lorde be a cause of trespace to Israel?
Neuerthelesse, the kynges worde preuayled agaynst Ioab. And Ioab departed and walked thorowe out all them of Israel, and came to Ierusalem agayne
Ꟶ gaue the nombre of the counte of the people vnto Dauid. And all they of Israel were a thousand thousande Ꟶ an hundred thousande men that drue swerde: and Iuda was .cccc.lxx. thousande men that drue swerd.
But the Leuites and Ben Iamin counted he not amonge them. For the kynges worde was abhominable to Ioab.
And the Lorde was displeased with thys thynge, and smote Israel.
And Dauid sayde vnto God: I haue synned exceadyngly in doynge this thynge. And nowe (I beseche the) do awaye the wyckednesse of thy seruaunt, for I haue done very folyshlye.
And the Lorde spake vnto Gad Dauids sear, sayinge:
goo and tell Dauid, sayinge: Thus sayth the Lorde: I geue the, the choyse of thre thynges: chose the one of them, that I maye do vnto the.
And Gad came to Dauid, and sayde vnto hym. Thus sayth the Lorde. Chose the,
ether thre yeares famyshement, or thre monethes to be destroyed before thyne aduersaryes, and that the swerde of thyne enemyes maye ouertake the: or else the swerde of the Lorde and pestilence in the lande thre dayes, and the Angell of the Lorde destroying thorowe out all the coastes of Israel. And nowe aduise thy selfe, what worde I shall brynge agayne to hym that sent me.
And Dauid sayde vnto Gad. I am in an exceadynge straite: Let me fall nowe into the hande of the Lorde, for passynge great are hys mercyes, but let me not fall into the hand of men.
So the Lorde sent pestilence vpon Israel, and there were ouerthrowen of Israel .lxx. thousande men.
And God sent the Angel into Ierusalem to destroye in it. And as he was about to destroye, the Lord behelde, and had compassyon on the euyll, and sayde to the Angell that destroyed: it is ynough, let now thyne hande ceasse. And the Angell of the Lorde stode by the thresshynge flowre of Ornan the Iebusyte.
And Dauid lyfte vp hys eyes, and sawe the Angell of the Lord stande betwene the erth and heauen, hauynge a drawen swerde in hys hande, stretched out towarde Ierusalem. Then Dauid Ꟶ the elders of Israel whych were clothed in sacke, fell vpon theyr faces.
And Dauid sayd vnto God: Is it not I that commaunded the people to be nombred? It is I that haue synned Ꟶ done euell in dede, Ꟶ what haue these shepe done? let thyne hande (O Lorde my God) be on me and on my fathers house, but not on thy people that they shulde be punysshed.
And the Angell of the Lorde commaunded Gad to saye to Dauid, that Dauid shulde go vp, and set vp an aulter vnto the Lorde, in the thresshynge flowre of Ornan the Iebusyte.
And Dauid went vp accordynge to the sayinge of Gad, which he spake in the name of the Lorde.
And Ornan turned aboute, and sawe the Angell, Ꟶ hys foure sonnes were with hym, and hyd them selues: But Ornan was thresshyng wheat.
And as Dauid came to Ornan, Ornan loked Ꟶ sawe Dauid, and went out of the thresshynge floure, and bowed hym selfe to Dauid wyth his face to the grounde.
And Dauid sayde to Ornan: geue me the place of the thresshyng flowre, that I maye buyld an aulter therin vnto the Lord. Thou shalt geue it me for as moche money as it is worthe, that the plage maye cease from the people.
And Ornan sayde vnto Dauid: take it to the, Ꟶ let my Lord the kyng do that which semeth good in his eyes: loo, I geue the oxen also for burnt sacrifyces, Ꟶ the thresshyng sleades for wodde, Ꟶ wheate for meat offeryng: I geue it all.
And kynge Dauid sayd to Ornan: not so, but I wyll bye it for as moche moneye as it is worth. For I wyll not take that whych is thyne for the Lorde, ner offer burntoffrynges wythout coast.
And so Dauid gaue to Ornan for that place, sycles of gold .vi. hundred by waight.
And Dauid buylt there an aulter vnto the Lord, and offered burntofferynges Ꟶ peaceoffrynges, and called vpon the Lord, and he heard hym from heauen in fyre vpon the aulter of burntoffering.
And whan the Lord had spoken to the Angell, he put vp his swerd agayne into the shethe of it.
At that tyme when Dauid sawe, that the Lorde had hearde hym in the thresshynge flowre of Ornan the Iebusyte: he vsed to offer there.
For the tabernacle of the Lord which Moses made in the wildernesse, and the aulter of burntofferynge were at that ceason in the hyll at Gibeon.
And Dauid coulde not go before it to aske councell at God, for he was aferde of the swerde of the Angell of the Lorde.
And Dauid sayde: thys is the house of the Lorde God, and thys is the aultare for the burntofferynge of Israel.
And Dauid commaunded togeather together the straungers that were in the lande of Israel, and he sett masons to hewe fre stone, for the buylding of the house of God.
And Dauid prepared plentie of yron for nayles and dores of the gates, and to ioyne with all, and aboundance of brasse without wayght,
and Cedar trees wythout nombre. For the zidons and they of Tyre brought moch Cedar wood to Dauid.
And Dauid sayde. Salomon my sonne is younge and tender, and the house that is to be buylt for the Lorde, must exceade in greatnesse, that it maye be spoken of and praysed in all landes. I wyll therfore make ordinaunce for it. And so Dauid prepared many thinges before his deeth.
And he called Salomon his sonne, Ꟶ charged him to buyld an house for the Lord God of Israel.
And Dauid sayde to Salomon. my sonne, I thought (as it was in myne hert) to buylde an house vnto the name of the Lorde my God.
But the worde of the Lorde came to me, saying: thou hast shed moch bloude, and hast made greate battelles: thou shalt therfore not buyld an house vnto my name, for thou hast shed moch bloude vpon the erth in my syght.
Beholde, a sonne is borne to the, Ꟶ he shalbe a man of reste, for I wyll geue him rest from all hys enemyes round about. For his name is Salomon: and I wyll sende rest and peace vpon Israel in hys dayes.
He shall buylde an house for my name, and he shalbe my sonne, and I wylbe his father, Ꟶ wyll prepare the seate of his kyngdome vpon Israel for euer.
Nowe therfore my sonne, the Lord be wt the, Ꟶ prospere thou Ꟶ thou shalte buylde the house to the name of the Lorde thy God, as he hath sayde of the.
And the Lorde shall geue the wysdome Ꟶ vnderstandyng, Ꟶ shall geue the commaundmentes for Israel, that ye maye kepe the lawe of the Lord thy God.
For then thou shalt prospere: euen whan thou takest hede Ꟶ fulfyllest the statutes Ꟶ lawes whych the Lorde charged Moses with, for Israel. Plucke vp thyne hert therfore, Ꟶ be stronge, dread not, nor be discouraged.
Beholde, in myne aduersyte haue I also prepared for the house of the Lord, an hundred thousande talentes of golde, Ꟶ a thousande thousande talentes of syluer, Ꟶ as for brasse Ꟶ yron it cannot be nombred, for it is very moche. And I haue prepared tymbre and stone, and thou mayest prouide more therto.
Moreouer, thou hast workemen wyth the ynowe, Ꟶ masons and carpenters to worke in stone Ꟶ tymbre, and many men that be actiue for euery worke.
And of golde, syluer, brasse and yron, there is no nombre. Up therfore, and be doynge, Ꟶ the Lorde shalbe wyth the.
And Dauid commaunded all the lordes of Israel, to helpe Salomon his sonne, saying:
Is not the Lord yor God wt you? Ꟶ hath he not geuen you rest on euery syde? for he hath geuen the enhabitoures of the lande into my hande, Ꟶ the lande is subdued before the Lord Ꟶ before his people.
Nowe therfore set youre hertes Ꟶ yor soules, to seke the Lord youre God. Up, and buylde ye the temple of the Lorde God, to bryng the Arcke of the couenaunt of the Lord and the holy vesselles of God, into the house so buylt for the name of the Lorde.
So when Dauid was olde and full of dayes, he made Salomon hys sonne kynge ouer Israel.
And then he geathered togeather all the Lordes of Israel wyth the preastes and the Leuites.
And the Leuites were nombred from the age of .xxx. yeare and aboue, and the nombre and summe of them was .xxxviij. thousande men.
Of which .xxiiij. thousande were set to further the worcke of the house of the Lorde. And syxe thousande were offycers Ꟶ Iudges.
Foure thousande were porters and foure thousande praysed the Lorde with soche instrumentes as was made to prayse wyth all.
And so Dauid put an ordre among them deuidinge them in partes. Of the children of Leui? Gerson, Cahath Ꟶ Merari:
Of the Gersonites was Laadan Ꟶ Semei.
The sonnes of Laadan the chefe was Iehiel, zethan Ꟶ Ioel, thre.
The sonnes of Semei: Selomith, Haziel, Ꟶ Haran, thre. These were the auncient fathers of laadan.
And the sonnes of Semei were Iahath, zina, Ieus Ꟶ Beria: these foure were the sonnes of Semei.
And Iahath was the chefe, zina the seconde. But Ieus and Beria had not many sonnes, therfore they were in one rekenynge, accordyng to theyr fathers housholde rekened for one auncient housholde.
The sonnes of Cahath: Amram, Izahar, Hebron and Uziel, foure.
The sonnes of Amram: Aaron Ꟶ Moses. And Aaron was separated, to haue the rule of the holy thynges in the place moost holye, he and hys sonnes for euer: and to burne incense before the Lorde, and to mynistre vnto him, Ꟶ to blesse in his name for euer.
Moses also the man of God, and his chyldren, were named wyth the trybe of Leui.
The sonnes of Moses: Gerson and Eliezer.
Of the sonnes of Gerzon: Sebuel was the chefe.
The sonnes of Eliezer: Rehabia the chefe. And Eliezer had none other sonnes: But the sonnes of Rehabia were very manye.
The sonnes of Izahar: Salomith, the chefe.
The sonnes of Hebron: Ieriahu the fyrst, Amaria the seconde, Iahaziel the thirde, and Iecameam the fourth.
The sonnes of Uziel: Micha the fyrst, and Iesia the seconde.
The sonnes of Merari Mahli: and Musi. The sonnes of Mahli Eleazar and Cis.
And Eleazar dyed, and had no sonnes, but daughters, and their brethren the sonnes of Cis toke them.
The sonnes of Musi: Mahli, Eder, Ꟶ Ieremoth, thre.
These are the chyldren of Leui after the houshold of theyr fathers, euen the auncient of the fathers according to theyr offyces, and after the nombre and somme of the names of them that dyd the worcke in the seruice of the house of the Lord, from the age of twentye yeares Ꟶ aboue.
And Dauid sayde: the Lorde God of Israel hath geuen rest vnto his people, that they maye dwell in Ierusalem for euer.
That the Leuites also shuld nowe nomore beare the tabernacle Ꟶ all the vesselles for the seruyce therof:
for accordynge to the last wordes of Dauid,
the Leuites were nombred from twentye yere and aboue, and their offyce was vnder the hande of the sonnes of Aaron, for the seruice of the house of the Lorde, in the courtes Ꟶ celles, and in the purifyinge of all holye thynges, and in the worcke of the seruice of the house of God.
In the shewe breed in the fyne flowre, in the meateofferinge, in the wafers of swete breed, in the fryinge panne, in the grydyron, and in all maner of measures and cyse,
and to stande euery daye in the mornynge, to thanke and prayse the Lorde, and so lykewyse at euen.
And to offer all burntsacrifyces vnto the Lorde, in the Sabbothes, in the newe moones, Ꟶ on the festfull dayes by nombre and custome continually (as they were commaunded) before the Lorde.
And that they shulde wayte on the tabernacle of wytnesse, and on the holy place, and on the sonnes of Aaron their brethren, in the seruice of the house of the Lorde.
These are the deuisyons of the sonnes of Aaron: The sonnes of Aaron: Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar Ꟶ Ithamar.
Nadab also and Abihu dyed before theyr father, Ꟶ had no chyldren. But Eleazar and Ithamar executed the prestes offyce.
And Dauid ordered them on this maner: zadock of the sonnes of Eleazar, Ꟶ Abimelek of the sonnes of Ithamar were according to theyr offyces in theyr ministracyon.
And there were mo auncient men founde amonge the sonnes of Eleazar, then the sonnes of Ithamar. And thus were they ordred together: Amonge the sonnes of Eleazar there were syxtene rulers, accordynge to the housholde of their fathers: Ꟶ eyght among the sonnes of Ithamar according to the houshold of theyr fathers.
And thus were they put in order by lott, the one sorte from the other, Ꟶ so were there rulers in the Sanctuarye Ꟶ Lordes before God, as well of the sonnes of Ithamar as of the sonnes of Eleazar.
And Simeia the sonne of Nathaneel the Scribe, of the kynred of the Leuites wrote them before the kyng and the Lordes, Ꟶ before zadock the preast and Abimeleck the sonne of Abiathar, and before the auncient fathers, before the preastes Ꟶ the Leuites: one principall houshold beyng reserued for Eleazar and one for Ithamar.
And the fyrst lot fell to Iehoiarib, Ꟶ the seconde to Iedaia.
The thirde to Harim, Ꟶ the fourth to Schorim.
The fyfte to Melchia, Ꟶ the syxte to Miamin.
The seuenth to Hakos, Ꟶ the eyght to Abia.
The nynthe to Iesua, Ꟶ the tenth to Secamahu.
The leuenth to Eliasib, Ꟶ the twelueth to Iakim.
The thirtenth to Hupa, Ꟶ the fourtenth to Iesebeab.
The fiftenth to Bisga, Ꟶ the syxtenth to Immer.
The seuententh to Hezir, Ꟶ the eyghtenth to Hapzez.
The nynetenth to Pathahia, and the twentieth to Ieheskel.
The twentieth Ꟶ one to Iachin and the .xxij. to Gamul.
The .xxiij. to Delaiahu, and the .xxiiij. to Maasiahu.
These are the ordinaunces of them in their offices, whan they came into the house of the Lorde, accordyng to their maner vnder Aaron their father, as the Lorde God of Israel had commaunded hym.
The rest of the sonnes of Leui, are these: of the sonnes of Amram, Subael. Of the sonnes of Subael, Iehediahu.
Of the sonnes of Rehabia, the fyrst Iesia.
Of the Iezaharites, Selomoth. Of the sonnes also of Selomoth, Iahath.
His sonnes Ieriahu the first Amariahu the seconde, Iahaziel the thirde, Ꟶ Iekameam the fourth.
Of the sonnes of Usiel, Micha. Of the sonnes of Micha, Samir.
The brother of Micha was Iisia. Of the sonnes also of Iisia zechariahu.
The sonnes of Merari, were: Mahli Ꟶ Musi. The sonnes of Iaaziahu, Beno.
The sonnes of Merari by Iahaziahu, Beno, Sohem, zacur Ꟶ Ibri.
Of Maheli came Eleazar Ꟶ he had no sonnes.
Of kis: the sonnes of Kis: Ierahemeel.
The sonnes of Musi: Mahli, Eder and Ierimoth. These are the children of the Leuites after the housholde of their fathers.
And these cast lottes next to their brethren the sonnes of Aaron, in the presence of Dauid the kyng, and zadoc Ꟶ Ahimelec Ꟶ the auncient fathers, preastes, Ꟶ Leuites: euen the principall fathers before their yonger brethren.
And so Dauid and the captaynes of the hoste appoynted out to do seruyce, the sonnes of Asaph Heman and Ieduthun, whan they dyd prophesye wyth harpes, psalteries and simbales. And there was a multitude of the men that were appoynted to the seruyce and mynistracyon.
Of the sonnes of Asaph: zaccur, Ioseph, Nathania and Aserela that wayted on Asaph, whych prophesyed by the kynge.
Of Ieduthun: the sonnes of Ieduthun: Gedeliahu, zeri, Iesaiahu, Hasabiahu, and Mathithiahu syxe, vnder the handes of theyr father Ieduthun, whych prophesyed wyth a harpe, for to geue thankes Ꟶ prayses vnto the lord.
Of Heman the sonnes of Heman: Buklahu, Mathaniahu, Uziel, zebuel, Ierimoth, Hanania, Hanani, Eliatha, Gedalthi, Romanthi, Ezer, Iosbekasa, malothi. Hothir, Ꟶ Mahazioth.
All these were the sonnes of Heman which was the kynges Sear in the wordes of God to lyfte vp the horne of the regall dignitie. And God gaue to Heman .xiiij. sonnes and the daughters.
All these also were at the hande of their father synging in the house of the Lorde wt simbales, psalteries Ꟶ harpes, whan Asaph Ieduthun and Heman executed the seruyce in the house of God, at the kinges hande.
And the multitude of them wyth their brethren that were instructe in the songes of the Lord: euen all that were connyng, were two hundred foure skore Ꟶ eyght.
And they cast Lottes among them selues howe they shulde wayte as well for the small as for the greate, for the scoler as well as for the skole master.
And the fyrst lot in Asaph fell to Ioseph. The seconde to Gedeliahu (wyth his brethren and sonnes) whych men were twelue.
The thirde fell to zaccur wyth hys sonnes Ꟶ brethren beyng twelue persones.
The fourth to Izri with his sonnes and brethren, twelue personnes.
The fyfte to Nathaniahu with his sonnes and brethren, twelue personnes.
The syxte to Bukiahu with hys sonnes and brethren, twelue personnes.
The seuenth to Iesarela with hys sonnes Ꟶ brethren, twelue personnes.
The eyght to Iesaiahu with his sonnes Ꟶ brethren, twelue personnes.
The nynth to Mathaniahu with hys sonnes and brethren, twelue personnes.
The tenth to Simei with his sonnes and brethren, twelue personnes.
The eleuenth to Azarael wyth hys sonnes and brethren, twelue personnes.
The twelueth to Hasabia wyth hys sonnes and brethren, twelue personnes.
The thyrtenth to Subael wyth hys sonnes Ꟶ brethren twelue personnes.
The fourtenth to Mathathiahu wt hys sonnes Ꟶ brethren twelue personnes:
The fyftenth to Ieremoth wt his sonnes Ꟶ brethren, twelue personnes.
The syxtenth to Hananiahu wyth his sonnes and brethren, twelue personnes.
The .xvii. to Iosbekasa wyth his sonnes, and brethren twelue personnes.
The eyghtenth to Hanani with hys sonnes Ꟶ brethren, twelue personnes.
The nynetenth to Malothi with hys sonnes Ꟶ brethren, twelue personnes.
The twentyeth to Eliathath with hys sonnes and brethren, twelue personnes.
The .xxi. to Hothir with hys sonnes Ꟶ brethren twelue personnes.
The .xxij. to Gidalthi with his sonnes and brethren, twelue personnes.
The .xxiii. to Mahazioth wt hys sonnes and brethren, twelue personnes.
The .xxiiii. to Romanthi Azer with hys sonnes Ꟶ brethren, twelue personnes.
These are the deuisyons of the porters, Amonge the Corethites: Meselemiahu the sonne of Kore of the chyldren of Asaph.
And the sonnes of Meselemiahu were these: zachariahu the eldest, Iedihel the seconde, zebadiahu the thyrde, and Iathniel the fourth,
Elam the fyfte, Iehohanan the sixt, Ꟶ Eliocnai the seuenth.
The sonnes of Obed Edom: Semeia the eldest, Iehosabad the seconde, Ioah the thyrde, Sacar the fourth, Ꟶ Nethanael the fyfte,
Amiel the syxte, Isachar the seuenth, Peulthai the .viij. for God blessed hym.
And vnto Semeia his sonne were sonnes borne, that ruled in the house of their father, for they were men of myght.
The sonnes of Semeia: Othni, Rephael, Obed and Elzabad Ꟶ hys brethren were stronge men. Elihu and Samahiahu.
All these were of the chyldren of Obed Edom, they and their children, and their brethren, actiue men and of strength to do seruice, euen .lxii. of Obed Edom.
And Meleniah had sonnes and brethren, actiue men .xviii.
The sonnes of Hosa of the chyldren of Merari: Simri the chefe, Ꟶ though he was not the eldest, yet his father sett him in the chefest place.
Helkiahu the seconde, Tebaliahu the thirde, and zechariahu the fourth: all the sonnes and brethren of Hosa were .xiii.
Amonge these was deuyded the offyce of the portershyppe that they shulde be auncient men, to wayte wyth theyr brethren, whan they mynistred in the house of the Lord.
And they cast lottes, betwene the great and small after the houshold of their fathers, for euery gate.
And the lot on the east syde fell vpon Selemeiahu. And for zachariahu hys sonne (which was a wise counceller) they cast lottes, Ꟶ hys lot came out towarde the North.
And Obed Edoms lot fell to the South. And for hys sonnes fell the houses of Asuppim.
For Suphim and Hosa towarde the west, with the gate that stondeth toward the hyer waye: one watch beynge ouer agaynst another.
In the east were syxe Leuites: Ꟶ towarde the North .iiii. a daye: toward the South .iiii. a daye, Ꟶ towarde Asuppim, two Ꟶ two.
In Pharbar towarde the west: two at the goyng vp, Ꟶ two in Pharbar.
These are the deuisyons of the porters among the sonnes of Koreh Ꟶ amonge the sonnes of Merari.
And of the Leuites, Ahiah had the ouersyght of the treasure of the house of God, and of the treasure of the dedicat thynges.
As concernyng the sonnes of Laadan whych were the chyldren of the Gersonites. Of Laadan came auncient fathers, Euen of Laadan there came Gersuni Ꟶ Iehieli.
The sonnes of Iehieli: zethan Ꟶ Ioel hys brother, which were ouer the treasures of the house of the Lorde.
Of the Amramites also Ꟶ Izaharites, Hebronites Ꟶ Ozielites,
was Subuel the sonne of Gerson the sonne of Moses, a ruler ouer the treasures.
And of his brethren the sonnes of Eliezer, was Rahabiahu, whose sonne was Isaiahu, whose sonne was Ioram, whose sonne was zichri, whose sonne was Selomith,
whych Selomith and hys brethren were ouer all the treasures of the dedycate thynges, which Dauid the kynge, Ꟶ the auncient fathers, the capitaynes ouer thousandes Ꟶ hundredes, Ꟶ the captaynes of the hoste,
had dedicated out of the spoyles wonne in battels: they dyd dedicate them to mainteyne the house of the Lorde:
Ꟶ all that Samuel the sear, and Saul the sonne of Cis, and Abner the sonne of Ner, and Ioab the sonne of zarnia had dedicated, Ꟶ whosoeuer had dedicate anye thynge, it was vnder the hande of Selomith and of hys brethren.
Of the Izaharites was Chenaniahu Ꟶ hys sonnes, appoynted to the businesse withoutforth ouer Israel: for they were officers and Iudges.
And of the Hebronites Hasabiahu Ꟶ his brethren, men of actiuite a thousande Ꟶ seuen hundred, were officers amonge them of Israel beyond Iordan westward, in all busynesse belonging to God, and seruice of the kynge.
Amonge the Hebronites was Iedia the chefest, euen a prince among the Hebronites Ꟶ fathers of hys kynred. And in the fourtye yeare of the kyngdome of Dauid, they were sought for. And there were found amonge them men of actiuite at Iazer in Gilead.
And hys brethren were men of actiuite, euen two thousand Ꟶ seuen hundred auncient fathers, whom kynge Dauid made rulers ouer the Rubenites, Gaddites, and ouer the halfe trybe of Manasse, for euery matter pertaynynge to God, and for the kynges busynesse.
The chyldren of Israel: after the nombre of them, the auncient heedes Ꟶ captaynes of thousandes and hundredes, Ꟶ their offycers that serued the kyng by diuerse courses which came in Ꟶ went out, moneth by moneth, thorow out all the monethes of the yere. And in euery course were .xxiiii. thousande.
Ouer the fyrst course for the fyrst moneth, was Iasoboan the sonne of zabdiel. And in his course were .xxiiii. thousand.
And the chefest of all the captaynes of the host for the fyrst moneth, was of the children of Pharez.
Ouer the course of the seconde moneth was Dodai an Ahohite Ꟶ in his course was Mikloth a ruler: (his helper) And in that course were .xxiiii. thousande.
The chefe captayne of the thirde host for the thirde moneth, was Banaiahu the sonne of Iehoiada the hye preaste: And in his course were .xxiiii. thousand.
This is that Banaiahu, which was most myghtie amonge .xxx. Ꟶ aboue .xxx. And in his parte was Amizadad his sonne.
The fourth captayne for the fourth moneth, was Asael the brother of Ioab, and zabadia his sonne after him. And in his course were .xxiiii. thousande.
The fyfte capytayne for the fyfte moneth was Samhut the Iezrahite: Ꟶ in hys course were .xxiiii. thousand.
The syxte capytayne for the syxte moneth was Ira the sonne of Ickes a Theckutte: Ꟶ in hys course were .xxiiii. thousande.
The seuenth captayne for the seuenth moneth, was Helez the Pelonite, of the chyldren of Ephraim Ꟶ in his course were .xxiiii. thousand.
The eyght captayne for the eyght moneth, was Sibechai an Husathite of the kynne of zarhi: Ꟶ in his course were .xxiiii. thousand.
The nynth capitayne for the nynth moneth, was Abiezer an Anathothite of the sonnes of Iemim: and in hys course were .xxiiij. thousand.
The tenth capitayne for the tenth moneth, was Mahari the Netophathite of the zarahites: and in hys course were .xxiiij. thousande.
The leuenth for the eleuenth moneth, was Banaia the Pirathonite of the chyldren of Ephraim: and in his course were .xxiiii. thousand.
The twelueth captayne for the twelueth moneth, was Heldai the Netophathite wt Othoniel, and in his course were .xxiiii. thousand.
And the rulers ouer the trybes of Israel were these: Amonge the Rubenites was Eliezer the sonne of zichri. Among the Simeonites also was Saphatiahu the sonne of Maacha.
Amonge the Leuites: Hasabia the sonne of Kemuel. Amonge the Haromites: zadock.
Among them of Iuda: Elihu of the brethren of Dauid. Amonge them of Isachar. Omri the sonne of Michael.
Amonge them of zabulon: Iesinaiahu the sonne of Obadiahu. Among them of Nephthali: Ierimoth the sonne of Azriel.
Amonge, the chyldren of Ephraim: Hosea the sonne of Azartahu. In the halfe trybe also of Manasse: Ioel the sonne of Phedaiahu.
Of the halfe trybe of Manasse in Gilead: Iido the sonne of zachariahu. Amonge them of BenIamin: Iaasiel the sonne of Abner.
Amonge them of Dan: Azarel the sonne of Ieroham. These are the Lordes of the trybes of Israel.
But Dauid toke not the nombre of them vnder .xx. yere: because the Lord sayd he wold encrease Israel lyke vnto the starres of the skye.
And Ioab the sonne of zaruia beganne to nombre: but he fynisshed it not, because that there fell wrath for it against Israel: neither was the nombre put in to the chronycles of kynge Dauid.
Ouer the kynges treasures was Azmaueth the sonne of Adiel. And ouer the treasures of the feldes, in the cyties Ꟶ villages Ꟶ castelles, was Iehonathan, the sonne of Uziahu.
And ouer the worckmen in the feldes that tylled the ground, was Ezri the sonne of Chelub.
And the ouersyght of the vineyardes had Semei the Ramathite. Ouer the increase also of the vineyardes, Ꟶ ouer the winesellers was Sabdi the Hasiphunite.
And ouer the oliuetrees Ꟶ mulberytrees that were in the valeyes, was Baal Hanan the Gederite. And ouer the treasure of oyle, was Ioas:
ouer the oxen that fed in Saron, was Setari the Saronite. And ouer the oxen that were in the valeyes was Saphat the sonne of Adlai.
Ouer the camelles, Obil the Ismaelyte. And ouer the Asses was Iohadtahu the Meronothite.
Ouer the shepe, was Iazis the Hagerite. All these were the rulers of the substance of kynge Dauid.
And Iehonathan Dauids vncle, a man of councell, and of vnderstondyng was a scrybe, and Ichiel the sonne of Hachmoni was wyth the kynges sonnes enstructinge them.
And Ahitophel was of the kynges counsell. And Husai the Arachite was the kynges companyon.
And next to Ahitophel was Iehoiada the sonne of Banaiahu, Ꟶ Abiathar. And the captayne of the kynges warre, was Ioab.
And Dauid geathered togeather all the Lordes of Israel: the Lordes of the trybes, the Lordes of the companyes that ministred to the kyng by course, the captaynes ouer the thousandes Ꟶ ouer the hundredes Ꟶ the Lordes that had the ouersyght ouer all the substaunce and possessyon of Dauid, hys sonnes, wyth the chambrelaynes: all the myghtye and valeaunt and all actiue men vnto Ierusalem.
And kynge Dauid stode vp vpon hys fete, and sayde. Heare me my brethren Ꟶ my people. I had in myne hert to buylde an house of rest for the Arcke of the couenaunt of the Lord, Ꟶ for the fote stole of oure God, Ꟶ had made redye, for the buylding.
But God sayd vnto me: thou shalt not buylde an house for my name, because thou hast bene a man of warre, and hast shed bloud.
Moreouer, the Lord God of Israel chose me before all the house of my father, to be kinge ouer Israel for euer, for in Iuda wold he chose a captayne: Ꟶ of the housholde of Iuda is the house of my father, Ꟶ amonge the sonnes of my father he had a lust to me, to make me king ouer all Israell.
And of all my sonnes (for the Lord hath geuen me manye sonnes) he hath chosen Salomon my sonne, to sytt vpon the seat of the kyngdom of the Lord in Israel.
And he sayde vnto me: Salomon thy sonne, he shall buyld me an house Ꟶ courtes, I haue chosen hym to be my sonne, Ꟶ I wilbe his father.
I will stablyshe his kingdome for euer, If he will be strong to do my commaundmentes, Ꟶ my lawes, as it goeth this daye.
Now therfore, in the syght of all Israel the congregacyon of the Lorde, Ꟶ in the audience of oure God: kepe Ꟶ seke for all the commaundmentes of the Lord yor God, that ye maye enioye a good land, Ꟶ leaue inheritaunce for yor children after you for euer.
And thou Salomon my sonne, knowe thou the God of thy father, and serue hym with a pure hert, and wyth a swete courage. For the Lorde sercheth all hertes, and vnderstandeth all the ymaginacyons of thoughtes. And yf thou seke hym, he wylbe founde of the: But yf thou forsake hym, he wyll cast the of for euer.
Take hede nowe, for the Lorde hath chosen the, to buylde hym an house of a Sanctuarie. Be stronge therfore, and playe the man.
And Dauid gaue Salomon his sonne the paterne of the porche Ꟶ of the houses that longed therto, of the store houses, upper chambres, ynner parloures, Ꟶ of the house of the mercyeseate:
Ꟶ the example of all that he had in hys mynde, for the courtes of the house of the Lorde, Ꟶ for all the celles rounde about, for the treasures of the house of God, and for the treasures of the dedycate thynges,
Ꟶ for the diuisyons of the preastes and Leuites that wayted by course, Ꟶ for all the workemanshyp, that shulde serue for the house of the Lorde, Ꟶ for all the vesselles that shulde serue in the house of the Lorde.
For golde Ꟶ for the wayght of golde, for all vesselles of sondrye ministracions: for all maner of vesselles of syluer in weyght, Ꟶ for all vesselles, whatsoeuer purpose they serued vnto.
The wayght of golde for the candelstyckes, and the golde for their lampes, with the wayght for euery candelstycke, Ꟶ for the lampes therof. And for the candelstyckes of syluer by wayght, both for the candelstycke and also for her lampes accordinge to the diuersite of the vse of euery candelstyck.
And by wayght golde for the tables of shewe breed, euen for euery table: and lyke wyse syluer for the tables of syluer.
And golde for fleshehokes, cuppes and drynckyng pottes: And pute golde in wayght for basens, euen for euery basen. And lykewyse syluer by wayght, for euery basen of syluer.
And for the aulter of incense, pure golde by wayght. And gold for the paterne of the charett of the Cherubes that stretched out their wynges, and couered the Arcke of the couenaunt of the Lord.
All (sayde Dauid) was geuen me by wrytynge of the hande of the Lorde, whych made me vnderstande all the workmanshyp of the paterne.
And Dauid sayde to Salomon hys sonne: Be stronge, and do manfully, feare not, nor be faynt harted. For the Lorde God, euen my God, is wyth the, and he shall not fayle the, nor forsake the, vntyll thou hast fynysshed all the worke that must serue for the house of the Lord.
Beholde, the preastes and Leuites are deuided in companyes, for all maner of seruyce that pertayneth to the house of God: they are wyth the for all maner of workmanshyp, and so are all that excell in wysedome for any maner of seruyce. Thou hast also the Lordes and all the people for euery thynge that thou hast nede of.
And Dauid the kynge sayde vnto all the congregacyon: God hath speciallye chosen Salomon my sonne whych is yet younge Ꟶ tender, Ꟶ the worcke is greate, for the house shall not be for man, but for the Lorde God.
Moreouer, I haue prepared wt all my myghte for the house of God: golde for vessels of golde, syluer fer them of syluer, brasse for thynges of brasse, yron for thynges of yron, Ꟶ wood for thynges of wood: and onix stones, and stones to be sett, glystringe stones and of diuerse coloure, and all maner of preciouse stones, and marble stones in great aboundance.
And because I haue lust to the house of my God:
I haue of myne owne propre good, of golde and syluer whych I haue seuerally geuen to the house of my God, besyde all that I haue prepared for the holy house: euen thre thousande talentes of golde of Ophir, and seuen thousande talentes of tryed syluer: to ouerlaye the walles of the houses withall:
the golde for thynges of golde syluer for them of syluer, Ꟶ for all maner of worcke by the handes of artifycers. And whosoeuer is willing, maye this daye consecrate hys hande vnto the Lorde.
And so the auncient fathers and the Lordes of the trybes of Israel, the captaynes of thousandes and hundredes, with the Lordes that were rulers ouer the kynges worke, were wyllynge
and gaue for the seruyce of the house of God, fyue thousande talentes of Golde, and ten thousande peces of golde: and ten thousande talentes of syluer, and .xviij. thousande talentes of brasse, and an hundred thousande talentes of yron.
And they with whom preciouse stones were founde gaue them to the treasure of the house of the Lord, by the hande of Ichiel the Gersonite.
And the people reioysed, whan they were so wyllynge to geue their goodes, and wyth a perfecte hert they offred vnto the Lorde. And Dauid the kynge reioysed wyth great gladnesse.
And Dauid blessed the Lorde before all the congregacyon, and sayde: Blessed be thou Lord God of Israel oure father, from euer and for euer.
Thyne (O Lorde) is greatnesse, and power, glorie, victorie and prayse: for all that is in heauen and in erth is thyne, Ꟶ thyne is the kyngdom (O Lorde) and thou excellest aboue all, euen as the heed of all.
And rychesse and honoure come of the, and thou rayguest ouer all, and in thyne hande is power and strength, and in thyne hand it is to make great Ꟶ to geue strength vnto all.
And nowe oure God, we thanke the, and prayse thy gloriouse name.
But whom am I? and what is my people? that we shulde enforce oure selues to geue these thinges so willingly? But all thynges come of the: and of that which we receaued of thyne hande we haue geuen the.
For we be but straungers before the, and soiourners, as were all oure fathers. Oure dayes on the erth also are but as a shadowe, and there is none abydinge.
O Lorde oure God, all this stuffe that we haue prepared to buylde the an house for thy holy name, commeth of thyne hande, Ꟶ is all thyne.
(I wote also my God) that thou tryest the hertes, and hast pleasure in vnfaynednesse. And in the unfaynednesse of myne herte. I haue willinglye offred all these thinges. And nowe haue I sene thy people which are founde here, to offer vnto the willyngly and wyth gladnesse.
O Lorde God of Abraham, Isahac, Ꟶ of Israel oure fathers, kepe this for euer, as the begynnynge of the thoughtes of the herte of thy people, and prepare their hertes vnto the.
And geue vnto Salomon my sonne, a perfecte herte, to kepe thy commaundementes, thy testymonies and thy statutes, and to do all, Ꟶ to buylde the house for the which I haue made prouision for.
And Dauid sayde to all the congregacyon: Nowe blesse the Lorde youre God. And all the congregacion blessed the Lorde God of their fathers, and bowed downe their heades and worshypped the Lorde and the kynge.
And they offered offerynges vnto the Lorde. And on the morowe after the sayde daye, they offered burntofferynges vnto the Lorde euen a thousande younge oxen, a thousande rammes Ꟶ a thousande shepe, with their dryncke offerynges. Many sacrifyces offred they for all Israel,
Ꟶ dyd eate Ꟶ dryncke before the Lorde the same daye wt greate gladnesse. And they made Salomon the sonne of Dauid kynge the seconde tyme, and annoynted him prynce before the Lorde, and zadock to be the hye preaste.
And Salomon sate on the seate of the Lorde, and was kyng in steade of Dauid his father, Ꟶ prospered, and all they of Israel obeyed him.
And all the Lordes and men of power, and all the sonnes of kynge Dauid submitted them selues, Ꟶ were vnder kynge Salomon.
And the Lorde magnified Salomon in dignitye, in the syght of all them of Israel, and gaue him so gloriouse a kyngdome as no kynge had before him in Israel.
And so Dauid the sonne of Isay raygned ouer all Israel.
And the space that he raygned ouer Israel, was fourtye yere: seuen yeare raygned he in Hebron, Ꟶ .xxxiij. yere raygned he in Ierusalem.
And he dyed in a good age: full of dayes, ryches and honoure. And Salomon his sonne raygned in his steade.
The actes of Dauid the kynge fyrst and laste, beholde, they are written in the boke of Samuel the sear, and in the boke of Nathan the prophete, and in the boke of Gad the sear,
wt all his kyngdome and power Ꟶ tymes, that went ouer him and ouer all Israel, Ꟶ ouer all the kyngdomes of the erth.
And Salomon the sonne of Dauid waxed stronge in hys kingdome Ꟶ the Lorde his God was with him, Ꟶ magnifyed him in the dignitye.
And Salomon spake vnto all Israel, to the captaynes ouer thousandes, to the captaynes ouer hundredes, to the iudges and to euery offycer in all Israel, and to the awncient fathers.
And so Salomon Ꟶ all the congregacyon with him went to the hye place that was at Gibeon: for there was the tabernacle of the witnesse of God, which Moses the seruaunte of the Lorde made in the wildernesse.
But the Arcke of God had Dauid brought from Kiriath Iearim, into the place which Dauid had prepared therfore. For he had pytched a tente for it at Ierusalem.
Moreouer, the brasen aulter that Bezaleel the sonne of Uri, the sonne of Hur had made, was there, before the tabernacle of the Lorde. And Salomon and the congregacyon went to vyset it.
And Salomon gat vp there before the Lorde to the brasen aulter that was before the tabernacle of wytnesse, Ꟶ offred a thousande burntsacrifyces vpon it.
And that same nyght dyd God appeare vnto Salomon, and sayde vnto hym: aske, what I shall geue the.
And Salomon sayde vnto God: thou hast shewed great mercye vnto Dauid my father, and hast made me to raygne in his steade.
Nowe therfore O Lorde God, let thy promyse which thou madest vnto Dauid my father, be true. For thou hast made me kynge ouer a people: which is lyke the dust of the earth in multitude.
Wherfore, geue me nowe wysdome Ꟶ knowledge, that I maye be able to go out and in before this people: for who els can iudge this people that is so great?
And God sayde to Salomon, because this was in thyne hert, and because thou hast not asked treasure, and rychesse, Ꟶ honoure, and the lyues of thyne enemyes, nether yet longe lyfe: but hast asked wysdome and knowledge for thy selfe, to iudge my people, ouer which I haue made the kyng
wysdome and knowledge is graunted vnto the, and I will geue the treasure, and rychesse, and glorye: so that amonge the kynges that haue bene before the or after the, none was or shalbe lyke the.
And so Salomon cam from the hylaulter (that was at Gibeon) to Ierusalem, from the tabernacle of witnesse, and raygned ouer Israel.
And Salomon geathered charettes and horsemen: and he had a thousande, and foure hundred charettes, and .xij. thousande horsemen, whom he bestowed in the charet cyties, and with the kynge at Ierusalem.
And the kynge made syluer and golde at Ierusalem, as plenteous as stones: and Cedar trees made he as plentie as the mulbery trees that growe in the valeyes
And the horses which Salomon had, were brought him out of Egypt by the kynges marchauntes that were together, which beynge of one company, toke them out at a pryce.
They came also and brought out of Egypte a charet for fyxe hundred peces of syluer: euen an horse for an hundred Ꟶ fyftie. And so brought they horses for all the kynges of the Hethites, Ꟶ for the kynges of Siria by their awne hande.
And Salomon determined to buylde an house for the name of the Lorde, and an house for his kyngdome
and Salomon tolde out thre skore and ten thousande men to beare burdens, and foure skore thousande men to hewe stones in the mountayne, and thre thousande and syxe hundred to ouer se them.
And Salomon sent to Hiram the kynge of Tire sayinge. As thou dydest deale with Dauid my father and dydest send him Cedar wodde, to buylde him an house to dwelle in, euen so deale with me:
For I am aboute to buylde an house for the name of the Lorde my God, to offre vnto him holy thinges, and to burne swete encense, and to sett shewbreed before him continuallye, to offre burnt sacrifyces of the mornynge and euenynge: on the Saboth dayes, in the fyrst daye of euery newe moone, Ꟶ in the solempne feastes of the Lorde oure God: for it is an ordinaunce to be continually kepte of Israel.
And the house which I buylde shalbe great: for great is oure God aboue all Gods.
But who is able to buylde him an house: when that heauen, and heauen aboue all heauens is not able to receaue him? what am I then that I shulde buylde hym an house? nay, but euen to burne sacrifice before him, shall this buyldinge be:
sende me nowe therfore a connynge man, that can worcke in golde and syluer, in brasse and yron, in purple, cremosin and yelowe sylke, and that can skylle to graue, with the connynge men that are with me in Iuda and Ierusalem, whom Dauid my father dyd prepare.
Send me also Cedar trees, pyne trees Ꟶ Algume trees out of Libanon. For I wote that thy seruauntes can skylle to hewe tymbre in Libanon. And beholde, my men shalbe wt thyne,
that they maye prepare me tymbre ynough. For the house which I am determyned to builde, shalbe wonderfull greate.
And beholde, for the vse of thy seruauntes the cutters and hewers of tymbre: I haue geuen .xx. thousande quarters of beaten wheate, and .xx. thousande quarters of barleye, and .xx. thousande bates of wyne, and .xx. thousande bates of oyle.
And Hiram kynge of Tire answered in wrytinge, which he sent to Salomon. Because the Lorde hath loued his people, therfore hath he made the kynge ouer them.
And Hiram sayde moreouer: blessed be the Lorde God of Israel which made heauen and erth, and that hath geuen Dauid the kynge a wyse sonne, and one that hath discrecion, prudence, and vnderstandynge, to buylde an house for the Lorde, Ꟶ a palace for him selfe.
And nowe I haue sent a wyse man, and a man of vnderstandynge (whom my father Huram dyd vse)
the sonne of a woman of the daughters of Dan, and his father was a man of Tire, and he can skylle to worke in gold and syluer, in brasse and yron, in stone and tymbre, in purple and yelowe sylke, in fyne whyte and cremosin: and can graue sondrie maner of grauinges, and to fynde out dyuerse maner of sotle worke that shalbe sett before him, with thy connynge men, Ꟶ with the connynge men of my Lorde Dauid thy father.
Nowe therfore, the wheate, and barleye, oyle and wyne which my Lorde hath spoken of, let him sende vnto his seruauntes.
And we will cut wood in Libano, as moch as thou shalt nede, and will bring it to the, in shippes by see to Iapho, from whence thou mayst carye them to Ierusalem.
And Salomon nombred all the straungers that were in the lande of Israel, after the nombre of them whom his father Dauid had nombred. And they were founde an hundred and .liij. thousande and syxe hundred.
And he set .lxx. thousande of them to beare burthens, and .lxxx. thousande to hewe stones in the mountayne, and thre thousande and syxe hundred officers, to set the people a worke.
And Salomon beganne to buylde the house of the Lorde at Ierusalem in mount Moria where (the Lorde) appeared vnto Dauid his father: euen in the place that Dauid prepared in the thresshynge floure of Ornan the Iebusyte.
And he began to buylde in the seconde daye of the seconde moneth the fourth yeare of his raygne.
And these are the paternes wherby Salomon was instructe to buylde the house of God. The length was thre skore cubytes after the olde measure, and the bredthe .xx. cubytes.
The porche, that was in bredth as large as the temple, had .xx. cubytes: and the heygth was an hundred Ꟶ .xx. cubytes. And he ouerlayed it on the ynner syde with pure golde.
And the greater house he syled with fyrre tree, which he ouerlayde with the best gold, and graued therto palmetrees and cheynes.
And he ouerlayed the house with precyouse stone bewtyfully. And the golde was golde of Paruaim.
The house (I saye) the beames, postes, walles and dores therof, ouerlayed he with gold, and made grauen worke vpon the walles.
And he made the house moost holye, whose length was .xx. cubytes lyke to the bredthe of the house, and the bredthe therof was also .xx. cubytes. And he ouerlayde it wyth good golde, euen with .vj. hundred talentes.
And the waight of the nayles of gold was fyftie sycles. And he ouerlayde the vpper chambres with golde.
And in the house most holy, he made two Cherubyns of ymage worke, lyke chyldren, and ouerlayde them with gold.
And the wynges of the Cherubs were .xx. cubytes longe. The one wynge was fyue cubites, reaching to the wall of the house, and the other wynge was lykewyse fyue cubytes, reachynge to the wynge of the other Cherub.
And euen so the one wynge of the other Cherub was fyue cubytes, reachynge to the wall of the house, and the other wynge was fyue cubites also, and reached to the wynge of the other Cherub.
So that the wynges of the sayde Cherubs were stretched out .xx. cubytes. And they stode on their fete, and loked inwardes.
And he made a fore hangyng of yelow sylke purple, cremosyne, and fyne white, and caused the pictures of Cherubs to be brodered theron.
And he made before the house, two pyllers of .xxxv. cubytes hye. And the heed that was aboue on the toppe of euerye one of them was fyue cubytes.
And he made chaynes of wrethen worke for the queere, and put them on the heedes of the pyllers, Ꟶ made an hundred pomegranates, and put them on the cheynes.
And he reared vp the pyllers before the temple: one on the ryght hande, and the other on the lefte, and called the ryght Iachin, and the lefte Boaz.
And he made an aulter of brasse .xx. cubytes longe, and .xx. cubytes broade, and ten cubytes hye.
And he cast a brasen Lauatorye of ten cubytes from brym to brym, rounde in compase, and fyue cubytes hye: and a lyne of thyrtye cubytes dyd compase it rounde aboute.
And vnder it was the fasshyon of oxen which dyd compase it rounde aboute: with ten cubytes dyd they compase the Lauatory rounde aboute, and there were, two rowes of oxen which were cast of lyke molten worke.
And it stode also vpon twelue oxen: thre loked towarde the North, thre towarde the west, thre towarde the South, and thre towarde the Eest, and the Lauatory was set vpon them, and all their backes were towarde the Lauatory.
And the thyckest of it was an handbreede, and the brym lyke the brym of a cuppe, with floures of lylyes. And it receaued and helde thre thousande bates.
And he made ten lauers: and put fyue on the ryght hande, and fyue on the lefte, to washe and clense in them, soch thinges as they offred for a burntofferynge. But the great Lauatory was for the preastes to washe in.
And he made ten candelstyckes of golde (accordinge to the paterne that was geuen of them) and put them in the temple: fyue on the ryght hande and fyue on the lefte.
And he made also ten tables, and put them in the temple: fyue on the ryght syde, and fyue on the lefte. And he made an hundred basens of golde.
And he made the courte of the preastes, Ꟶ the great courte and dores to it: and ouerlayde the dores of them with brasse.
And he set the great Lauatorye on the ryght syde of the Eest ende, ouer agaynst the South.
And Hiram made pottes, shouelles and basens, and fynesshed the worke that he was appoynted to make for kynge Salomon in the house of God.
The two pyllers, the couerynges or two heedes on the toppes of the pyllers: Ꟶ the two wrethes to couer the two scalpes or heedes that were on the toppes of the pyllers:
and foure hundred pomegranates on the two wrethes, two rowes of pomegranates on one wrethe, to couer the two toppes or heedes that were on the pyllers.
And he made two bottomes, and lauers made he vpon the bottomes:
the great Lauatory, and twelue oxen vnder it.
Pottes also and shouelles, flesshe hokes, and all these vesselles dyd Hyram (hys father) make to kynge Salomon for the house of the Lorde, of bryght brasse.
In the playne of Iordan dyd the kynge cast them, euen in the claye ground that is, betwene Socoth Ꟶ zaredatha.
And Salomon made all these vesselles in greate aboundaunce, for the weight of brasse coulde not be rekened.
And Salomon made all the vesselles that were for the house of God: the golden aulter also Ꟶ the tables to sett the shewbred vpon
Moreouer, the candelstickes with their lampes (to burne after the maner before the quere) and that of precious golde:
and the floures and the lampes, and the snoffers made he of golde, and that perfecte golde:
and the dressynge knyues, basens, spones and censers of pure golde. And the dore of the temple, and the ynner dores within the place moost holye, and the ynner dores of the temple, were gylted. And so was all the worcke that Salomon made for the house of the Lorde fynisshed.
And so all the worke that Salomon made in the house of the Lorde was fynisshed, and Salomon brought in all the thynges that Dauid his father had dedycated, with the syluer and golde and all the Iewelles, and put them amonge the treasures of the house of God.
Then Salomon gathered the elders of Israel togeather and all the heedes of the trybes, and auncient fathers of the chyldren of Israel, vnto Ierusalem: to bringe the Arcke of the couenaunt of the Lorde out of the cycie of Dauid which is zion.
Wherfore all the men of Israel resorted vnto the kynge in the feaste, euen in the seuenth moneth.
And all the elders of Israel came, and the Leuites toke vp the Arcke.
And the preastes and the Leuites brought a waye the Arcke and the tabernacle of wytnesse, and all the holy vesselles that were in the tabernacle, and they bare them.
And kynge Salomon and all the congregacyon of Israel that were assembled vnto him before the Arcke, offered shepe and oxen, so manye, that they coulde not be tolde nor nombred for multitude.
And the preastes brought the Arcke of the appoyntement of the Lorde vnto his place, euen into the quere of the temple within the place most holye, and set it vnder the wynges of the cherubs,
that the Cherubs stretched out their wynges ouer the place of the Arcke, Ꟶ the Cherubs couered both the Arcke and her barres aboue on hye.
And the barres of the Arcke, were so longe, that the heades of the barres were sene without the Arcke within the quere, but not without. And there the Arcke remayned vnto this daye.
But there was nothynge in the Arcke, saue the two tables which Moses put therin at Horeb, when the Lorde made a couenaunt with the chyldren of Israel, after they were come out of Egypt.
And it fortuned, that when the preastes were come out of the holy place the sanctuarye was fylled with smoke, for all the preastes that were present, were sanctifyed and dyd not then wayte by course,
that both the Leuites and the syngers, vnder Asaph, Heman and Ieduthun, were appoynted to sondrye offyces with their chyldren and brethren Ꟶ were arayed in fyne whyte, hauynge Symbales, Psalteries, and Harpes, Ꟶ stode at the Eest end of the aulter and by them an hundred and .xx. preastes blowinge with trompettes.
And the trompette blowers and the syngers so agreed, that it semed but one voyce in praysinge and thankynge the Lorde. And whan they lyfte vp their voyce with the trompettes, symbales and other instrumentes of musyck, and whan they praysed the Lorde, howe that he is good, and that his mercye lasteth euer, the house of God was fylled wt a cloude:
so that the preastes coulde not endure to mynister by the reason of the cloude. For the maiesty of the Lorde had fylled the house of God.
Then Salomon sayde: the Lorde hath spoken, howe that he wyll dwell in the cloude.
And I haue buylt an habitacyon for the, and a place for thy dwellynge for euer.
And the kynge turned his face, and blessed the hole congregacyon of Israel, and all the congregacyon of Israel stode.
And he sayde: blessed be the Lorde God of Israel which hath with his handes, fulfylled it, that he spake with his mouth to my father Dauid, sayinge:
sence the daye that I brought my people out of the lande of Egypt, I chose no cytie amonge all the trybes of Israel to buylde an house in, that my name myght be there, nether chose I any man to be a ruler ouer my people Israel:
sauynge that I haue chosen Ierusalem, that my name myght be there, and haue chosen Dauid to be ouer my people Israel.
And whan it was in the herte of Dauid my father to buylde an house for the name of the Lord God of Israel:
the Lord sayd to Dauid my father: for as moch as it was in thyne herte to buylde an house for my name, thou dydest well that thou so thoughtest in thyne hert.
Notwithstandynge, thou shalt not buylde the house, but thy sonne which is proceaded out of thy loynes, he shall builde an house for my name.
The Lorde therfore, hath made good his sayinge that he hath spoken, and I am rysen vp in the rowme of Dauid my father, and am set on the seate of Israel, as the Lord promysed, and haue buylt an house for the name of the Lorde God of Israel.
And in it haue I put the Arcke, wherin is the couenaunt of the Lorde that he made with the children of Israel.
And the kynge stode before the aulter of the Lorde in the presence of all the congregacyon of Israel, and stretched out his handes.
For nowe Salomon had made a brasen pulpyt of fyue cubytes longe Ꟶ fyue cubytes broad, and thre of heyght, Ꟶ had set it in the myddes of the great courte, Ꟶ vpon it, he stode and kneled downe, vpon his knees before all the congregacyon of Israel Ꟶ stretched out his handes towarde heauen,
Ꟶ sayde: O Lorde God of Israel, there is no God lyke the in heauen and in erth, which kepest couenaunt and shewest mercye vnto thy seruauntes that walke before the with all their hertes.
Thou which hast kept wt thy seruaunt Dauid my father the thynges that thou promisedest him: thou saydest it wt thy mouth, and hast fulfylled it with thyne handes, as it is to se this daye.
And nowe Lorde God of Israel, kepe wt thy seruaunt Dauid my father, the thynges that thou promysedest him, sayinge: thou shalt in my syght not be without a man, that shall sytte vpon the seate of Israel: so that thy children take hede to their wayes, to walcke in my lawe, as thou hast walked before me.
And nowe Lord God of Israel, lett thy sayinge be true which thou spakest vnto thy seruaunt Dauid.
And wyll God in very dede, dwell with men on erthe? Beholde heauen and heauen aboue all heauens do not contayne the: howe moch lesse the house which I haue buylded?
Let it be thy pleasure therfore to turne to the prayer of thy seruaunte and to his supplicacyon (O Lorde my God) to herken vnto the voyce and prayer which thy seruaunt prayeth before the:
and let thyne eyes be open towarde this house daye and nyght, ouer this place, wherin thou hast sayde, that thou woldest put thy name: to herken vnto the prayer which thy seruaunte prayeth in this place:
herken vnto the prayers of thy seruaunt Ꟶ of thy people Israel, which they praye in this place: heare thou (I saye) out of thy dwellinge place, euen out of heauen: heare and be mercyfull.
If a man synne agaynst his neyboure, and take on ooth against him, and make him to sweare, Ꟶ they both come before thyne aulter in this house:
then heare thou from heauen, and worcke, Ꟶ iudge thy seruauntes, that thou rewarde the vngodly, Ꟶ recompence him his waye vpon his heed, and iustefye the ryghteous, and geue him accordynge to his ryghtwesnesse.
And yf thy people Israel be put to the worse before the enemye, because they haue synned agaynst the. Yet yf they turne Ꟶ geue thankes vnto thy name, and make intercessyon, and praye before the in this house:
then heare thou from heauen, and be mercyfull vnto the synne of thy people Israel, and brynge them agayne vnto the lande, which thou gauest to them and to their fathers.
Whan heauen is shutt vp, and there be no rayne, because they haue synned agaynst the: yet yf they praye in this place, and confesse thy name, and repent from their synne for the which thou chastenest them:
then heare thou in heauen, Ꟶ be mercyfull vnto the synne of thy seruauntes and of thy people Israel, and guyde thou them into the good waye, to walke in, and sende rayne vpon thy lande, which thou hast geuen vnto thy people, for an enheritaunce.
And yf there be dearth in the lande, or pestylence, corrupcyon, or blastinge of corne, grashoppers, or caterpyllers, or that theyr enemyes besege them in the cyties of theyr lande, or whatsoeuer plage or syckenesse it be.
Then what supplicacyons and prayers soeuer shalbe made of any man, Ꟶ of all thy people Israel, whych shall knowe euery man his awne sore and his awne greffe, and shall stretche out their handes towarde this house,
thou shalt heare from heauen, euen from thy dwellynge place, and shalt be mercyfull, and geue euery man accordynge vnto all his wayes, euen as thou doest knowe euery mannes herte: for thou onely knowest the hertes of the chyldren of men:
that they maye feare the Ꟶ walke in thy wayes as longe as they lyue in the lande, which thou gauest vnto oure fathers.
Moreouer, the straunger which is not of thy people Israel, yf he come from a farre lande for thy greate names sake, and thy myghtye hande, and thy stretched oute arme, Yf they come (I saye) Ꟶ praye in thy house:
thou shalt heare from heauen, euen from thy dwellynge place, and shalt do accordynge to all that the straunger calleth to the for. That all people of the erth maye knowe thy name, and feare the, as doeth thy people Israel, and that they maye knowe, howe that in thys house which I haue buylt, thy name is called vpon.
Yf thy people go out to warre agaynst their enemyes, by the waye that thou shalt sende them, and they praye to the, in the waye towarde this cytie which thou hast chosen, euen towarde the house which I haue buylt for thy name:
then heare thou from heauen their supplicacyon and prayer, and helpe them in theyr ryght.
If they synne agaynst the, as there is no man but he doth synne, and thou be angrye with them, and delyuer them ouer before their enemyes, and they take them and leade them awaye vnto a lande ferre or neare,
yet yf they repent in their hert in the lande where they be in captyuite, and turne, and praye vnto the in the lande of their captiuite, sayinge: we haue synned, we haue done euell Ꟶ wyckedlye,
and turne agayne to the, wyth all their herte and all their soule, in the lande of their captyuite, where they kepe them in bondage, and so praye towarde theyr lande which thou gauest vnto their fathers, euen towarde the cytie whych thou hast chosen, and towarde the house which I haue buylt for thy name.
Then heare thou from heauen euen from thy dwellinge place, their supplicacion and their prayer, and iudge their cause, and be mercyfull vnto thy people, which haue synned agaynst the.
Nowe my God, let thyne eyes be open, and thyne eares attent vnto the prayer that is made in this place.
Nowe vp O Lorde God into thy restynge place: thou and the Arcke of thy strengthe. O Lorde God, let thy preastes be clothed with health, and let thy saynctes reioyse in goodnesse.
O Lord God, turne not a waye the face of thyne anoynted. Remembre the mercyes, which thou hast promysed to Dauid thy seruaunte.
And when Salomon had made an ende of prayinge, there came downe fyre from heauen, Ꟶ consumed the burnte offerynge and the sacrifyces. And the house was fylled with the glorie of the Lorde,
Ꟶ the preaste coulde not go into the house of the Lorde, because the glorye of the Lorde had fylled the Lordes house.
And whan all the chyldren of Israel sawe howe the fyre, and the glorye of the Lorde came downe vpon the house, they fell downe flat vpon their faces to the erth vpon the pauement, and worshypped and confessed vnto the Lord, that he is gracious, and that his mercye lasteth euer.
And the kynge and all the people offered sacrifyces before the Lorde.
And kynge Salomon offered a sacrifyce of .xxij. thousande oxen, and an hundred Ꟶ twentye thousande shepe. And so the kynge and all the people dedicated the house of God.
And the preastes wayted on their offyces, and the Leuites had the instrumentes of musycke of the Lorde, which kynge Dauid had made to confesse vnto the Lorde, that his mercye lasteth euer, playenge a psalme of Dauid with their hande. And the preastes blewe with trompettes before them: and all they of Israel stode.
Moreouer, Salomon halowed the myddle of the courte, that was before the Lorde: for there he offered burntofferinges and the fatt of the peaceofferynges, because the brasen aulter which Salomon had made, was not able to receaue the burntofferynges and the meateofferynges and the fatte.
So at the same tyme Salomon kepte a feast of seuen dayes, and all they of Israel with him, an exceadynge great congregacyon, euen from the entringe in of Hamath, vnto the ryuer of Egypt.
And in the eyght daye they made a gatheringe. For they kepte the dedicacyon of the aulter seuen dayes, and the feast seuen dayes.
And the .xxiij. daye of the seuenth moneth, he let the people departe into their tentes glad and merye in hert, for the goodnesse that the Lorde had shewed to Dauid, and to Salomon, and to Israel his people.
And so Salomon finisshed the house of the Lorde, and the kynges house: and all that came in his hert to make in the house of the Lorde, and in hys awne house, went prosperouslye forwarde.
And the Lorde apered to Salomon by nyght, and sayde to him. I haue hearde thy peticyon, and haue chosen this place for my selfe, to be an house of sacrifyce.
Yf I shut vp heauen, that there be no rayne: or yf I commaunde the locustes to deuoure the lande, or yf I sende pestilence amonge my people:
and yf they that are of my people, amonge whom my name is called vpon, do humble them selues, and make intercessyon, and seke my presence, and turne from their wycked wayes, then will I heare from heauen, and be mercyfull to their synne, Ꟶ wyll heale their lande.
And from hence forth myne eyes shalbe open, and myne eares attent vnto the prayer that is made in this place.
And therfore nowe I haue chosen and sanctifyed this house, that my name maye be there for euer: and myne eyes and myne heart shalbe there perpetuallye.
And yf thou wylt walke before me, as Dauid thy father walked, to do all that I haue commaunded the, and shalt obserue my statutes and my lawes:
then wyll I stablyshe the seat of thy kyngedome, accordynge as I made the couenaunt with Dauid thy father sayinge: thou shalt not be without a man, to be ruler in Israel.
But Ꟶ yf ye turne awaye, and forsake my statutes, and my commaundementes, which I haue set before you, and shall go Ꟶ serue other Gods, and worshyppe them:
then wyll I plucke them vp by the rotes out of my lande which I haue geuen them, and this house, which I haue sanctifyed for my name, wyll I cast out of my syght, and will make it to be a prouerbe Ꟶ a least amonge all nacyons.
And euery one that passeth by shalbe astonnyed at this house, which belonged to the most hye God, Ꟶ shall saye, why hath the Lorde dealte on this fassion wyth thys lande and wyth thys house?
And they shal answere: because they forsoke the Lord God of their fathers, whyche brought them out of the lande of Egypte, and caught holde on other Gods, and worshypped them, and serued them: euen therfore hath he brought all thys euell vpon them.
And it fortuned, that after .xx. yeare, when Salomon had buylt the house of the Lorde and hys awne house:
he buylte the cyties that Hiram gaue him, and put of the chyldren of Israell in them.
And Salomon went to Hamath zoba, and strengthed it.
And he buylt Thadmor in the wyldernesse, and repayred all the store cyties which were in Hamath.
And he buylt Bethhoron the vpper and Bethhoron the nether, stronge cyties, hauynge walles, gates and barres.
And Baalah and all the stoare cyties that Salomon had, and al the charet cyties, and the cyties of the horsemen, and euery pleasaunt place, that Salomon had lust to buylde in Ierusalem and Libanon, and thorowe out all the lande of his dominion.
And all the people that were lefte of the Hethites, Amorites, Pheresytes, Heuites Ꟶ Iebusites, which were not of the children of Israel:
but were the children of them, which were lefte after them in the lande, and were not consumed of the children of Israel, them dyd Salomon make to paye trybute vnto this daye.
But of the children of Israel dyd Salomon make no bondmen for his worke: but they were men of warre and rulers and great Lordes with hym, and captaynes ouer his charetes and horsemen.
And kyng Salomons offycers that ouersawe and ruled the people, were two hundred and fyftye.
And Salomon brought the daughter of Pharao out of the cytie of Dauid, into the house that he had buylded for her. For he sayd: my wyfe shall not dwel in the house of Dauid kyng of Israel, for it is holy, because that the Arcke of the Lorde is come vnto it.
Then Salomon offered burnt offeringes vnto the Lorde, on the aulter of the Lorde which he had buylt before the porche,
doyng euery thynge in his due tyme and offerynge accordynge to the commaundement of Moses, in the sabbothes, newmoones, and solempne feastes, thre tymes in the yeare, that is to saye, in the feast of swete bread, in the feast of weakes, and in the feast of tabernacles.
And Salomon set the sortes of preastes to their offyces, as Dauid his father had ordered them, and the Leuites in theyr watches for to prayse Ꟶ ministre before the preastes daye by daye, and the porters by course at euery gate. For so had Dauid the man of God commaunded.
And they omytted not the commaundement of the kynge vnto the preastes and the Leuytes, concernynge eny maner of thynge, and concernynge the treasures.
For Salomon made prouision for the charges, from the fyrst daye that the foundacion of the house of the Lorde was layde: tyll it was fynished, that the house of the Lorde was perfecte.
Then went kyng Salomon to Ezion Gaber, and to Eloth at the see syde in the lande of Edom.
And Hiram sent him by the hande of his seruauntes, shyppes and seruauntes that had knowledge of the see: and they came with the seruauntes of Salomon to Ophir, and caryed thence foure hundred and fyftye talentes of golde, and brought it to kynge Salomon.
And whan the quene of Saba hearde of the fame of Salomon, she came to proue hym in harde questions at Ierusalem, with a very great company, with camelles that bare spices Ꟶ plentye of golde and precyouse stones. And when she was come to Salomon, she commoned with hym of all that she had in her herte.
And Salomon foyled her, all her questions, and there was not one worde hyd from Salomon, whych he tolde her not.
And when the quene of Saba had sene the wysdome of Salomon and the house that he had buylte,
and the meate of hys table, the syttynge of his seruauntes, and the standing of his wayters, theyr apparell, hys buttelars, theyr apparell, hys goynge vp, by the whych he went into the house of the Lorde, ther was nomore sprete in her.
And she sayde to the kynge: the sayenge which I heard in myne awne lande, of thyne actes, and of thy wysdome, is true.
I beleued not the wordes of them, vntyll I came, Ꟶ myne eyes had sene it. And beholde, the one halfe of thy wysdome was not tolde me: for thou exceadest the fame that I hearde.
Happye are thy men, and happy are these thy seruauntes which stande before the alwaye, Ꟶ heare thy wysedome.
Blessed be the Lorde thy God, which had lust to the, to set the kynge on his seat, that thou myghtest be kyng, ordeyned by the Lorde thy God. Because thy God loueth Israell, and hath delyte to make them contynue euer, therfore made he the kynge ouer them to do ryght and equyte.
And she gaue the kyng an hundred Ꟶ .xx. talentes of golde, and of spyces exceadynge great abundaunce and preciouse stones, nether was there any more soche spyce, as the quene of Saba gaue kyng Salomon.
And the seruauntes of Hiram and the seruauntes of Salomon which brought golde from Ophir, brought also Algume wood and preciouse stones.
And the kyng made of the Algume wood, steyres in the house of the Lorde and in the kynges palace, and harpes and psalteries for syngers. And there was no soch wood sene before in the lande of Iuda.
And kynge Salomon gaue to the quene of Saba euery pleasaunt thing that she asked but not so moche as she brought vnto the kyng. And so she turned and went awaye to her awne lande with her seruauntes.
The weyght of golde that came to Salomon in one yere, was syxe hundred .lxvi. talentes of golde,
besydes that which chapmen and marchauntes brought: and all the kynges of Arabia and rulers of that countrey, brought gold and syluer to Salomon.
And kynge Salomon made two hundred bucklers of beaten golde, and .vi. hundred sycles of beaten gold were spent vpon one bucklar:
and thre hundred shyldes made he of beaten gold, and one shylde cost thre hundred peces of golde, and the king put them in the house that was in the forest of Libanon.
And the kynge made a great seat of Iuorie, Ꟶ ouerlayde it with pure golde.
Another were syxe steppes to the seate wyth a fote stole of golde fastened to the seate: and pomelles on eche syde of the syttynge place,
and two lyons standynge by the pomelles. And .xii. lyons stode on the one syde and on the other: vpon the syxe steppes, so that there was no soche worke made in any kyngdome.
And all the drynckinge vesselles of kyng Salomon were of golde, and all the vessels of the house that was in the forest of Libanon, were of precious golde: for syluer was counted nothynge worthe in the dayes of Salomon.
For the kynges shyppes wente to Tharsis wyth the seruauntes of Hiram: euery thre yeare once came the shyppes to Tharsis, and brought golde, syluer, Iuorie and apes and pecockes.
And kyng Salomon passed all the kynges of the earth in rychesse and wysedome.
And all the kynges of the earth sought the presence of Salomon, to heare his wysdome that God had put in hys herte:
And they brought euery man his present: vesselles of syluer, and vesselles of golde, rayment, harnesse spyces, horses and mules, and whatsoeuer myght be gotten, yeare by yeare.
And Salomon had foure thousande stalles for horses and charettes, Ꟶ twelue thousande horsemen, whom he bestowed in the charet cyties, Ꟶ some were with the kyng at Ierusalem.
And he raygned ouer all the kynges that were from Euphrates vnto the lande of the Philistines, and to the border of Egipt.
And the kynge made syluer in Ierusalem as plenteous as stones, and Cedar trees as plenteous, as the mulbery trees that growe in the valleyes.
And they brought vnto Salomon horses out of Egypt, Ꟶ out of al landes.
The rest of the actes of kyng Salomon, fyrst and last, are they not written in the sayenges of Nathan the Prophete, and in the prophesye of Ahiah the Silonite, and in the visions of Iedo the sear of visions, agaynst Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat?
And Salomon raygned in Ierusalem vpon all Israel fourtye yeares.
And Salomon slepte wyth hys fathers, and they buryed hym in the cytie of Dauid his father, and Rehoboam his sonne raygned in his steade.
And Rehoboam went to Sichem: for to Sichem were all Israell come together, to make hym kynge.
And when Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat (which was fled into Egypte from the presence of Salomon the kynge) hearde it, he returned out of Egypt.
And they sent and called hym. And so Ieroboam and all they of Israel came and comoned wyth Rehoboam, sayenge:
Thy father layed a greuouse yocke vpon vs: nowe therfore remytte thou somewhat of the greuouse seruyce of thy father and of his heuye yocke that he put vpon vs, and we wyll serue the.
And he sayde to them come agayne vnto me after thre dayes. And the people departed.
And kynge Rehoboam counsayled wyth the elders that had stande before Salomon his father, whyle he yet lyued, and he sayde: what councell geue ye me, to answere thys people agayne?
And they tolde him, saying: If thou be kynde to thys people, and shewe thy selfe lowely to them, and speake louynge wordes to them, they wyll be thy seruauntes for euer.
But he left the councell whiche the elders gaue him, and toke councell wyth the youngemen, that were growen vp with hym and that stode in his presence.
And he sayde vnto them: what aduise geue ye, that we may answere thys people, which haue commoned wyth me, sayinge: Abate some what of the yocke, which thy father dyd put vpon vs.
And the yonge men that were growen vp wyth hym, spake vnto hym, sayinge: Thus shalt thou answere the people that spake to the, sayinge: Thy father made oure yocke heuye: but make thou it some what lyghter for vs. Thus shalt thou saye vnto them, my lytle fynger shalbe heuyer then my fathers, loynes.
For where my father put a heuye yocke vpon you, I wyll put more to your yock: my father chastysed you wt whyppes, but I wyll chastyce you with scorpions.
And so Ieroboam Ꟶ all the people came to Rehoboam the thyrde daye, as the kynge badde, saying: come agayne to me the thyrd daye.
And the kynge answered them cruelly: and kyng Rehoboam left the councell of the aged men,
and answered them after the aduise of the yonge men, sayinge: My father made your yocke greuous, and I wyll adde therto: my father chastysed you with whyppes, but I wyll chastyce you with scorpions.
And so the kynge herkened not vnto the people: but the occasion came of God, that the Lord myght make good his saying, which he spake, by the hande of Ahia the Silonite, to Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat.
And when all they of Israel sawe that the kynge wolde not agree vnto them, the people answered the kynge sayinge: what parte haue we wt Dauid, or enheritaunce wt the sonne of Isai? let euery man of Israel go to his tent. And now Dauid, se to thyne awne house. And so all Israel gat them to their tentes,
so that Rehoboam raygned ouer no moo of the chyldren of Israel, then dwelt in the cyties of Iuda.
Then kynge Rehoboam also sente Haduram that was ruler ouer the tribute, and the chyldren of Israel stoned hym wt stones that he dyed. But kyng Rehoboam made spede to get him vp to his charret, to flye to Ierusalem.
And they of Israel rebelled agaynst the house of Dauid vnto thys daye.
And whan Rehoboam was come to Ierusalem, he gathered of the house of Iuda Ꟶ Beniamin, nyne score thousande chosen men of warre to fight agaynst Israel, Ꟶ to brynge the kyngdome agayne to Rehoboam.
And the word of the Lorde came to Semeiahu the man of God, saying:
speake vnto Rehoboam the sonne of Salomon kynge of Iuda, Ꟶ to all them of Israel that are in Iuda Ꟶ Beniamin, Ꟶ saye:
thus sayeth the Lorde. Ye shall not go vp nor fight agaynst your brethren: returne euery man to his house, for thys thynge is done of me. And they obeyed the wordes of the Lorde, and returned from goynge agaynst Ieroboam.
And Rehoboam dwelt in Ierusalem, and buylt stronge cyties in Iuda.
He buylded vp Bethleem, and Etham, and Theko:
Bethzur, Socho and Adullam:
Gath, and Maresa: and ziph Adurahim,
Lachis and asecha:
zorca Aialon and Hebron, which is in Iuda Ꟶ Beniamin, stronge cyties.
And he repayred the stronge holdes Ꟶ put captaynes in them, and store of vitayle, Ꟶ wyne, Ꟶ oyle.
And in all cyties he put shyldes Ꟶ speares, and made them exceadynge stronge, hauynge Iuda and Beniamin on his syde.
And the prestes and the leuites that were in all Israel, resorted to hym out of all their coastes.
For the leuites lefte their suburbes and their possession, and came to Iuda and Ierusalem: for Ieroboam and his sonnes had cast them out from minystrynge vnto the Lorde.
And he ordeyned hym prestes for the hylaultares, for the deuylles and for the calues which he had made.
And after the leuites there went of all the trybes of Israel, soche as submitted their hertes to seke the Lorde God of Israel, and came to Ierusalem, to offer vnto the Lorde God of their fathers.
And so they strengthed the kyngdome of Iuda, and made Rehoboam the sonne of Salomon myghtye thre yeare longe for thre yere they walked in the waye of Dauid and Salomon.
And Rehoboam toke hym Mahalath the daughter of Ierimoth the sonne of Dauid to wyfe, and Abihail the daughter of Eliab the sonne of Isai,
which bare hym chyldren Ieus, Samaria, and zaha.
And after her he toke Maaca the daughter of Absalon which bare hym Abia, Atthai, ziza, Ꟶ Selomith.
And Rehoboam loued Maacah the daughter of Absalon aboue all his wyues Ꟶ concubynes, for he toke eyghtene wyues and thre skore concubynes, and begat .xxviii. sonnes and .lx. daughters.
Ad Rehoboam made Abiah the sonne of Maacah the chefe ruler amonge his brethren, and to haue the ouersyght of the kyngdome.
And he played wysely, and scatered all his chyldren thorowe out all the countreyes of Iuda and Ben Iamin vnto euery stronge cytie. And he gaue them aboundaunce of vitayle, and obtayned many wyues.
And it came to passe, that when Rehoboam had stablysshed the kyngdome, and became myghtye, he forsoke the lawe of the Lorde, and all Israel with him.
And it fortuned, that in the fyfte yeare of kynge Rehoboam, Sesac the kyng of Egypte came vp agaynst Ierusalem, because they had transgressed agaynst the Lorde
wt .xii.C. charettes, and .lx.M. horsmen. And the people were without nombre, that came with hym out of Egypte Lubim, Sukkim, and the blackmores.
And they toke the stronge cyties in Iuda, and came to Ierusalem.
Then came Semeia the prophete to Rehoboam Ꟶ to the Lordes of Iuda, that were gathered together within Ierusalem for Sesac, and sayd vnto them: thus sayd the Lord, ye haue left me, Ꟶ therfore haue I also left you in the handes of Sesac.
Wherupon the lordes of Israel and the kynge humbled them selues, and sayde, the Lorde is ryghteous.
And whan the Lorde sawe that they submitted themselues, the worde of the Lorde cam to Semeia, sayinge: They submitte them selues, therfore I wyll not destroye them. But I wyll delyuer them somwhat, and my wrath shall not burne vpon Ierusalem by the hande of Sesac.
Neuerthelesse, they shalbe hys seruauntes, to knowe what difference is betwene my seruice, and the seruice of the kyngdomes of the worlde.
And so Sesac kynge of Egypte came to Ierusalem, and toke awaye the treasures of the house of the Lorde, and the treasures of the kynges house: he toke euen all. And he caryed awaye the shyldes of golde, which Salomon made.
In steade of which, kynge Rehoboam made shyldes of brasse, and commytted them to the handes of the captaynes which had the ouersyght of the fotemen, and that kept the entraunce of the kynges house.
And it came to passe, that when the kynge entred into the house of the Lorde, the garde came Ꟶ fet them, and brought them agayne vnto the garde chambre.
And when he humbled hymselfe, the wrath of the Lorde turned from hym, that he wolde not destroye all together. And in Iuda all was well.
And so kyng Rehoboam waxed myghty Ꟶ raygned in Ierusalem. And Rehoboam was .xli. yere olde, when he began to raygne, Ꟶ he raygned .xvii. yeres in Ierusalem, the cytie which the Lorde had chosen out of all the trybes of Israel to put his name there. And hys mothers name was Naama an Ammonitesse.
And he dyd euyll, because he prepared not hys hert to seke the Lorde.
The actes also of Rehoboam, fyrst and last, are they not wrytten in the sayinges of Semeia the prophete, and of Iddo the fear which noted the genealogie? and there was warre alwaye betwene Rehoboam Ꟶ Ieroboam.
And Rehoboam slept wt his fathers, and was buryed in the cytie of Dauid, and Abia his sonne raygned in his steade.
The .xviii. yere of kynge Ieroboam began Abia to raygne ouer Iuda,
Ꟶ he raygned thre yere in Ierusalem. His mothers name also was Michaiahu the daughter of Uriel of Gibea. And there was warre betwene Abia Ꟶ Ieroboam.
And Abia made prouisyon for the warre, hauyng valeaunt Ꟶ expert men of warre, euen .iiii.C.M. chosen men. And Ieroboam set him selfe in araye to fyght agaynst hym, wt .viii.C.M. picte men which were stronge Ꟶ men of armes.
And Abia stode vp vpon zemaraim an hill which is in mount Ephraim, Ꟶ sayd: heare me thou Ieroboam and all Israel.
Do not you knowe, howe that the Lorde God of Israel gaue the kyngdome, ouer them of Israel, to Dauid for euer, euen to hym and to hys sonnes with a salted couenaunt?
And Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat the seruaunt of Salomon the sonne of Dauid is rysen vp, Ꟶ hath rebelled agaynst his lorde.
And ther gathered to hym lewde men the chyldren of Belial, Ꟶ preuayled agaynst Rehoboam the sonne of Salomon: when Rehoboam was yong Ꟶ tender hearted, Ꟶ coulde not stande before them.
And nowe ye saye, that ye be able to preuayle agaynst the kyngdome of the Lorde, which is in the hande of the sonnes of Dauid, Ꟶ ye be a greate multitude, Ꟶ haue the golden calues which Ieroboam made you for gods.
And haue ye not cast out the prestes of the Lorde the sonnes of Aaron, and the leuites, and haue made you prestes after the maner of the nacions of other landes? so that whosoeuer commeth, Ꟶ consecrateth his hande with a yonge oxe Ꟶ seuen rammes, the same maye be a preste of them that are no gods.
But we belonge vnto the Lord our God whom we haue not forsaken, and the prestes are the sonnes of Aaron, which ministre vnto the Lorde, and the leuites wayte vpon theyr office.
They burne vnto the Lorde euery mornynge Ꟶ euenynge, burnt sacrifyces Ꟶ swete incense: the shewe breed set they in ordre vpon a pure table: Ꟶ prepare the candelstick of gold wt the lampes of the same to burne euer at euen. And truly we kepe the watche of the Lorde oure God: but ye haue forsaken him.
And behold, God hym selfe is our captayne, Ꟶ hys prestes blowe wt the trompettes, Ꟶ crye alarum agaynst you. O ye chyldren of Israel, fyght not agaynst the Lord God of your fathers: for it wyll not prospere with you.
But for all that, Ieroboam conuayed men preuely about, to come behynde them: Ꟶ so they were before Iuda, Ꟶ the layers in wayte were behynde them.
And when they of Iuda loked about, behold the battayll was before Ꟶ behynde, Ꟶ they cryed vnto the Lord Ꟶ the prestes blewe wt the trompetes,
Ꟶ the men of Iuda gaue a showte. And as the men of Iuda showted, it came to passe, that God smote Ieroboam and all Israel before Abia and Iuda.
And the children of Israel fled before Iuda, and God delyuered them into theyr hande.
And Abia Ꟶ hys people slue a great slaughter of them: there fell downe wounded of Israel .v.C.M. chosen men.
And so the chyldren of Israel were brought vnder, at that tyme, and the chyldren of Iuda preuayled: because they leaned vnto the Lorde God of theyr fathers.
And Abia folowed after Ieroboam, and toke cities from hym, Bethel wt the townes belongyng therto, Iesana with the townes that longed therto, and Ephron with her townes.
And Ieroboam recouered no strength agayne in the daies of Abia. And the Lorde plaged him, Ꟶ he dyed.
But Abia waxed mightye, and maryed .xiiij. wyues, and begat .xxij. sonnes, and .xvj. daughters.
The rest of the actes of Abia, his customes and hys sayinges are wrytten in the storye of the prophete Iddo.
So Abia slepte wt hys fathers, and they buryed hym in the cytie of Dauid, and Asa hys sonne raygned in hys steade. In whose dayes the lande was in quyetnes ten yere.
And Asa dyd that was good Ꟶ right in the eyes of the Lorde hys God:
for he toke awaye straunge aultars and the hyllaultars, and brake downe the ymages, and cut downe the groues,
and commaunded Iuda to seke the Lorde God of their fathers, and to do accordynge to the lawe and commaundement.
And he put awaye out all the cyties of Iuda the hylaultars and the ymages: and the kyngdome was quyet before hym.
And he buylte stronge cities in Iuda: because the land was in rest, and he had no warre in those yeares. For the Lorde had geuen hym rest.
Therfore he sayde to Iuda: let vs buyld these cityes, and make about them walles, towres, gates and barres, for the lande is yet in rest before vs, because we haue sought the Lorde oure God: we haue sought hym, and he hath geuen vs rest on euery side: Ꟶ so they buylt and it prospered with them.
And Asa had an armye of men that bare shyldes and speares, out of Iuda, thre hundred thousand: and out of Beniamin that bare shyldes and drue bowes, two hundred Ꟶ foure skore thousande, all these were valeaunt men.
And there came out agaynst them zarah the black morian with an hoost of ten hondred thousande, and thre hondred charrettes, and came as farre as Maresa.
And Asa went out before him, and they ioyned the battayll in the valey of zephata besyde Maresa.
And Asa cryed vnto the Lorde hys God, Ꟶ sayde: Lorde, it is no harde thinge with thou to helpe ether many, or them that haue no power: helpe vs therfore, O Lorde our God, for we trust to the, and in thy name we go agaynst thys multytude. Thou arte the Lorde oure God, and no man shall preuayle agaynst the.
So the Lorde smote the blacke mores before Asa and Iuda, Ꟶ the blacke mores fled.
And Asa and the people that was with him, folowed after them vnto Gerar. And the blacke mores hoost was ouerthrowen, that there was none of them lefte, but were destroyed before the Lorde and before his host. And they caryed awaye a myghtye greate praye.
And they smote all the cyties rounde about Gerar. For the feare of the Lorde came vpon them. And they spoyled all the cyties and there was exceadynge moche spoyle in them.
They smote also the tentes of catell, Ꟶ caryed awaye plentye of shepe and camels, and returned to Ierusalem.
And the sprete of God came on Asaria the sonne of Oded.
And he went out to mete Asa, Ꟶ sayde vnto him: heare me Asa, and all Iuda, Beniamin. The Lorde is with you, whyle ye be with hym, and when ye seke hym, he wyll be founde of you: and agayne, when ye forsake hym, he also wyll forsake you.
And truly, for a longe season in Israel no man sought the true God, no man regarded the preste that taught them, no man cared for the lawe.
And when any man in hys trouble dyd turne vnto the Lord God of Israel, and sought him, he was founde of them.
And in that time me there was no peace to hym, that dyd goo out and in: but greate sedicyon was there amonge all the inhabiters of the earth.
And nacyon was destroyed of nacyon, and cytie of cytie: for God dyd moue all aduersitye amonge them.
Playe ye therfore the men, and let not youre handes slacke, for youre worke shalbe rewarded.
And when Asa hearde those wordes, and the prophesye of Azaria the sonne of Oded the prophete, he toke courage, Ꟶ put awaye the abhominable ydols out of all the lande of Iuda and Beniamin, Ꟶ out of the cityes which he wanne in mount Ephraim, and renued the aultar of the Lorde, that was before the porch of the Lorde.
And he gathered all Iuda and Beniamin, and the straungers with them out of Ephraim, Manasse, Ꟶ Simeon. For there fell many to hym out of Israel, when they sawe that the Lorde hys God was wt hym.
So they assembled at Ierusalem the thyrde monethe, the fyftenth yeare of the raygne of Asa.
And they offered vnto the Lord the same tyme of the spoyle which they had brought .vij.C. oxen, and .vij. thousande shepe.
And they made a couenaunt to seke the Lorde God of theyr fathers, with all theyr hert Ꟶ all theyr soule.
And whosoeuer wolde not seke the Lorde God of Israel, shulde dye for it: whether he were small or great man or woman.
And they sware vnto the Lorde with a loude voyce, showtynge Ꟶ blowyng wyth trompettes and shawmes.
And all they in Iuda reioyced at the oth, for they had sworne vnto the Lorde, with all theyr herte, and sought hym with all theyr lust, and he was founde of them. And the Lorde gaue them rest rounde about on euery syde.
And kinge Asa put Maacha his mother out of auctorite, because she had made an abhominable ydoll in a groue: and Asa brake downe her ydoll, and stamped it, Ꟶ burnt it at the broke Cedron.
But all the hylaulters were not taken awaye out of Israel: though the hert of Asa was perfecte all hys dayes.
And he brought into the house of God the thynges that hys father had dedicat, and that he hym selfe had dedicate: euen syluer, Ꟶ golde, and Iewelles.
And ther was nomore warre vnto the .xxxv. yere of the raygne of Asa.
In the .xxxvi. yere of the raygne of Asa, came Baasa kyng of Israel vp agaynst Iuda, and buylt Rama, to the entent that he wolde let none passe out or in to Asa kynge of Iuda.
And Asa set out golde and syluer, out of the treasures of the house of the Lorde, Ꟶ of the kynges house, Ꟶ sent to Benhadad kyng of Siria that dwelt at Darmesec, and sayd:
There is a confederacion betwene me Ꟶ the, betwene my father Ꟶ thine. Beholde, I haue sent the syluer and golde, that thou wylt come and breake thyne appoyntment wt Baasa kynge of Israel, that he maye departe from me.
And Benhadad graunted vnto kynge Asa, and sent to the captaynes of hys armye to the cityes of Israel. And they smote Iion, Dan, and Abelmain, and the strong cyties of Nephthali.
And when Baasa hearde this, he left buyldynge of Rama, and let his worcke cease.
And then Asa the kyng toke all Iuda, and caryed awaye the stones and tymbre of Rama, wherwith Baasa was a buyldyng, and he buylt therwith Geba and Mizpa.
At that same tyme, Hanani the sear came to Asa kyng of Iuda, Ꟶ sayde vnto hym: because thou hast trusted in the kyng of Siria, and not rather put thy trust in the Lorde thy God, therfore is the host of the kynge of Siria escaped out of thyne hande.
Had not the blacke mores and Lubim an exceadinge great hoost with many charettes and horsemen? And yet because thou trustedest in the Lorde, he delyuered them into thyne hande.
For the eyes of the Lorde beholde all the erth, to strength them that are of perfecte hert towarde him. Herin thou hast done folyshly, and therfore from hensforth thou shalt haue warre.
And Asa was wroth with the fear, Ꟶ put him into a preson house, for he was displeased with hym because of thys thynge. And Asa destroyed certayne of the people the same ceason.
And beholde, these dedes of Asa, fyrst, Ꟶ last, are wrytten in the boke of the kinges of Iuda and Israel.
And Asa in the .xxxix. yere of hys raygne fell sycke in hys fete, and that hys disease contynued very longe. And in hys sycknes he sought not the Lord, but phisicions.
And Asa slept with his fathers, and dyed in the .xlj. yere of hys raygne.
And they buryed hym in his awne sepulchre, which he had made for hym selfe in the cytye of Dauid, and layed hym in the bed which he had fylled with dyuerse kyndes of spices Ꟶ swete odours, made by the craft of the potecaryes. And they burnt very moch spyce about him.
And Iehosaphat his sone raygned in hys steade, Ꟶ preuayled agaynst Israel.
And he put souldyers in all the stronge cityes of Iuda, and sett rulers in the lande of Iuda and in the cityes of Ephraim, which Asa his father had wonne.
And the Lorde was with Iehosaphat, because he walked in the olde wayes of his father Dauid, and sought not Baalim.
But sought the Lorde God of hys father, Ꟶ walked in hys commaundmentes: and not after the doynges of Israel.
And the Lord stablisshed the kyngdome in his hande, and all they that were in Iuda, brought hym presentes, so that he had aboundance of riches and honoure.
And he lyft vp his hert vnto the wayes of the Lorde, and he putt downe yet more of the hylaultars and groues out of Iuda.
In the thyrde yere of hys raygne he sent to hys lordes, euen to Benhail, Obadia, zacharia, Nethanel and to Michaahu, that they shulde teach in the cityes of Iuda,
and with them he sent leuites: euen Semeiahu, Nethaniahu, zabadiahu, Asahel, Semiramoth, Ꟶ Tubadonia, and with them Elisamah and Iehoram prestes.
And they taught in Iuda, and had the boke of the lawe of God wt them, and went about thorowout all the cityes of Iuda, and taught the people.
And the feare of the Lorde fell vpon all the kyngdomes of the landes that were rounde about Iuda, Ꟶ they fought not agaynst Iehosaphat.
And some of the philistines brought Iehosaphat gyftes, and tribute syluer: And therto the Arabians brought him catell: euen .vij.M. and .vij.C. rammes, and .vij.M. and .vij.C. he goates.
And so Iehosaphat prospered Ꟶ grue vp on hye. And he buylt in Iuda, castels and stronge cityes,
Ꟶ he had great substaunce in the cities of Iuda, but the men of armes Ꟶ strongest soudiers were in Ierusalem.
And these are the offyces of them in the houses of their fathers, the captaines ouer thousandes in Iuda. Adna the captayne, Ꟶ with hym of fightynge men .iij.C.M.
And next to hys hande was Iehohanan a captayne, and with hym .ij.C. and .lxxx.M.
And nexte him was Amazia the sonne of zichri, which of his awne good wil offred him selfe vnto the Lord, and wt hym .ij.C.M. myghty men of warre.
And of the chyldren of Beniamin, Eliada a man of myght, and had with hym armed men with bowe Ꟶ shylde .ij.C.M.
And nexte hym was Iehosabad, and with hym an .C. and .lxxx.M. that were prepared for the warre.
These wayted on the kynge, besydes those which the kinge put in the stronge cityes thorowout all Iuda.
And Iehosaphat had aboundance of rychesse and honoure, and ioyned affinyte wt Ahab.
And after certayne yeres he went downe to Ahab to Samaria. And Ahab slue many shepe Ꟶ oxen for hym, and for the people that he had with hym, and entreated him to go vp with hym vnto Ramoth in Gilead.
And Ahab kynge of Israel sayde to Iehosaphat kynge of Iuda: wylt thou go with me to Ramoth in Gilead? And he answered hym: I wyll be as thou, and my people shalbe as thyne, and we wyll go with the to the warre.
And Iehosaphat sayd vnto the kynge of Israel: aske councell I praye the, at the worde of the Lorde, thys same daye.
Therfore the kyng of Israel gathered together of prophetes .iiij.C. men, and sayde vnto them: shall we go to Ramoth in Gilead to fyght, or shulde I cease? And they sayde: go vp, Ꟶ God shall delyuer it into the kinges hande.
But Iehosaphat sayde: is there yet here neuer a prophete more of the Lordes, that we might aske of him?
And the kinge of Israel sayde vnto Iehosaphat: there is yet one man, by whom we maye aske the Lorde. But I hate him: for he neuer prophecieth me good, but alwaye euell, and the same is Michea the sonne of Iimla. And Iehosaphat sayd: let not the kynge saye so.
And the kinge of Israell called one of his chamberlaynes, and sayde: fetch hether quyckly Michea the sonne of Iimla.
And the kynge of Israel and Iehosaphat kyng of Iuda sate ether of them on his seate in their apparell, in a thresshing floure beside the gate of Samaria, and all the prophetes prophesyed before them.
And one zedekia the sonne of Chanana had made hym hornes of yron, Ꟶ sayd: thus sayth the Lorde: with these shallt thou ouerthorowe Siria, vntyll they be brought to naught.
And all the prophetes prophesyed euen so, sayinge: Go vp to Ramoth in Gilead, and it shall prospere with the: for the Lord shall delyuer it into the hande of the kynge.
And the messenger that went to call Michea, spake to him, saying: beholde, the wordes of the prophetes speake good to the kyng with one assent, lett thy wordes therfore be lyke one of theirs, that thou speake that which is pleasaunt.
And Michea sayd: as truly as the Lorde liueth: euen what my God sayth that wyll I speake.
And whan he was come to the kynge, the kynge sayde vnto hym: Michea, shuld we go to Ramoth in Gilead to fight, or leaue of? And he sayde: go vp, Ꟶ all shalbe well: Ꟶ they shalbe delyuered into your hande.
And the kyng sayde to him: So Ꟶ so may tymes do I charge the, that thou saye nothynge but the trueth to me, in the name of the Lorde.
Then he sayde: I dyd se all them of Israel scatered in the mountaynes, as shepe that haue no shepherde. And the Lord sayde: these haue no master, let then returne euery man therfore to hys house in peace.
And the kynge of Israel sayd to Iehosaphat: dyd I not tell the, that he wold not prophecy good vnto me: but euell.
But he sayde agayne: therfore heare ye the worde of the Lorde. I sawe the Lorde syt vpon his seate, Ꟶ all the company of heauen stode on hys ryght hande Ꟶ on hys lefte.
And the Lorde sayde: who shall deceaue Ahab king of Israel, that he maye go vp Ꟶ be ouerthrowen at Ramoth in Gilead? And he sayde: oue sayth this, another that.
And there came out a sprete Ꟶ stode before the Lorde, Ꟶ sayde: I wyll deceaue him. And the Lorde sayde vnto him: Wherin?
And he sayd: I will go out, Ꟶ be a lyinge sprete in the mouth of all his prophetes. And the Lorde sayde: thou shalt deceaue him, and shalt preuayle: go out, and do euen so.
And now therfore beholde, the Lord hath put a lyinge sprete in the mouthes of all these thy prophetes, Ꟶ the Lorde hath spoken euell agaynst the.
And zedekia the sonne of Chanana went to, Ꟶ smote Michea vpon the cheke. Ꟶ sayde: by what waye went the sprete of the Lorde from me, to speake wt the?
And Michea sayde: thou shalt se the daye when thou shalt go in from chambre to chambre, for to hyde thy selfe.
And the kinge of Israel sayde take ye Michea, and brynge hym to Amon the gouerner of the citye, Ꟶ to Ioas the kinges sonne,
Ꟶ ye shall saye: thus sayth the kynge: putt thys felowe in the preson house, Ꟶ fede hym wt breed of affliction Ꟶ water of trouble vntill I come agayne in peace.
And Michea sayde: yf thou come agayne in peace, then hath not the Lorde spoken to me. And he sayde: herken to, ye people euery one of you.
And so the kinge of Israel and Iehosaphat the kinge of Iuda went vp to Ramoth in Gilead.
And the kyng of Israel sayde vnto Iehosaphat: I must chaunge me, when I go to the batatyll: but se that thou haue thyne awne apparell vpon the. And the kynge of Israel chaunged hym selfe, and they came to battayll.
But the kyng of Siria had commaunded the captaynes of the charrettes that were with him, sayinge: se that ye fight not agaynst small or greate, saue agaynst the kynge of Israel onely.
And when the captaynes of the charettes sawe Iehosaphat, they sayde: it is the kynge of Israel, and therfore they compassed about hym to fyght. But Iehosaphat cryed out, Ꟶ the Lorde helped him, and God chased them awaye from hym.
For it came to passe that when the captaynes of the charretes perceaued that it was not the kyng of Israel, they turned backe agayne from him.
And a certayn man drewe a bowe with all hys myght, and smote the kyng of Israel betwene the ioyntes of his habergyn. And he sayd to hys charretman: turne thyne hande, that thou mayest cary me out of the hoost: for I am wounded.
And the battayll ceassed that daye. Howbeit the king of Israel caused his charet to stond still agaynst the Sirians vntyll euen. And about the tyme of the sunne going downe, he dyed.
And Iehosaphat the kynge of Iuda came home agayne in peace to Ierusalem.
And Iehu the sonne of Hanam the sear went out to mete hym, and sayde to kynge Iehosaphat: Woldest thou helpe the vngodly, and loue them that hate the Lorde? Therfore is wrath come downe vpon the, from before the Lorde.
Neuertheles, there are some good actes founde in the, in that thou hast hewen downe the groues out of the lande, and hast prepared thyne herte to seke God.
And so Iehosaphat dwelt at Ierusalem: Ꟶ turned Ꟶ went out to the people from Beerseba to mount Ephraim, Ꟶ brought them again vnto the Lord God of their fathers.
And he set iudges in the lande thorowout all the strong cityes of Iuda, citye by citye:
Ꟶ sayde to the iudges: take hede what ye do, for ye execute not the iudgmentes of man, but of God, which is wt you in the iudgement.
Wherfore nowe, let the feare of the Lorde be vpon you, and take hede, Ꟶ be doyng the thynge that pleaseth hym. For ther is no vnryghtewesnes wt the Lord oure God: that he shulde haue any respecte of persones, or take rewardes.
Moreouer, in Ierusalem dyd Iehosaphat set of the leuites, and of the prestes and of the auncient fathers ouer Israel, in the iudgement Ꟶ cause of the Lord. And they returned agayne to Ierusalem.
And he charged them saying: Thus shall ye do in the feare of the Lorde, wt the trueth Ꟶ a pure herte:
What cause soeuer come to you of your brethren that dwell in their cyties, betwene bloud Ꟶ bloud, betwene law and commaundment, betwene statutes Ꟶ ordynaunces, ye shall warne them, that they trespace not agaynst the Lorde, Ꟶ so wrath come vpon you Ꟶ on youre brethren. Thus do, Ꟶ ye shall not offende.
And behold, Amaria the hye prest is amonge you in all matters of the Lord, Ꟶ zebadia the sonne of Ismael, a ruler of the house of Iuda, he is ouer soch busynesses as concerne the kyng: there be offycers of the leuites also before you. Take courage to you therfore, and be doynge manfully: and the Lorde shalbe with soche as be good.
After thys also, it fortuned that the chyldren of Moab and the chyldren of Ammon, and wt them other of the Ammonites came agaynst: Iehosaphat to battayll.
And there came some that tolde Iehosaphat sayinge: there commeth a greate multitude agaynst the from the other syde of the see, Ꟶ out of Siria. And beholde, they be in Hasason Thamar, which is Engadi.
And Iehosaphat feared, and set him selfe to seke the Lord, and proclaymed fastyng thorowout all Iuda.
And they that were in Iuda, gathered them selues together, to aske councell of the Lord. And they came out of all the cityes of Iuda, to make intercessyon to the Lorde.
And Iehosaphat stode betwene the congregacion of Iuda and Ierusalem in the house of the Lorde before the newe courte,
and sayde: O Lorde God of our fathers, art not thou God in heuen, and raygnest not thou on all the kyngdomes of the Hethen? And in thyne hande is power and myght, and there is no man that is able to withstande the.
Art not thou oure God, which dydest cast out the inhabiters of thys lande before thy people Israel, and gauest it to the seede of Abraham thy louer for euer?
And they dwelt therin, and haue buylt the a temple therin for thy name, sayinge:
Yf euell come vpon vs, as the swerde of iudgement, pestilence or hongre: then, yf we stand before this house in thy presence, for thy name is in thys house, and crye vnto the in our tribulacyon, heare thou, and helpe.
And nowe behold, the chyldren of Ammon, and Moab, Ꟶ mount Seir, by whom thou woldest not let them of Israel go, when they came out of the lande of Egipte: but they departed from them, Ꟶ destroyed them not.
Se, howe they rewarde vs, to come for to cast vs out of thy possessyon, which thou hast geuen vs to inheret.
O our God, wylt thou not iudge them: for we haue no myght agaynst thys great companye that commeth agaynst vs. Nether wote we what to do: but oure eyes be vnto the.
And all Iuda stode before the Lorde wt their yongeones, theyr wyues Ꟶ theyr chyldren:
Ꟶ ther was Iehasiel the sonne of zacharia the sonne of Banaia the sonne of Ieiel the sonne of Mathania, a leuite of the sonnes of Asaph, and vpon hym came the sprete of the Lorde, euen in the myddes of the congregacion.
And he sayde: herken all Iuda, and ye enhabiters of Ierusalem, Ꟶ thou king Iehosaphat: Thus sayth the Lord vnto you: be not afrayd nor faynte herted by reason of thys greate multitude: for the battayll is not youres: but Gods.
Tomorow go ye downe agaynst them: for they come vp at ziz, Ꟶ ye shall finde them at the ende of the broke before the wildernes of Ieruel.
Ye shall not nede to fyght in thys battayll: but steppe forth Ꟶ stande, Ꟶ beholde the helpe of the Lorde which is with you: feare not, nor let youre hertes fayle you, O ye of Iuda and of Ierusalem. Tomorowe go out agaynst them: for the Lorde wylbe with you.
And Iehosaphat bowed hys face to the erth, and all Iuda and the enhabiters of Ierusalem fell before the Lorde worshippynge the Lorde.
And the leuites of the chyldren of the Cahathites and of the children of the Corahites stode vp, to prayse the Lorde God of Israel with a loude voyce on hye.
And whan they arose earlye in the mornynge, they gat them out vnto the wyldernesse of Thekoa. And as they went out, Iehosaphat stode and sayde: heare me, O Iuda, Ꟶ ye enhabiters of Ierusalem. Put your trust in the Lord your God, that ye maye be founde faythfull. Geue credence to hys prophetes, Ꟶ so shall ye prospere.
And he gaue the people councell, and set some to syng vnto the Lord, Ꟶ to prayse him in the bewtye of holynes, Ꟶ to go out before the army, as they went, and to saye: prayse the Lorde for hys mercy lasteth euer.
And what tyme as they beganne to laude Ꟶ prayse, then the Lorde stered vp certayne of the chyldren of Ammon and Moab, which layed wayte for them that were of mount Seir: which were come agaynst Iuda. And they were ouerthrowen with strokes amonge them selues. For the chyldren of Ammon and Moab rose against the enhabiters of mount Seir. And they slewe and destroyed them.
And whan they had made an ende of the enhabiters of Seir, euery one helped to destroye another amonge them selues.
And when Iuda came to the edge of the wildernes, they loked vnto the multitude. And beholde, they were deed carcasses fallen to the erth, Ꟶ none escaped.
And whan Iehosaphat and hys people came to take awaye the spoyle of them, they founde amonge them aboundaunce of goodes, rayment and pleasaunt Iewels, which they toke for them selues, more then they could cary awaye: so that they were thre dayes in gatherynge of the spoyle, it was so moch.
And the fourth daie they assembled in the valley of blessinge: for there they blessed the Lord: And therfore they called the name of the same place, the valeye of blessyng vnto thys daye.
And so all the men of Iuda Ꟶ Ierusalem returned with Iehosaphat theyr heade, for to go againe to Ierusalem with gladnesse: for the Lorde had made them to reioyse ouer theyr enemyes.
And they came to Ierusalem with psalteryes and harpes, Ꟶ shawmes, euen vnto the house of the Lorde.
And the feare of God fell in the kyngdomes of all landes, whan they had hearde that the Lorde fought agaynst the enemyes of Israel.
And so the realme of Iehosaphat was in tranquyllite: and hys God gaue hym rest on euery syde.
And Iehosaphat raygned vpon Iuda, Ꟶ was .xxxv. yere olde when he beganne to raygne, Ꟶ raygned .xxv. yere in Ierusalem. And his mothers name was Asuba the daughter of Silhi.
And he walked in the waye of Asa his father, Ꟶ bowed not therfrom, doynge that which was ryght in the syght of the Lorde:
Howbeit the hylaultars were nott taken awaye, for the people had not yet prepared theyr hertes vnto the God of theyr fathers.
The rest of the actes of Iehosaphat first Ꟶ last beholde, they are wrytten amonge the sayinges of Iehu the sonne of Hanam, which noted them in the boke of the kynges of Israel.
After this dyd Iehosaphat kyng of Iuda ioyne him selfe wt Ahaziahu kinge of Israel, whose mynde was to do wyckedly.
He coupled hym selfe with hym, to make shippes to go to tharsis, And they made the shyppes in Ezion Gaber.
And Elieser the sonne of Dodanah of Maresa prophesyed agaynst Iehosaphat, sayinge: because thou hast ioyned thy selfe with Ahaziahu, the Lorde hath broken thy workes. And the shippes were broken, that they were not able to go to Tharsis.
Iehosaphat also slepte wt hys fathers, and was buryd with his fathers in the citie of Dauid, Ꟶ Iehoram his sonne raygned in his steade:
and he had brethren which were the sonnes of Iehosaphat. Asaria, Iehiel, zacharia, Asaria, Michael, Ꟶ Sephatiahu. All these were the sonnes of Iehosaphat kynge of Iuda.
And their father gaue them many greate gyftes of golde, and syluer, and other speciall substaunce, wt stronge cityes in Iuda: but the kyngdome gaue he to Iehoram, for he was the eldest.
And Iehoram rose vp agaynst the kyngdome of his father, and preuayled, and slue all his brethren with the swerde, Ꟶ diuerse of the lordes of Israel.
Iehoram was .xxxij. yere olde whan he beganne to raygne, and he raygned eight yere in Ierusalem.
And he walked in the waye of the kinges of Israel, lyke as dyd the house of Ahab, for he had the daughter of Ahab to wyfe, Ꟶ he wrought euell in the eyes of the Lorde.
Howbeit, the Lord wolde nott destroye the house of Dauid, because of the couenaunt that he had made with Dauid, as he promysed to gyue a light to hym and to hys sonnes for euer.
In hys dayes the Edomites rebelled, whan they were vnder the dominyon of Iuda, and made them selues a kinge.
And Iehoram went forth wt his lordes, and all hys charettes were wt hym: Ꟶ he rose vp by nyght, Ꟶ smote that Edomites, which compased him in, Ꟶ the captaynes of the charettes.
But Edom rebelled styll, so that they wolde not be vnder the hande of Iuda vnto this daye. That same time also dyd Libna departe from beyng vnder his hande, because Iehoram had forsaken the Lorde God of his fathers.
Moreouer, he made hylaulters in the cyties of Iuda, and caused the enhabiters of Ierusalem to commyt fornycacyon, and prouoked Iuda to Idolatrye.
And there came a writynge to him from Elia the prophete, saying: Thus sayth the Lord God of Dauid thy father: because thou hast not walked in the wayes of Iehosaphat thy father, Ꟶ in the wayes of Asa kynge of Iuda,
but walkedst in the wayes of the kynges of Israel, Ꟶ hast made Iuda Ꟶ the dwellers of Ierusalem to go a whoring, lyke to the whordome of the house of Ahab, Ꟶ hast slayne thy brethren, euen thy fathers house, which were better then thou:
beholde, wt a greate plage wyll the Lorde smyte thy folke, thy children, thy wyues, and thy goodes.
And thou shalt suffre great payne: euen a dysease of thy bowelles, vntyll thy guttes fall out by reason of thy sycknes, daye by daye.
And so the Lorde stered vp agaynst Iehoram the sprete of the Philistines, Ꟶ the Arabians that were besyde the blacke mores.
And they came vp into Iuda, and wasted it, and caryed awaye all the substaunce that was found in the kynges house, and hys sonnes, and his wyues: so that there was neuer a sonne lefte him saue Iehohahaz which was the yongest amonge hys sonnes.
And after all these thynges, the Lorde smote him in his bowelles wt an incurable disease.
And it came to passe, that in processe of tyme, euen after the ende of two yeres, hys guttes fell out in his sycknes: and so he dyed of very euell diseases. And they made no burnynge for him lyke the burnyng of hys fathers.
When he beganne to raygne, he was .xxij. yeare olde, and raygned in Ierusalem .viij. yere, Ꟶ lyued wretchedly: howbeit they buryed hym in the citye of Dauid: but not among the sepulchres of the kynges.
And the enhabiters of Ierusalem made Ahaziahu hys yonge sonne kinge in hys steade. For the men of warre that came with the host of the Arabians, had slayne all hys eldest sonnes. And so Ahaziahu the sonne of Iehoram kynge of Iuda, was made kynge.
Two and fourtye yere olde was he, whan he began to raygne, and he raygned one yere in Ierusalem. Hys mothers name was Athaliahu the daughter of Amri.
And he walked also in the wayes of the house of Ahab, for hys mother (by her councell) entysed him to do wyckedly.
Wherfore he dyd that which was euell in the syght of the Lorde, as dyd they that were of the house of Ahab: for they were hys councelers after the deeth of his father, to his destruccyon. And he walked after theyr councell,
and went with Iehoram sonne of Ahab king of Israel, to fight agaynst Hazael king of Siria at Ramoth in Gilead: and the Sirians smote Ioram.
And he returned to be healed in Iezrel, of the woundes which were geuen him at Rama, when he fought wt Hazael kyng of Siria. And Ahaziahu the sonne of Iehoram kynge of Iuda went downe to se Iehoram the sonne of Ahab at Iezrel, because he was diseased.
And it cam of God, that Ahaziahu shulde be despysed for hys commynge to Iehoram: for whan he was come, he went out with Iehoram agaynst Iehu the sonne of Nimsi, whom the Lorde had anoynted to destroye the house of Ahab.
And so it came to passe that whan Iehu was executynge iustice vpon the house of Ahab, Ꟶ had founde the lordes of Iuda and the sonnes of the brethren of Ahaziahu that wayted on Ahaziahu, he slue them.
And he sought Ahaziahu, and they caught hym where he was hyd in Samaria, and brought him to Iehu. And when they had slayne hym, they buried hym: because (sayde they) he is the sonne of Iehosaphat, which sought the Lord with all hys hert. And the house of Ahaziahu had no power to kepe styll the kyngdome.
But when Athaliahu the mother of Ahaziahu sawe that her sonne was deed, she arose and destroyed all the kynges seed in the kynred of the house of Iuda.
And Iehosabeth the daughter of the kinge toke Ioas the sonne of Ahaziahu, Ꟶ stale hym from amonge the kynges sonnes that were slayne, and putt hym and hys nource in a preuye chambre. And so Iehosabeath the daughter of kinge Iehoram the wyfe of Iehoiada the prest, and the syster of Ahaziahu hyd hym from Athaliahu that he was not slayne.
And so he was wt them hyd in the house of God syxe yere. And Athaliahu raygned ouer the lande.
And in the seuenth yere Iehoiada beynge bolde, toke the captaynes of hundredes, Azariahu the sonne of Ieroham, and Ismael the sonne of Iehohanam, Azariahu the sonne of Obed, Maasiahu the sonne of Adaiahu, and Elisaphat the sonne of zichri, and made a bonde with them.
And they went aboute in Iuda, and gathered the Leuites out of all the cyties of Iuda and the auncyent fathers of Israel: and they came to Ierusalem.
And all the congregacyon made a bonde with the kynge in the house of God. And he sayd vnto them: beholde, the kynges sonne must raygne, as the Lorde hath sayde of the chyldren of Dauid.
This is it therfore that ye shall do: The thyrde parte of you shall (on the Sabbath) come to the preastes, Leuites, and kepers of the porches.
And another thyrde parte shalbe by the kynges house, and another thyrde parte shalbe at the gate of the foundacyon, and all the people shalbe in the courtes of the house of the Lorde.
But ther shall none come into the house of the Lorde, saue the preastes Ꟶ they that ministre vnto the Leuites. They shall go in, for they are holy: but all the people shall kepe the watch of the Lord.
And the Leuites shall compase the kynge rounde about and euery man shall haue hys wepon in hys hande: and what other man soeuer doth come into the house of the Lorde, he shall be slayne: and let them be with the kynge, whan he commeth in, and whan he goeth out.
And the Leuites and all Iuda dyd accordynge to all thynges that Iehoiada the preaste had commaunded, Ꟶ toke euery man hys men, that came in on the Sabboth, wt them that went out on the Sabboth daye: nether did Iehoiada the preast let the companies departe.
And Iehoiada the preast deliuered to the captaynes of hundredes, speares, shyldes, and boukelars, that had pertayned to kynge Dauid, and were in the house of God.
And he set all the people euery man hauyng his wepon in his hande, from the ryght syde of the temple, to the left syde of the temple, alonge by the aulter and the temple, rounde aboute the kynge.
And they brought out the kynges sonne, and put vpon him the crowne, and the testimonie, and made him kynge. And Iehoiada Ꟶ his sonnes annoynted him, Ꟶ sayde: God saue the kynge.
When Athaliahu hearde the noyse of the people, runninge Ꟶ praysinge the kynge, she came to the people into the house of the Lorde.
And she loked, and beholde, the kynge stode in his place at the enterynge in, Ꟶ the Lordes and the trompettes were by the kynge, Ꟶ all the people of the lande reioysed, blowinge wt trompettes, Ꟶ dyd playe with instrumentes of musycke, Ꟶ taught to synge Ꟶ prayse. But Athaliahu rent her clothes, and sayed: treason, treason.
And Iehoiada the preaste went out to the captaynes of hundredes that were gouerners of the hoste, Ꟶ sayde vnto them: haue her out without the dore of the temple: and whoso foloweth her, let hym be slayne with the swerde. For the preaste sayde that they shulde not sley her in the house of the Lorde.
And they layde handes on her, tyll she was come to the entrynge of the horsgate besyde the kynges house and there they slue her.
And Iehoiada made a bonde betwene hym and all the people and the kynge, that they shulde be the Lordes people.
And all the people went to the house of Baal, Ꟶ destroyed it, and brake hys aulters and his ymages, Ꟶ slue Mathan the preaste of Baal before the aulters.
And Iehoiada put the offyces for the house of the Lord vnder the hande of the preastes and Leuites, as Dauid had distrybuted them in the house of the Lorde, to offer burnt offerynges vnto the Lorde, as it is wrytten in the lawe of Moses, with reioysynge and syngynge, as it was ordeyned by Dauid.
And he set porters by the gates of the house of the Lorde, that none which was vncleane in any thynge shulde entre in.
And he toke the captaynes of hundredes Ꟶ all the nobles, and the gouernoures of the people, Ꟶ all the folke of the lande, and caused the kynge to come downe out of the house of the Lord, and they came thorowe the hye gate into the kynges house, and set the kynge vpon the seate of the kyngdome.
And all the people of the lande reioysed, and the cytie was in tranquillite, after that they had slayne Athaliahu with the swerde.
Ioas was seuen yere olde when he beganne to raygne, Ꟶ he raygned fourty yere in Ierusalem Hys mothers name also was zibia of Beer Seba.
And Ioas dyd that which was ryght in the syght of the Lorde all the dayes of Iehoiada the preaste.
And Iehoiada toke hym two wyues, and he begat sonnes and daughters.
And it chaunsed after this, that Ioas was mynded, to renewe the house of the Lord
and he gathered together the preastes Ꟶ the Leuites, and sayd to them: go out vnto the cyties of Iuda, Ꟶ gather of all Israell money, to repayre the house of youre God from yere to yere, and se that ye hast the thynge: howbeit the Leuites were slacke.
And the kyng called Iehoiada that was the chefest and sayd vnto hym. Why requirest thou not of the Leuites to brynge in, out of Iuda Ꟶ Ierusalem, the collection of money accordynge to the commaundement of Moses the seruaunt of the Lorde and the congregacion of Israel shulde offre it for the tabernacle of wytnesse.
For wycked Athaliahu and her chyldren brake vp the house of God, and all the thynges that were dedicat for the house of the Lorde dyd they bestowe for Bealim.
And at the kinges commaundement, they made a chest, Ꟶ set it without at the gate of the house of the Lorde
and made proclamacyon thorowe Iuda and Ierusalem, to bryng into the Lorde the taxacion of money, that Moses the seruaunt of God set vpon Israel in the wyldernesse.
And the Lordes and all the people reioysed, and brought in, and cast into the chest, vntill it was full.
And it fortuned, that at the same tyme they brought in the chest (vnto them which were in the kynges busynesse) by the hande of the Leuites. And when they sawe that there was moche money, the kynges scrybe (and one appoynted by the hye preast) came, and emptied the chest, and toke it, and caryed it to his place agayne: thus they dyd daye by daye, and gathered moche money.
And the kynge Ꟶ Iehoiada gaue it to soch as dyd the laboure and worke in the house of the Lorde, and hyred masons and carpenters to repayre the house of the Lorde, and so dyd they artificers in yron and brasse, to mende the house of the Lorde.
And so the worckmen wrought, and the worcke mended thorowe theyr handes: and they made the house of God as it ought to be, and strengthed it.
And when they had finisshed it, they brought the rest of the moneye before the kyng and Iehoiada, and ther with were made vessels for the house of the Lorde: euen vessels to ministre withall, and to serue for burnt offerynges: chargers and spones, vessels of golde and syluer. And they offered burntofferynges in the house of the Lorde continuallye all the dayes of Iehoiada.
But Iehoiada waxed olde, and dyed full of dayes. For an hundred Ꟶ thyrtye yere olde was he when he dyed.
And they buryed hym in the cytie of Dauid amonge the kynges, because he dealt well with Israel, and with God and with his house.
And after the deeth of Iehoiada, came the Lordes of Iuda, and made obeysaunce to the kynge. And the kynge herkened vnto them.
And so they lefte the house of the Lorde God of theyr fathers, Ꟶ serued groues and ydoles. And then came the wrath of God vpon Iuda and Ierusalem, for this theyr trespaces sake.
And he sent prophetes to them, to bryng them agayne vnto the Lorde. And they testifyed vnto them: But they wolde not heare.
And the spyrite of God came vpon zacharia the sonne of Iehoiada the preast, which stode by the people, Ꟶ sayde vnto them: Thus sayth God: why transgresse ye the commaundementes of the Lorde, that ye cannot prospere? For because ye haue forsaken the Lord, he also hath forsaken you.
And they conspyred agaynst him, and stoned him with stones at the commaundement of the kynge: euen in the courte of the house of the Lorde.
And so Ioas the kynge remembred not the kyndnes which Iehoiada hys father had done to him, but slue his sonne. And when he dyed, he sayd: the Lorde loke vpon it, and requyre it.
And when the yere was out, it fortuned, that the host of Syria came vp agaynst him: and they came agaynst Iuda Ꟶ Ierusalem, and destroyed all the Lordes of the people from among the people, Ꟶ sent all the spoyle of them vnto the kyng to Damasco
wt a small companye of men, Ꟶ the Lord deliuered a very great hoste into their hande, because they had forsaken the Lord God of theyr fathers. And morouer they serued Ioas according to his dedes.
And whan they were departed from him, they left him in great diseases Ꟶ hys awne seruauntes conspyred agaynst him for the bloude of the chyldren of Iehoiada the preaste, and slue hym on hys bed, and he dyed, Ꟶ they buryed him in the cytie of Dauid: but not in the sepulchres of the kynges.
And these are they that conspired agaynst him: zebad the sonne of Simeath an Ammonite, and Ihosabad the sonne of Simrith a Moabite.
And hys sonnes, and the summe of the taxe that was raysed in hys tyme, and the repayringe of the house of God, beholde, they are written in the storie of the boke of the kynges. And Amaziahu hys sonne raynged in hys steade.
Amaziahu was .xxv. yere olde, when he beganne to raynge, and he raynged .xxix. yere in Ierusalem. Hys mothers name was Iehodadan of Ierusalem.
And he dyd that which is ryght in the syght of the Lorde: but not with a perfecte hert.
And as sone as he was settled in the kyngdome, he slue hys seruauntes, that had kylled the king hys father.
But he slue not their children, because it is written thus in the law Ꟶ boke of Moses, where the Lorde commaunded, saying: the fathers shall not dye for the children, nether shall the chyldren dye for the fathers, but euery man shall dye for hys awne synne,
And Amaziahu gathered Iuda together, and made them captaynes ouer thousandes and ouer hundredes, accordynge to the houses of theyr fathers, thorowe out all Iuda and Beniamin. And he nombred them from twentye yere olde and aboue, and founde amonge them, thre hundred thousande chosen men, able to go to battell, and that coulde handle speare and shylde.
He hyred also an hundred thousande stronge fyghtynge men out of Israel, for an hundred talentes of syluer.
And there came a man of God to him, and sayde: O kynge, let not the armye of Israel come with the: for the Lorde is not with Israel, nether with all the house of Ephraim.
But yf thou wylt nedes be faythlesse, come on, and take the batell in hande, and God shall make the fall before the enemie. For God hath power to helpe, Ꟶ to cast downe.
And Amaziahu sayde to the man of God: what shall we do then, for the hundred talentes, which I haue geuen for the hoste of Israel? The man of God answered: the Lorde is able to geue the moche more then they be.
And Amaziahu seuered them to the armie that was come to him out of Ephraim, to go home agayne. Wherfore they were exceadynge wroth with Iuda, and returned home in greate angre.
And Amaziahu toke hert and caryed out hys people, and went to the salt valley, and smote of the chyldren of Seir ten thousande.
And other ten thousande dyd the chyldren of Iuda take alyue, and caryed them vnto the toppe of a rocke, and cast them downe from the toppe of the rocke, that they all to burst:
but the souldyers of the armye which Amaziahu sent awaye, that they shulde not go wt his people to battell, fell vpon the cyties of Iuda, from Samaria vnto Bethhoron, Ꟶ smote thre thousande of them, Ꟶ toke moche spoyle.
And it chaunced, after that Amaziahu was come from the slaughter of the Edomites, he brought the Gods of the chyldren of Seir, Ꟶ set them vp to be hys Gods, and bowed hym selfe before them: and burned encense vnto them.
Wherfore the Lorde was wroth with Amaziahu and sent vnto hym a prophete, whych sayd vnto hym: why hast thou sought the Gods of the people, which were not able to delyuer theyr awne people out of thyne hande?
And it chaunced, that as the prophete talked with hym the kynge sayde vnto hym: haue men made the of the kynges councell? cease, why wylt thou be beaton? And the prophete ceased and sayde: I am sure that God is mynded to destroye the, because thou hast done this, and agreest not vnto my councell.
Then Amaziahu kynge of Iuda toke aduise, and sent to Ioas the sonne of Ichoahaz the sonne of Iehu kyng of Israel, Ꟶ sayde come, that we maye se ether other.
And Ioas kynge of Israel sent to Amaziahu kynge of Iuda, sayinge: a thystell that is in Libanon, sent to a Cedar tree of Libanon, saying, geue thy daughter to my sonne to wyfe. And there came a wylde beast of Libanon, Ꟶ troad downe the thystell.
Thou sayest that thou hast beaten the Edomites, and thyne hert maketh the proude, to glorify thy selfe. Nowe therfore byde at home: why dost thou prouoke vnto euell, that thou mayest perisshe, both thou and Iuda with the?
But Amaziahu wolde not herken to him: for it came of God, euen to deliuer them into the hande of theyr enemyes because they sought councell at the Gods of Edom.
And so Ioas the kynge of Israel came vp: and they sawe ether other, both he and Amaziahu kynge of Iuda at Bethsames which is in Iuda.
And Iuda was put to the worse before Israel, and they fled euery man to his tent.
And Ioas the kynge of Israel toke Amaziahu kyng of Iuda the sonne of Ioahas the sonne of Iehoahas at Bethsames: and brought hym to Ierusalem, Ꟶ tare the walle of Ierusalem (from the gate of Ephraim vnto the gate that was ouer agaynst it) foure hundred cubytes.
And he toke awaye also all the golde and syiner, and all the Iewelles that were founde in the house of God with Obed Edom, and the treasures of the kynges house, Ꟶ the yonge wardes, and returned to Samaria.
And Amaziahu the sonne of Ioas kynge of Iuda lyued after the deeth of Ioas sonne of Iehoahaz king of Israel fiftene yere.
The rest of the actes of Amaziahu fyrst and last, are they not written in the boke of the kynges of Iuda and Israel?
And after the tyme that Amaziahu dyd turne awaye from the Lorde they conspired treason agaynst him in Ierusalem: and whan he was fled to Lachis, they sent to Lachis after hym, and slue hym there:
and brought hym vp with horsses, and buryed hym with hys fathers in the cytie of Iuda.
Then all the people of Iuda toke Uzia (which was syxtene yere olde) and made hym kynge in the rowme of hys father Amaziahu.
And he buylt Eloth, and brought it agayne to Iuda, after that the kynge was layd to slepe with hys fathers.
Syxtene yere olde was Uzia, when he began to raygne, and he raygned .lii. yere in Ierusalem. Hys mothers name also was Ieeholia of Ierusalem.
And he did that which was right in the syght of the Lorde, accordynge to all, as dyd hys father Amaziahu.
And it came to passe, that he sought God in the dayes of zachariahu (which mayntened the feare of God) Ꟶ as longe as he sought the Lorde, God made hym to prospere.
And he went to batell agaynst the Philistines, and brake downe the wall of Geth, Ꟶ the wall of Iabne, and the wall of Asdob, Ꟶ buylt cyties about Asdod Ꟶ among the Philistines.
And God holpe him against the Philistines, and agaynst the Arabiens that dwelt in Gurbaal and Hammehunim.
And the Ammonites gaue tribute to Uzia, and his name spredde abroade euen to the entryng in of Egypte: for he played the man exceadingly.
Moreouer Uzia buylt towres in Ierusalem by the corner gate, Ꟶ by the valeye gate, and at the turninge of the wall, and made them stronge.
And he buylt towres in the wyldernesse, and digged many welles: For he had moche catell, in the valeys and playnes, plowmen and vynedressers in the mountaynes and in Charmel, for he loued husbandrye:
And Uzia had an host of fyghtynge men that went out to warre in the armye accordynge to the nombre of theyr office vnder the hande of Ieiel the scrybe Ꟶ Maasiahu the ruler, Ꟶ vnder the hande of Hananiahu which was one of the kynges Lordes.
And the hoale nombre of the auncient fathers, Ꟶ of the men of myght were two thousande and syxe hundred:
Ꟶ vnder the hande of them was the armye of the men of warre, euen thre hundred and seuen thousande, Ꟶ fyue hundred that made warre with the power of an armye, helpyng the kynge against the enemies.
And Uzia prouided them thorowe out all the host, shildes, speares, helmettes, haberginnes, bowes and slynges for to cast stones.
And he made sotle engynnes in Ierusalem, which he inuented Ꟶ layed on the towres and corners, to shote arowes and greate stones with all. And his name spredd farre abroad, because he was helped so excellently, so that he became very mighty.
But in his strength, his hert arose to hys destruction: For he transgressed agaynst the Lorde hys God, Ꟶ went into the temple of the Lorde, to burne cense vpon the alter of incense.
And Asariahu the preaste went in after him, and with him foure skore preastes of the Lorde that were valeaunt men.
And they stode by Uzia the kynge, and sayde vnto hym: it pertayneth not to the Uzia to burne incense vnto the Lorde, but to the preastes the chyldren of Aaron, that are consecrate for to offre incense. Come therfore out of the sanctuarye for thou hast trespaced, and it is no worshyp to the before the Lorde God.
And Uzia was wroth, Ꟶ had incense in his hande to burne it: Ꟶ so whyle he had indignacyon agaynst the preastes, the leprosye sprange in his foreheed before the preastes in the house of the Lorde, euen besyde the incense aulter.
And Asariahu the chefe preaste with all the other preastes loked vpon him: and beholde, he was become a leper in his foreheed, Ꟶ they vexed him thence. And he was fayne to go out, because the Lorde had smitten hym.
And Uzia the kynge contynued a lepre vnto the daye of hys deeth, and dwelt seuerall in an house beynge a leper and shutte out of the house of the Lorde. And Iotham hys sonne had the gouernaunce of the kynges house, and iudged the people of the lande.
The rest of the actes of Uzia fyrst Ꟶ last, dyd Isai the prophete the sonne of Amos, wryte
And so Uzia slepte with hys fathers, and they buryed him with his fathers in the felde of the buryall which was besyde the sepulchres of the kinges. For they sayde: he is a leper. And Ioatham hys sonne raygned in hys steade.
Iotham was fyue and twenty yere olde, when he beganne to raygne, and raygned syxtene yere in Ierusalem. Hys mothers name also was Ierusa the daughter of zadoc.
And he dyd that which was ryght in the syght of the Lorde in all poyntes as dyd hys father Uzia saue, that he came not into the temple of the Lorde, and the people dyd yet wyckedly.
He buylt the hye gate of the temple of the Lorde, and on the walle (where the house of ordinaunce was) he buylte moche.
Moreouer he buylt cyties in the mountaynes of Iuda, and in the wood countreye he buylt castelles and towres.
He fought with the kynge of the chyldren of Ammon, and preuayled agaynst them. And the chyldren of Ammon gaue hym the same yere an hundred talentes of syluer, and ten thousande quarters of wheate, Ꟶ ten thousand of barleye. So moche dyd the chyldren of Ammon geue hym the seconde yere and the thyrd also.
So Iotham became myghtie, because he directed hys waye before the Lorde his God.
The rest of the actes of Iotham Ꟶ all hys warres, Ꟶ his conuersacyon, lo, they are written in the boke of the kynges of Israel and Iuda.
He was .xxv. yere olde when he beganne to raygne, Ꟶ raygned syxtene yere in Ierusalem.
And Iotham slepte with his fathers, and they buryed hym in the cytie of Dauid: Ꟶ Ahaz hys sonne raygned in hys steade.
Ahaz was twenty yere old when he beganne to raygne, Ꟶ raygned syxtene yere in Ierusalem, and he dyd not that which is ryght in the syght of the Lorde, as dyd his father Dauid:
For he walked in the wayes of the kynges of Israel, Ꟶ made molten ymages for Baalim.
He offered incense in the valeye of the sonne of Hinnom, and burnt hys chyldren in fyre after the abominacions of the Heithen, whom the Lord cast out before the chyldren of Israel.
He offered also, and burnt incense in hilaulters and on mountayns and vnder euery grene tre.
Wherfore the Lorde his God delyuered him into the hande of the kynge of the Siriens: which bet him, Ꟶ caried awaye a great multitude of hys captiue, and brought them to Damascon. And he was delyuered into the hande of the kynge of Israel, which smote him with a greate slaughter.
For Pekah the sonne of Remaliahu slue in Iuda an hundred Ꟶ twentye thousande in one daye, which were all fyghtinge men: and that because they had forsaken the Lorde God of theyr fathers.
And zichria mightye man of Ephraim slue Maasiahu the kynges sonne, Ꟶ Africa the gouernour of the house, and Elcana that was next to the kynge.
And the children of Israel toke prisoners of theyr brethren, two hundred thousande wemen, sonnes, Ꟶ daughters, Ꟶ caryed awaye moche spoyle of them, Ꟶ brought the spoyle to Samaria.
But there was a prophete of the Lordes (whose name was Obed) and he went out before the host that came to Samaria, Ꟶ sayde vnto them. Beholde, because the Lorde God of youre fathers is wroth wt Iuda, he hath delyuered them into youre hande. And ye haue slayne them with cruelnesse, that reacheth vp to heauen.
And nowe ye purpose to kepe vnder the chyldren of Iuda and Ierusalem, and to make them bondmen and bondwemen. And do ye not lade youre selues with synne in the syght of the Lorde youre God?
Nowe heare me therfore, and delyuer the captyues agayne which ye haue taken of youre brethren. for els shall the great wrath of God be vpon you.
Wherfore, certayne of the heedes of the chyldren of Ephraim, as Asaria the sonne of Iehohanan. Berechiahu the sonne of Mesillemoth, and Iehezkiahu the sonne of Sallum, and Amasa the sonne of Hadlai, stode vp agaynst them that came from the warre,
and sayde vnto them: bringe not in the captiues hyther. For where as we haue offended towarde God allreadye, ye entende to adde more to our synnes Ꟶ trespace. For our trespace is great allready, and there is a fearce wrath agaynst Israel.
And vpon that, the men of armes lefte the captiues and the spoyle before the Lordes and all the congregacyon.
And the men that were nowe rehearsed by name, rose vp, and toke the prisoners, Ꟶ with the spoyle clothed all that were naked amonge them, and arayed them, Ꟶ shoed them, Ꟶ gaue them to eate and to drinke, Ꟶ anoynted them, and caryed all that were feble of them vpon asses, Ꟶ brought them to Iericho (the cytie of Paulme trees) to theyr brethren: Ꟶ then they returned to Samaria agayne.
At that same tyme dyd kyng Ahaz send vnto the kynges of Assur, to haue helpe of them.
And the Edomites came agayne, and slue some of Iuda, and caryed awaye captyues.
And the Philistines inuaded the cities in the lowe countrey, and towarde the south of Iuda: Ꟶ toke Bethsames, Ꟶ Aialon, and Gederoth, and Socho with the townes longynge therto, and Thimna with the townes of the same: Gimso, and the townes therof, and dwelt there.
For the Lord brought Iuda lowe, because of Ahaz kynge of Iuda, which made Iuda naked, Ꟶ transgressed sore against the Lorde.
And Thilgath pilneser kynge of the Assyrians came vpon him, and troubled him rather then strengthed hym.
For Ahaz toke awaye a porcion out of the house of the Lorde, and out of the kynges house, Ꟶ out of the Lordes houses, Ꟶ gaue vnto the kynge of the Assyrians: and yet it helped him not.
And in the very tyme of hys tribulacion dyd kyng Ahaz trespace yet moare agaynst the Lord.
For he offered vnto the Gods of them of Damasco, which bette hym, Ꟶ he sayd: because the Gods of the kynges of Syria healpe them, therfore wyll I offer to them, that they maye helpe me also. But they were his destruccyon, and the destruccion of all Israel.
And Ahaz gathered together the vessels of the house of God, and brake them, and shut vp the dores of the house of the Lord, and made him aulters in euery corner of Ierusalem.
And in all the cities of Iuda he made hyllaulters, to burne incense vnto other Gods, Ꟶ angred the Lorde God of his fathers.
The rest of hys actes and hys workes fyrst and last: beholde, they are written in the boke of the kynges of Iuda Ꟶ Israel.
And Ahaz slepte with hys fathers, Ꟶ they buryed hym in the cytie of Ierusalem: but brought hym not vnto the sepulchres of the kynges of Israel. And Hezekia his sonne raygned in hys steade.
Hezekia beganne to raygne, when he was fyue Ꟶ twenty yere olde, Ꟶ raygned nyne Ꟶ twenty yere in Ierusalem. And his mothers name was Abia the daughter of zachariahu.
And he dyd that which was ryght in the syght of the Lorde, in all poyntes as dyd Dauid hys father.
He opened the dores of the house of the Lorde (in the fyrst yere and fyrst moneth of hys raygne) and repayred them.
And he brought in the preastes and the Leuites, and gathered them together in to the eest strete:
and sayde vnto them. Heare me ye Leuites, Ꟶ now be sanctifyed and halowe the house of the Lorde God of youre fathers, brynge fylthinesse out of the holy place.
For oure fathers haue trespaced, and done euell in the eyes of the Lorde oure God: and haue forsaken him, Ꟶ turned awaye theyr faces from the habitacion of the Lorde, and turned theyr backes on it.
And besyde that they haue shut vp the dores of the porche and quenched the lampes, Ꟶ haue nether burnt incense, nor offered burnt offeringes in the holy place vnto the God of Israel.
Wherfore the wrath of the Lorde fell on Iuda and Ierusalem: Ꟶ he hath brought them to trouble, to be wondred on, and to be hissed at, euen as ye se with youre eyes.
For, lo, oure fathers were ouerthrowen with the swerde, and oure sonnes, oure daughters Ꟶ oure wyues were caryed awaye captiue for the same cause.
And nowe it is in my hert, to make a couenaunt with the Lorde God of Israel: that he maye turne awaye his heuye indignacyon from vs.
Nowe therfore my sonnes, be not neclygent: for the Lorde hath chosen you to stande before him, and for to ministre and serue hym, and to burne incense.
Then the Leuites arose: Mahath the sonne of Amasai, Ꟶ Ioel the sonne of Asariahu of the chyldren of the Cahathites. And of the sonnes of Merari, Kis the sonne of Addi, and Asariahu the sonne of Iehalelel. And of the sonnes of the Gersonites, Ioah the sonne of Simma, and Eden the sonne of Ioah.
And of the sonnes of Elizaphan, Simri Ꟶ Iehiel. And of the sonnes of Asaph, zechariahu and Mathaniahu.
And of the sonnes of Heman, Iehiel Ꟶ Simei. And of the sonnes of Ieduthun Semaia and Uziel.
And they gathered their brethren, Ꟶ purifyed them selues, Ꟶ came accordynge to the commaundement of the kynge and the wordes of the Lorde, for to clense the house of the Lorde.
And the preastes went into the ynner partes of the house of the Lord to clense it, and brought out all the vnclennesse that they founde in the temple of the Lorde into the court of the house of the Lorde. And the Leuites toke it, to carye it out into the broke Cedron.
They beganne the fyrst daye of the fyrst moneth to purifye, and the eyght daye of the monethe came they to the porche of the Lorde: and purged the house of the Lorde in eyght dayes, and in the syxtene daye of the fyrst moneth they made an ende.
And they went into Hezekia the kynge, Ꟶ sayde: we haue clensed all the house of the Lord, the aulter of burntofferinge, with all his vessels, Ꟶ the shewbreed table with all his apparell:
and all the vessels which kyng Ahaz did cast a syde when he raygned Ꟶ transgressed, them we haue prepared and sanctifyed: and beholde, they are before the aulter of the Lord.
And Hezekia the kynge rose earlye, Ꟶ gathered the Lordes of the cytie and went vp to the house of the Lorde.
And they brought seuen oxen, seuen rammes, seuen shepe, and seuen hegoates, to be a synne offeryng for the kyngdome, for the sanctuarie, Ꟶ for Iuda. And he commaunded the preastes the sonnes of Aaron, to offer them on the aulter of the Lorde.
And they slue the oxen, Ꟶ the preastes receaued the bloude, Ꟶ sprinkled it on the aulter: lyke wyse, whan they had slayne the rammes, they sprinkled the bloude vpon the aulter: they slue also the shepe, Ꟶ they sprinkled the bloud vpon the aulter.
And then they brought forth the hegoates for the synne offerynge before the kynge and the congregacyon, Ꟶ put theyr handes vpon them.
And the preastes slue them, and with the bloude of them they clensed the aulter, to make satisfaccion for all Israel: for the kynge commaunded, that the burnt offerynge and the synne offering shulde be made for all Israel.
And set the Leuites in the house of the Lorde with symbales, psalteries and harpes accordynge to the commaundement of Dauid and of Gad the kynges sear, and Nathan the prophete. For so was the commaundment of the Lorde thorowe the hande of his prophetes.
And the Leuites stode, hauynge the instrumentes of Dauid, and the preastes helde the trompettes.
And Hezekia commaunded to offer the burntofferynge vpon the aulter. And when the burntoffering beganne, the songe of the Lorde beganne also, Ꟶ the trompettes wt the instrumentes that were ordeyned by the hande of Dauid kynge of Israel.
And all the congregacion worshypped, synginge a song, and blowinge with the trompets, Ꟶ all thys continued, vntyll the burnt offerynge was fynysshed.
And when they had made an ende of offerynge, the kynge and all that were present wt hym. bowed them selues, Ꟶ worshypped.
And Hezekia the kynge Ꟶ the Lordes spake to the Leuites to prayse the Lorde with the wordes of Dauid, Ꟶ of Asaph the sear. And the Leuites sange prayses with gladnesse, and the other bowed them selues, and worshypped.
And Hezekia answered, Ꟶ sayde: nowe ye haue consecrate youre handes to the Lord: go to therfore, Ꟶ bringe in the sacrifices Ꟶ thankofferynges into the house of the Lorde. And the congregacyon brought in the sacrifyces Ꟶ thanke offerynges Ꟶ burntofferinges, as many as were of a fre liberall hart.
And the nombre of the burntofferinges which the congregacion brought, was .lxx. oxen, an hundred rammes, Ꟶ two hundred shepe: which were, all for the burnt offeringe of the Lorde.
And ther were dedicated syxe hundred oxen, and thre thousande shepe.
And the preastes were to fewe, to fleye all the burnt offeringes: but their brethren the Leuites dyd helpe them, till they had ended the worke, and vntyll the preastes were sanctifyed. For the Leuites were purer herted to be sanctifyed then the preastes.
And therto the burnt offerynges were many with the fatte of the peace offeringes Ꟶ the drinke offerynges that be longe to the burnt offerynge. And so the seruice pertayninge to the house of the Lorde was fynisshed.
And Hezekia reioysed Ꟶ all the people, that God had made the folcke so readye: and that the thynge was so soone done.
And Hezekia sent to all Israell and Iuda, and wrote letters to Ephraim Ꟶ Manasse, that they shulde come to the house of the Lorde at Ierusalem, and offer Passeouer vnto the Lord God of Israel.
And the kynge helde a councell with his Lordes and all the congregacion of Ierusalem to kepe the feast of Passeouer in the seconde moneth.
For they coulde not kepe it at that tyme: because the prestes were not sanctifyed sufficiently, nether was the people gathered together to Ierusalem.
And the thynge pleased the kynge and al the congregacion.
And they decreed that it shulde be proclaymed thorowe out all Israel from Bersabe to Dan, that they shulde come, Ꟶ holde the feast of Passeouer vnto the Lord God of Israel at Ierusalem: for they had not done it of a greate season as they shuld haue done by the lawe.
So the postes wente with letters of the hande of the kyng, Ꟶ of his Lordes thorowe out all Israell and Iuda: Ꟶ at the commaundement of the kynge they sayd: Ye children of Israel, turne agayne vnto the Lord God of Abraham, Isahac Ꟶ Israel, and let euery one returne to the remnaunt that are escaped you out of the hande of the kynges of Assur.
And be not ye lyke your fathers, Ꟶ your brethren which trespaced agaynst the Lorde God of theyr fathers, which gaue them vp to be destroyed, as ye se.
And nowe be not ye stiffenecked, lyke as were your fathers, but yelde your selues vnto the Lorde, Ꟶ entre into his holy place, which he hath sanctified for euer and serue the Lorde your God, Ꟶ the fearcenesse of his wrath shal turne awaye from you.
For yf ye turne agayne vnto the Lord, then shall your brethren and your children fynde compassion in the presence of them that toke them captyue, and they shall come agayne vnto this land: for the Lord your God is gracious Ꟶ mercyfull and wil not turne awaye his face from you, yf ye conuerte vnto hym.
And so the postes went from cytie to cytie in the lande of Ephraim Ꟶ Manasse, euen vnto zabulon. But they laughed them to skorne Ꟶ mocked them.
Neuerthelesse, yet dyuerse of Asser, Manasse and of zabulon submytted them selues, and came to Ierusalem.
And the hande of God was in Iuda, so that he gaue them one hert, to do the commaundement of the kyng and of the rulers, accordyng to the worde of the Lorde.
And there assembled to Ierusalem moch people, and there was present a myghtye great congregacion, to holde the feast of swete bread in the second moneth.
And they arose, Ꟶ remoued the aulters that were in Ierusalem. And all the vessels of incense dyd they awaye, and cast them into the broke Cedron.
And they slue Passeouer the fourtenth daye of the second moneth. And the preastes and Leuites. which were ashamed, sanctifyed them selues, and brought in the burnt offerynges into the house of the Lorde.
And they stode in theyr offyce after theyr maner, and accordynge to the lawe of Moses the man of God. And the preastes sprinkled the bloude, which they receaued of the hande of the Leuites.
For there were many in the congregacion, that were not sanctifyed: Ꟶ the Leuites dyd sley Passeouer for al that were not cleane, Ꟶ that myght not execute the holy worke of the Lorde.
For many of the people, and very many: out of Ephraim, Manasse, Isakar and zabulon were not cleansed, Ꟶ yet dyd eate Passeouer agaynst the lawe apoynted. Wherfore Hezekia prayed for them, and sayd: the good Lorde
be mercyful vnto them: For he set hys whole hert, to seke the Lorde God euen the God of his fathers: but all the other dyd not so accordyng to vnfayned holynesse.
And the Lorde hearde Hezekia, and healed the people.
And the chyldren of Israel that were present at Ierusalem, helde the feast of swete bread seuen dayes with great gladnesse, and the Leuites and the preastes praysed, and magnifyed the power of the Lorde daye by daye, vpon instrumentes.
And Hezekia spake hertely vnto all the Leuites that had vnderstandyng and were of a good mynde toward the Lorde. And they dyd eate thorowe out that feast, seuen dayes longe, Ꟶ offered peaceofferynges, Ꟶ thanked the Lorde God of theyr fathers.
And the hole assemble toke councell, to do so other seuen dayes, and they helde those seuen dayes with gladnesse.
For Hezekia kinge of Iuda toke out (from amonge his catel) for the congregacion, a thousande yonge oxen, and seuen thousande shepe. And the Lordes gaue out to the congregacion a thousande yonge oxen, and ten thousande shepe. And a greate nombre of the preasts were sanctifyed.
And all the congregacyon of Iuda wyth the preastes Ꟶ Leuites, Ꟶ al the congregacion that came out of Israel, and the straungers that came out of the lande of Israel, and that dwelt in Iuda, reioysed:
Ꟶ there was great gladnesse in Ierusalem. For sence the tyme of Salomon the sonne of Dauid kynge of Israel there was no soche ioye in Ierusalem.
And the preastes and the Leuites arose, and blessed the people, and theyr voyce was hearde of the Lord, and theyr prayer came vp vnto heauen, his holy dwellynge place.
And when all these thynges were fynysshed, all they of Israel that were present in the cyties of Iuda, went out and brake the ymages, and cut downe the Idoles groues, Ꟶ al to brake the hye places, and aulters, thorow out all Iuda and Beniamin, in Ephraim also and Manasse, vntyll they had vtterly destroyed them al. And all the children of Israel returned euery man to his possessions Ꟶ to their awne cyties.
And Hezekia appoynted sondrye companies of the preastes and Leuites after the dyuersyte of their ministracions, euery man accordynge to his office: both preastes and Leuites, for the burntofferinge Ꟶ peace offeringes, to ministre, Ꟶ to geue thankes Ꟶ prayse in the gates of the host of the Lord.
And the kynges porcion of his substaunce that he gaue, were dayly burntofferinges in themorning and euening, Ꟶ burntofferinges for the Saboth dayes, newmones, Ꟶ solempne feastes, accordynge as it is written in the lawe of the Lorde.
And he bade the people that dwelt in Ierusalem, geue the parte to the preastes Ꟶ Leuites, that they might substauncially applye them selues to the lawe of the Lord.
And as sone as the kynges commaundement came abroad, the children of Israel brought aboundaunce of first frutes, of corne, wyne, oyle, honye, Ꟶ of all maner of frutes of the felde, Ꟶ the tythes of all maner of thynges brought they in plenteously.
And the chyldren of Israel and Iuda that dwelt in the cyties of Iuda, they also brought in the tythes of oxen and shepe, and other holy tythes which were consecrate vnto the Lorde theyr God, they dyd offre, and brought them all by heapes.
In the thyrd moneth they beganne to laye the heapes (in maner of a foundacion) and finisshed them in the seuenth moneth.
And when Hezekia and the Lordes came and sawe the heapes, they blessed the Lorde Ꟶ his people Israel.
And Hezekia questioned with the preastes Ꟶ the Leuites concernyng the heapes.
And Azaria the chefe preaste of the house of zadock, answered him, Ꟶ sayde: sense the people beganne to bryng the heaue offerynges into the house of the Lord, we also haue had ynough to eate, there remayned so moch: for the Lorde hath blessed his people and this heape is left.
And Hezekia bad prepare the chambres in the house of the Lord. And they dyd prepare them,
Ꟶ caryed in the first frutes, the tythes, and the dedicat thynges, faythfully. Ouer which Chonaniahu the Leuite had the rule, and Semei his brother next to him.
And Iehiel, Asaziahu, Nahath, Asael, Ierimoth, Iosabad, Eliel, Iesmachiahu, Mahath Ꟶ Banaiahu were ouer sears ordeyned by Chonaniahu, Ꟶ Semei his brother was an offycer of Hezekia the kyng, and Azaria was the ruler of the house of God.
And Chore the sonne of Imna the Leuite and porter of the East dore, had the ouersyght of the thinges that were offred of a frewill vnto God (and were geuen in maner seuerally vnto the Lorde) and ouer the thynges most holy.
And vnder his hand were Eden, Miniamin, Iesua, Semeiahu, Amariahu, and Sechaniahu in the cities of the preastes appoynted of theyr fydelyte to geue to their brethren theyr porcions, as wel to the small as to the greate.
Except that to the males that were reckened from thre yere Ꟶ aboue (amonge al that went into the house of the Lord) they shuld geue daye by daye, for theyr ministracion, Ꟶ for theyr geuyng attendaunce, Ꟶ for their diuerse waytinges by course.
And to the preastes Ꟶ Leuites thorowe out the housholde of theyr fathers, from twentye yere Ꟶ aboue to wayte when their courses came.
And to the families of all their babes, wyues, sonnes Ꟶ daughters thorowe all the congregacion. For vpon the fydelyte of them were the holy thynges bestowed.
And to the chyldren of Aaron, the preastes, whych were in the feldes Ꟶ suburbes of their cyties, cytie by cytie the men (whose names were expressed afore) shulde geue porcions, euen to all the males amonge the preastes, and to all the Leuites accordynge to theyr nombre.
And of thys maner dyd Hezekia thorowe out all Iuda, Ꟶ wrought it that is good, and ryght and true, before the Lorde hys God.
And in all the worckes that he beganne for the seruice of the house of God, for the lawe, and for the commaundementes, he sought his God, Ꟶ that dyd he with all his hert, Ꟶ prospered.
After that these deades were faythfully done Sennacherib kynge of Assur came, Ꟶ entred into Iuda, Ꟶ compased the stronge cyties, and thought to winne them for him selfe.
And so when Hezekia sawe that Sennacherib was come, Ꟶ that he was purposed to fyght agaynst Ierusalem,
he toke councel with his Lordes, and men of myght to stop the water of the fountaynes without the cytie: Ꟶ they dyd helpe him.
For ther gathered many of the people together, Ꟶ stopte al the welles, and the broke that ranne thorow the myddes of the lande, sayenge: why shall the kynges of Assur come, and fynde moch water?
And Hezekia went to lustelye, and built vp all the wal where it was broken, Ꟶ made ordinaunce vpon the towres and to the other wall without, and repayred Myllo in the cytie of Dauid, and made many dartes and shyldes.
And he sett captaynes of warre ouer the people, and gathered them together to hym in the large strete of the gate of the cytie, and spake ientely to them, saying:
Plucke vp yor hertes, and be strong: Be not afraied ner discouraged for the kyng of Assur, and for all the multitude that he hath with him: for there be moo with vs then with him.
With him is an arme of flesh. But with vs is the Lorde oure God, for to helpe vs, and to fyght oure batayles. And the people toke a courage thorow the wordes of Hezekia kyng of Iuda.
After thys dyd Sennacherib kynge of Assur send of hys seruauntes to Ierusalem, (but he hym selfe remayned besyde Lachis: hauyng all his power with him) vnto Hezekia kyng of Iuda and vnto all Iuda that were at Ierusalem, sayenge:
Thus sayeth Sennacherib kyng of Assur: wherin do ye trust, O ye that dwell in Ierusalem which is beseged?
Doth not Hezekia entyce you to geue ouer youre selues vnto deeth, hongre, and thurst, sayeng: the Lorde our God shall ridd vs oute of the hande of the kynge of Assur?
Hath not the same Hezekia put downe hys hye places and hys aulters, and commaunded Iuda and Ierusalem, sayinge: Ye shall worshyppe before one aulter, and burne incense vpon the same?
Know ye not, what I and my fathers haue done vnto the people of all landes? were the Gods of the people of otherlandes able or mighty to saue their landes out of my hand?
which of all the Gods of those nacions (that my fathers destroyed) coulde delyuer hys people out of myne hand? And shall yor God be able to delyuer you out of myne hande?
Wherfore, nowe lett not Hezekia deceaue you, ner persuade you of this facion, nor yet beleue him. For as no God among all nacions and kingdomes, was able to rydde hys people out of my hande and out the hande of my fathers: How moch lesse shall your goddes be able to kepe you out of myne hand?
And yet mo thinges dyd his seruauntes speake against the Lord God, and agaynst his seruaunt Hezekia.
And (Sennacherib) also wrote a letter, to rayle on the Lord God of Israell, Ꟶ spake agaynst him, sayinge: as the Gods of the nacyons of other landes haue not bene able to delyuer their people out of myne hande. Euen so shal not the God of Hezekia delyuer hys people out of myne hand.
And they cryed wt a loude voyce in the Iewes speach vnto the people of Ierusalem that were on the wall, to feare them and to make them faynt harted, Ꟶ that they might so take the cyte.
And they spake against the God of Ierusalem, as against the Gods of the nacyons of the earth, which were the worckes of the handes of men.
But Hezekia the kynge, and the prophet Isai the sonne of Amoz prayed agaynst that blasphemy, and cryed vp to heauen.
And the Lord sent an angell, which destroyed all the men of warre and the Lordes and captaynes of the hoost of the kyng of Assur, that he turned his face agayne wt shame toward hys awne land. And when he was come into the house of his God, they that came of hys awne body, slue hym there with the sweard.
And so the Lord saued Hezekia and the inhabiters of Ierusalem out of the hand of Sennacherib king of Assur, and from the hand of all other, and mayntened them on euery syde.
And many brought offerynges vnto the Lord to Ierusalem, and presentes to Hezekia king of Iuda: so that he was magnifyed in the syght of all nacions from thence forth.
In those dayes Hezekia was sycke vnto the death, Ꟶ prayed vnto the Lord, which answered him, Ꟶ shewed hym a wonderfull miracle.
But Hezekia dyd not agayne vnto God acording to it that he had shewed hym, for his hert arose: Ꟶ there came wrath vpon him and vpon Iuda Ꟶ Ierusalem.
Notwithstanding Hezekia submitted hym self (after that hys hert was rysen vp) he, Ꟶ the inhabyters of Ierusalem: and the wrath of the Lord came not vpon them in the dayes of Hezekia.
And Hezekia had exceadynge moche ryches and honour. And he gat hym treasures of syluer and golde, precious stones, and spices, shyldes, and of all maner pleasaunt Iuelles:
and made store houses for the frutes of corne, for wyne and oyle: and stalles for all maner of beastes, and foldes for shepe.
And he made him cyties, and had of shepe and oxen great aboundance. For God had geuen him substaunce exceadinge moch.
This same Hezekia stopped the vpper water sprynges of Gihon, and brought them downe to the west syde of the cyte of Dauid. And Hezekia prospered in all hys worckes.
And when the prynces of Babylon sent vnto him Ambassatoures, to enquyre of the wondre that chaunced in the lande, God left hym to trye hym, and that all that was in hys hert, myght be knowne.
The rest of the dedes of Hezekia, and hys goodnes, behold, they are wryten in the vysyon of Isai the prophete the sonne of Amoz in the boke of the kinges of Iuda and Israell.
And Hezekia slepte with his fathers, Ꟶ they buryed hym in the most worthy place of the sepulchres of the sonnes of Dauid: and all Iuda and the enhabiters of Ierusalem dyd hym worshyppe at his death. And Manasse hys sonne raygned in his steade.
Manasse was .xij. yeare olde when he beganne to raygne, Ꟶ he raygned .lv. yeare in Ierusalem:
But dyd euell in the syght of the Lord, lyke vnto the abhominacions of the heathen, whom the Lorde cast out before the children of Israel. For he went to,
and buylt the hylaulter, which Hezekia hys father had broken downe. And he rered vp aulters for Baalim, and made groues, and worshypped all the hoost of heauen, and serued them.
And he buylt aulters in the house of the Lord: where as the Lorde yet had sayd: in Ierusalem shall my name be for euer.
And he buylded aulters for all the hoost of heauen, in the two courtes of the house of the Lorde.
And he burnt hys chyldren in fyre, in the valey of the sonne of Hinnom. He was a sorcerer, he regarded the cryenge of byrdes, vsed inchauntementes, and mayntened workers wt spretes, and sears of fortunes: and wrought moch euell in the syght of the Lorde, to angre him with all.
And he put the kerued ymage Ꟶ an Idole which he had made, in the house of God. Of which house God had sayd to Dauid and to Salomon his sonne: in this house and in Ierusalem whych I haue chosen afore all the trybes of Israell, wyll I put my name for euer,
and will nomore bryng the seate of Israell from of the lande which I haue ordeyned for your fathers. If so be that they wyll be diligent and do all that I haue commaunded them in al the lawe, and statutes, and ordinaunces by the hande of Moses.
And so Manasse made Iuda and the enhabiters of Ierusalem to erre, and to do worse then the heathen, whom the Lorde destroyed before the chyldren of Israell.
And the Lorde spake to Manasse Ꟶ to hys people, but they wolde not regarde.
Wherfore, the Lord brought vpon them the captaynes of the host of the kyng of the Assirians, whych toke Manasse in holde, and bounde hym with chaynes, and caryed hym to Babylon.
And when he was in trybulacion, he besought the Lord hys God, Ꟶ humbled hym selfe exceadyngly before the God of his fathers,
and made intercession to hym and God was entreated of hym, and hearde his prayer, and brought hym agayne to Ierusalem into his kyngdome. And then Manasse knewe, that the Lorde was God.
After this he built a wal without the cytie of Dauid on the west syde of Gihon in the valley as they come to the fish gate, Ꟶ round about Ophel, and brought it vp of a very great heygth, and put captaynes of warre in all the strong cyties of Iuda.
And he toke awaye straunge Gods Ꟶ ymages out of the house of God, and all the aulters that he had buylt in the mount of the house of God, and in Ierusalem, and cast them oute of the cytie.
And he prepared the aultar of the Lord, and sacrifyced theron peace offerynges, and thankoffrynges, and charged Iuda, to serue the Lord God of Israel.
Neuertheles, the people dyd offer styll in the hylaulters, howbeit vnto the Lorde their God onely.
The rest of the actes of Manasse, and his prayer vnto his God, and the wordes of the sears and of them that spake to hym in the name of the Lorde God of Israell, beholde, they are writen in the sayenges of the kynges of Israel.
And his prayer, and howe that he was hearde, and all his synnes, and his trespasse, and the places where he made hylaulters, and set vp groues, and ymages (before he was mekened) beholde, they are wrytten among the sayenges of the sears.
And Manasse slepte with hys fathers, and they buryed hym in hys awne house: and Amon his sonne raigned in his rowme.
Amon was two and twenty yeare olde, when he beganne to raygne, and raygned two yeare in Ierusalem.
But he did euell in the syght of the Lord, lyke as dyd Manasse his father, for Amon sacrificed to all the kerued ymages which Manasse hys father had made, and serued them,
and submitted not him selfe before the Lord as Manasse hys father had mekened hym selfe. But Amon trespassed greatly.
And his awne seruauntes conspired agaynst him, and slue hym in hys awne house.
But the people of the lande slue all them that had conspyred agaynst kynge Amon. And the same people of the lande made Iosia hys sonne kynge in hys rowme.
Iosia was eyght yeare olde whan he began to raygne, and he raygned in Ierusalem thyrtye and one yere.
And he dyd that which was ryght in the syght of the Lorde, and walked in the wayes of Dauid his father, and bowed nether to the ryght hand ner to the left.
In the .viij. yere of hys raygne (when he was yet a childe) he beganne to seke after the God of Dauid hys father. And in the twelueth yeare he beganne to pourge Iuda and Ierusalem from hylaulters, groues, kerued ymages, and ymages of metall:
and they brake downe the aulters of Baalim euen in hys presence: and other ymages that were in greater honoure then they, he caused to be destroyed. And the groues, kerued ymages, and ymages of metall he brake and made dust of them, and strawed it vpon the graues of them that had offered to them.
And he burnt the bones of the preastes vpon the aulters of them, and clensed Iuda and Ierusalem.
And euen so dyd he in the cyties of Manasse, Ephraim, Simeon vnto Nephthali. And in the wyldernesses of them rounde about,
he plucked a sondre the aulters and the groues, and dyd beate them and stampte them to powdre, Ꟶ beate downe all the ymages thorow out all the lande of Israel: and returned to Ierusalem agayne.
In the eyghtene yere of his raygne when he had purged the lande and the temple he sent Saphan the sonne of Amaziahu, and Maasiah the gouernoure of the cytie Ꟶ Ioah the sonne of Ioahaz the recorder, to repayre the house of the Lorde hys God.
And when they came to Helkiah the hye preast, they delyuered them the money that was brought in to the house of God, whych the Leuites that kepte the entryes had geathered of the hande of Manasse and Ephraim, and of all that yet remayned in Israel, and of all Iuda and BenIamin, and of the enhabiters of Ierusalem.
And they put in the handes of the worckemen, that had the ouersyght of the house of the Lorde: and they gaue it to the labourers that wrought in the house of the Lorde, to repayre and mende the house.
Even to masons and carpenters gaue they it, to get stone and tymbre, for couples and for beames of the houses, which the kynges of Iuda had destroyed:
And the men dyd the worcke faythfully. And the ouersears of them to courage them forward, were Iahath and Obadiahu Leuites of the chyldren of Merari: Ꟶ Secharia Ꟶ Mesullam, of the chyldren of the Cahathites, and other of the Leuytes whych all coulde skylle of instrumentes of Musicke.
And ouer the bearers of burthens and ouer all that wrought, in whatsoeuer worckemanshyppe it were, were there Scrybes, officers and porters of the Leuites.
And whan they brought out the money that was brought into the house of the lord, Helkia the preaste founde the boke of the lawe of the Lord geuen by Moses.
And Helkia answered and sayde to Saphan the scribe: I haue founde the boke of the law, in the house of the Lorde, and Helkia gaue the boke to Saphan.
And Saphan caryed the boke to the kyng, and brought the kyng worde agayne, sayenge: all that was commytted to thy seruauntes, that do they.
And they haue gathered together the money that was found in the house of the Lord, and haue delyuered it into the handes of the ouersears of the worke, and to the handes of the worckemen.
And then Saphan the scribe shewed the kyng, saying: Helkia the preast hath geuen me a boke, Ꟶ Saphan redd in it before the king.
And it fortuned, that when the kyng had heard the wordes of the lawe, he tare his clothes:
and the kyng commaunded Helkia and Ahikam the sonne of Saphan, and Abidon the sonne of Micah, and Saphan the scrybe, and Asaia a seruaunt of the kynges, saying:
go Ꟶ enquire of the Lorde for me and for them that are left in Israel and Iuda, concerning the wordes of the boke that is found. For great is the wrath of the Lorde that is fallen vpon vs, because oure fathers haue not kepte the worde of the Lord, to do after all that is wrytten in this boke.
And Helkia and they that the kynge had appoynted, went to Hulda a prophetisse the wyfe of Sallum the sonne of Tokhath the sonne of Hasra keper of the wardrope (for she dwelt in Ierusalem with in the second wall) and so they communed with her.
She answered them: thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel: tell ye the man that sent you to me.
Euen thus sayth the Lord: Behold, I wyll bryng euell vpon this place, Ꟶ vpon the enhabiters therof (euen all the cursses that are wrytten in the boke which they haue reade before the kyng of Iuda)
because they haue forsaken me, and haue offered vnto other Gods, to angre me wt all maner worckes of theyr handes, therfore is my wrath set on fyre agaynst thys place and shall not be quenched.
And as for the kyng of Iuda whych sent you to enquire of the Lorde, so shall ye saye vnto him: thus sayth the Lord God of Israel concernyng the wordes which thou hast heard.
Because thyne hert dyd melt, Ꟶ thou dydest meke thy self before God, when thou heardest his wordes agaynst this place Ꟶ agaynst the enhabiters therof: Ꟶ humbledest thy selfe before me, and tarest thy clothes, and weptest before me, that haue I hearde also sayth the Lord.
Behold, I wyll take the to thy fathers, and thou shalt be put in thy graue in peace, and thyne eyes shall not se all the myschefe that I wyll bryng vpon thys place, Ꟶ vpon the enhabyters of the same. And they brought the kynge worde agayne.
Then the kynge sent, and gathered to gether all the elders of Iuda and Ierusalem.
And the kyng went vp into the house of the Lorde, and all the men of Iuda, and the enhabiters of Ierusalem, Ꟶ the preastes Ꟶ Leuites and all the people great and smalle: Ꟶ the kyng dyd reade all the wordes of the boke of the couenaunt that was found in the house of the Lorde.
And the kyng stode at hys standyng, Ꟶ made a couenaunt before the Lord, to folowe the Lorde, and to kepe his commaundementes, his wytnesses, and hys statutes, wyth all hys hert Ꟶ wyth all his soule, Ꟶ to fulfyll the wordes of the appoyntment wrytten in the sayde boke.
And he set in theyr rowme all them that were founde in Ierusalem and BenIamin, and the enhabiters of Ierusalem dyd accordyng to the couenaunt of the Lorde God of theyr fathers.
And Iosia put awaye all maner of abhominacyons out of all landes that pertayned to the chyldren of Israell, and brought in all that were found in Israel, to worshyp, and to serue the Lorde theyr God. And they turned not a syde from after the Lorde God of theyr fathers, as longe as he lyued.
And Iosia helde the feast of passeouer vnto the Lord in Ierusalem, Ꟶ they slue passeouer in the fourtene daye of the first moneth.
And he set the preastes in theyr offyces, and ayded them in the seruice of the house of the Lorde.
And he sayde vnto the Leuytes (that taught all Israel, and were sanctifyed vnto the Lord) put the holy arcke in the house whych Salomon the sonne of Dauid kyng of Israel, dyd buyld, there shall no other burthen be layd vpon youre shoulders: But now serue the Lorde youre God and hys people Israel.
And prepare yourselues by youre auncient housholdes and companies, accordynge to the wrytynge of Dauid kyng of Israel, and the wrytyng of Salomon his sonne.
And stande in the holy place accordynge to the deuisyon of the auncient housholdes of youre brethren the chyldren of the people, Ꟶ after the deuisyon of the auncient housholdes of the Leuites,
kyll passeouer, Ꟶ sanctifye and prepare youre brethren, that they may do accordyng to the word of the Lorde by the hande of Moses.
And Iosia gaue to the people flockes of shepe and kyddes, all for passeouer and for all that were present, thyrtie thousand by tale, and thre thousande oxen, and these were euen of the kynges substaunce.
And hys Lordes gaue willynglye both vnto the people Ꟶ to the preastes, Ꟶ vnto the Leuytes. Helkia also, zacharia and Iehiel, rulers of the house of God, gaue vnto the preastes for passeouer offerynges two thousand and syxe hundred shepe, and thre hundred oxen.
Conama Ꟶ Semeiahu and Nethanel his brethren, and Hasabiahu and Iaiel and Iosabad, rulers of the Leuites, gaue vnto the Leuites Passeouer offerynges, euen fyue thousand shepe, Ꟶ fyue hundred oxen.
And so the seruice was prepared, and the preastes stode in theyr places, and the Leuites in theyr distincte companies at the kynges commaundment.
And they slue Passeouer, and the preastes sprinckled the bloude with theyr hande, Ꟶ the Leuites pulled of the skynnes of the beastes.
And they fett awaye the burntofferinges, to geue them vnto the people that were deuyded by auncient houses, Ꟶ that they shulde offer vnto the Lorde, lyke as it is wrytten in the boke of Moses. And so dyd they wyth the oxen also.
And they dressed the Passeouer wyth fyre as the maner was. And the other dedycat beastes: sodde they in pottes, caulderns Ꟶ pannes, and deuyded them among all the people.
And afterwarde, they made readye for them selues Ꟶ for the preastes: for the chyldren of Aaron were busyed in offeryng of burntofferynges and the fatt vntyll nyght: therfore the Leuites prepared for them selues and for the preastes the sonnes of Aaron.
And the syngers, the chyldren of Asaph stode in theyr standynge accordyng to the commaundement of Dauid and Asaph, Heman Ieduthum the kynges sear: and the porters wayted at euery gate, and myght not departe from theyr seruice: for theyr brethren the Leuites prepared for them.
And so all the seruice of the Lorde was prepared the same daye, to offer Passeouer, and to offer burntoffrynges vpon the aulter of the Lord accordynge to the commaundement of kyng Iosia.
And so the chyldren of Israel that were present, offered Passeouer the same tyme, and kepte the feast of swete breade seuen dayes.
And ther was no Passeouer lyke to that kepte in Israel from the dayes of Samuel the prophete: nether dyd all the kynges of Israel hold soch a Passeouer feast as dyd Iosia and the preastes and Leuites and all Iuda, and Israel that were present, and the enhabiters of Ierusalem.
This Passeouer was holden in the eyghtene yere of the raygne of Iosia.
After all thys, when Iosia had prepared the temple, Necho kyng of Egypt came vp to fyght agaynst Carcamis besyde Euphrates, and Iosia went out agaynst hym:
whych sent messengers to hym, Ꟶ sayd: what haue I to do wyth the thou kynge of Iuda? Be not thou agaynst thy self this daye: For my warre is agaynst another house, Ꟶ God bade me make hast. Leaue of therfore Ꟶ medle not with God whych is wyth me, least he destroye the.
Neuerthelesse, Iosia wolde not turne hys face from hym, but rather toke aduyse to fyght with him, and herkened not vnto the wordes of Necho out of the mouth of God, and came to fyght in the valeye of Magedo,
Ꟶ the shoters shott dartes at kyng Iosia. And the kyng sayd to his seruauntes: carye me awaye, for I am sore wounded.
His seruauntes therfore had him out of that charet, and put him in another charet that they had. And whan they had brought him to Ierusalem, he dyed, and was buryed in the sepulchre of his fathers. And all Iuda and Ierusalem mourned for Iosia.
And Ieremia lamented Iosia, and all syngynge men and synginge wemen mourned for Iosia in their lamentacions, to thys daye, and made the same lamentacions an ordinaunce in Israel, Ꟶ behold, they be wryten in the lamentacions.
The rest of the actes of Iosia Ꟶ hys goodnes which he dyd in folowynge the wryting in the lawe,
and his sayenges, first and last: behold, they are wryten in the boke of the kynges of Israel and Iuda.
And the people of the land toke Iehoahaz the sonne of Iosia, and made him kynge in his fathers steade in Ierusalem.
And Iehoahaz was thre and twentye yeare olde, when he beganne to raygne, and he raygned thre monethes in Ierusalem.
And the kyng of Egypt put him downe at Ierusalem, ann merced the lande in an hundred talentes of syluer, and a talent of gold.
And the kynge of Egypt made Eliakim his brother king vpon Iuda and Ierusalem, Ꟶ turned hys name vnto Iehoakim: and Necho toke Iehoahaz hys brother, and caried hym to Egipt.
Iehoakim was fyue and twenty yeare olde, when he began to raygne, and he raygned eleuen yeare in Ierusalem: and he dyd euyll in the sight of the Lorde his God.
Agaynst him then came vp Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and bounde hym with two chaynes, to carye him to Babilon.
The king Nabuchodonosor also caried of the vessels of the house of the Lorde to Babilon, Ꟶ and put them in his temple at Babilon.
The rest of the actes of Iehoakim, and his abhominacions which he did, and carued ymages that were layde to hys charge, beholde, they are writen in the booke of the kynges of Israell: and Iehoacin his sonne raygned in hys steade.
Iehoacin was eyght yeare olde whan he beganne to raygne, and he raygned thre monethes and ten dayes in Ierusalem: and dyd euelll in the sight of the Lorde:
And when the yeare was out, kynge Nabuchodonosor sent, and let him to Babilon with the goodly vessels of the house of the Lord, and made zedekia (his fathers brother) kynge ouer Iuda and Ierusalem.
zedekia was one and twenty yere olde, when he beganne to raygne, Ꟶ raygned eleuen yere in Ierusalem.
And he dyd euell in the syght of the Lorde hys God, and humbled not him selfe before Ieremia the prophete at the mouth of the Lorde.
And he rebelled agaynst Nabuchodonosor, which had receaued an oth of hym by God. But he was stifnecked, and to harde herted to turne vnto the Lorde God of Israell.
Moreouer, all the rulers, the prestes, Ꟶ the people trespaced more synnyng after all maner of abhominacyons of the heathen, and poluted the house of the Lord, which he had halowed in Ierusalem.
And the Lord God of their fathers sent to them, by hys messengers, risyng vp by tymes and sendynge: for he had compassyon on hys people, and on his dwellyng place.
But they mocked the messengers of God, Ꟶ despised his wordes, and mysse vsed hys prophetes, vntyll the wrath of the Lord arose agaynst his people, and tyll there was no remedy.
And so he brought vpon them the kyng of Caldeye, which slue their yong men with the swearde in their holy temple, and spared nether yonge man, mayden, olde man, ner hym that stowped for age. He gaue them all into his hande.
And all the vessels of the house of God, (both great and small) and the treasures of the house of the Lorde, and the treasures of the kynge, and of hys Lordes: all these caried he to Babilon.
And they burnt the house of God and brake downe the wall of Ierusalem and burnt all the places therof with fyre, and destroyed all the goodly Iewles therof.
And the rest that had escaped the sweard, caryed he to Babylon, where they were bound to him and his chyldren, vntyll the tyme that Persia had the empire.
To fulfyll the word of the Lord by the mouth of Ieremia, vntyll the lande had her pleasure of her Sabbothes: for as longe as she laye desolate, she kept Saboth, vntyll seuenty yeares were fulfylled.
And the first yeare of Cyrus kynge of Persia (whan the worde of the Lorde spoken by the mouth of Ieremia, was fynisshed) the Lord stered vp the sprete of Cyrus kyng of Persia, that he made a proclamacion thorow out all his kyngdome, and that by writynge, sayeng:
Thus sayeth Cyrus kyng of Persia: all the kyngdomes of the earth hath the Lord God of heauen geuen me, and hath charged me to buylde him an house in Ierusalem, that is in Iuda. Wherfore, whosoeuer is amonge you of all hys people, the Lorde his God be with hym, and lett hym go vp.
In the firste yere of Cyrus kynge of Persia (that the word of the Lord spoken by the mouth of Ieremy might be fulfilled) the Lord stered vp the spret of Cyrus kynge of Persia, that he caused to be proclaymed thorow out all hys empire, Ꟶ to be wryten, saying:
Thus sayth Cirus the kynge of Persia: The Lorde God of heauen hath geuen me all the kyngdomes of the earth, and hath commaunded me to buylde hym an house at Ierusalem which is in Iuda.
Whosoeuer now among you is of his people, the Lorde his God be with hym, and let him go vp to Ierusalem in Iuda, Ꟶ builde the house of the Lorde God of Israell. He is the God that is at Ierusalem.
And whosouer remayneth yet in eny maner of place (where he is a straunger) let the men of that place helpe hym wt syluer and golde, with good Ꟶ catell, besyde that which they wyllyngly offer, for the house of God that is at Ierusalem.
Then gat vp the principal fathers of Iuda and Beniamin, Ꟶ the prestes Ꟶ leuites, and all they whose sprete God had raysed to go vp, Ꟶ to buylde the house of the Lord, which is at Ierusalem.
And al they that were about them strengthed their hand, wt vessels of syluer, Ꟶ golde, with good and catell, Ꟶ Iewels: in so moch that euery one shewed hym selfe liberall.
And kyng Cyrus brought forth the vessels of the house of the Lord, which Nabuchodonosor had taken out of Ierusalem, and had put in the house of his God.
Those dyd Cyrus the kyng of Persia bryng forth by the hande of Mithridates the treasurer, and nombred them vnto Sesbazar the prince of Iuda.
And this is the nombre of them .xxx. chargers of gold .M. chargers of syluer .xxix. knyues
.xxx. basens of gold and of other siluer basens .iiij.C. Ꟶ .x. Ꟶ of other vessels: .M.
All the vessels of gold and syluer, were .v.M. and .iiij.C. All these dyd Sesbazar carye awaye with them that came vp oute of the captyuite of Babylon vnto Ierusalem.
These are the chyldren of the lande that went vp oute of the captyuite (whom Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon had caryed awaye vnto Babylon) and came agayne vnto Ierusalem, and into Iuda, euery one vnto hys cytie.
They that came with zorobabell are these. Iesua, Nehemiah, Saraia, Raelaia Mardochai, Bilsan, Mispar, Biguai, Rehum, Baana. Thys is the nombre of the men of the people of Israel.
The children of Phares, two thousand, an hundred, and two and seuentye:
the chyldren of Saphatia, thre hundred, and two and seuenty:
the chyldren of Arath, seuen hundred, and fyue and seuenty:
the chyldren of the captayne of Moab among the chyldren of Iesua and Ioab, two thousande, eyght hundred and twelue:
the chyldren of Elam, a thousande, two hundred, and foure and fyftye:
the chyldren of zathu, nyne hundred, and fyue and fourtye:
the chyldren zaccai, seuen hundred, and thre score:
the children of Bani, syxe hundred, and two and fourty:
the chyldren of Bebai, syxe hundred and thre and twentye:
the chyldren of Asgad, a thousand, two hundred, and two and twenty:
the chyldren of Adonicam, syx hundred, and syxe and syxty:
the chyldren of Beguai, two thousande, and syx and fyfty:
the chyldren of Adin, foure hondred and foure Ꟶ fyfty:
the chyldren of Ater of Hezekia, eyght and nyntye:
the chyldren of Bezai, thre hundred, and thre and twentye:
the chyldren of Iora, an hundred and twelue:
the chyldren of Hasum, two hundred, and thre and twentye:
the chyldren of Gebar, fyue and nyntye:
the chydren of Bethlehem, an hundred and thre and twentye:
the men of Netopha, syxe and fyftye:
the men of Anathoth, an hundred, and eyght and twentye:
the chyldren of Asmaueth, two and fourty:
the chyldren of Kyriath Iarim, euen the chyldren of Cephira and Beeroth, seuen hundred and thre and fourty:
the children of Harama and Geba, syx hundred, and one and twenty:
the men of Michmas, an hundred, and two and twentye:
the men of Bethell and Hai, two hundred, and thre and twenty:
the children of Nebo, two and fyfty:
the chyldren of Magbis, an hundred, and syxe and fyftye:
the children of the other Elam, a thousande, Ꟶ two hundred, and foure and fyfty:
the chyldren of Harym, the hundred and twentye:
the chyldren of Lodhadid and Ono, seuen hundred, and fyue and twentye:
the chyldren of Iericho, thre hundred, and fyue and fourtye:
the children of Senaa, thre thousand, syxe hundred and thyrtye.
The prestes of the chyldren of Iedaia of the house of Iesua, nyne hundred, and thre Ꟶ seventye:
the children of Immer, a thousand and two and fyfty:
the children of Phashur, a thousande, two hundred, and seuen and fourtye:
the children of Harim, a thousande, and seuentene.
The leuites. The children of Iesua, and Cadmiel of the children of Hodauia, foure Ꟶ seuentye.
The syngers, the children of Asaph, an hundred, and eyght Ꟶ twentye.
The children of the dore keper. The children of Sallum, the children of Ater, the children of Talmon, the children of Akub, the children of Hatita, the children of Sobai: all togeather an hundred, and nyne and thyrtye.
The Nethinims, the children of ziha, the children of Hasupha, the children of Tabaoth,
the children of Ceros, the children of Sicha, the children of Padon,
the chyldren of Lebanaa, the children of Hagabh, the chyldren of Akub,
the chyldren of Hagab, the chyldren of Samlai, the chyldren of Hanan,
the children of Giddel, the chyldren of Gahar, the chyldren of Reaia,
the chyldren of Razin, the chyldren of Necoda, the chyldren of Gasam,
the chyldren of Usa, the chyldren of Passeah: the chyldren of Bessai,
the chyldren of Asna, the chyldren of Mehunim, the chyldren of Nephussim,
the chyldren of Bacbuc, the chyldren of Hacuba, the chyldren of Harhur,
the chyldren of Bazluth, the children of Mehira, the chyldren of Harsa,
the chyldren of Barcom, the chyldren of Sisara, the chyldren of Thamah,
the chyldren of Neziah, the chyldren of Hatipha.
The chyldren of Salomons seruauntes, the chyldren of Sotai, the chyldren of Sophereth, the chyldren of Peruda,
the chyldren of Iaala, the children of Darcon, the chyldren of Giddel,
the chyldren of Sephatiah, the children of Hattil, the children of Pochereth Hazbaim, the chyldren of Ami.
All the Nethinims and the chyldren of Salomons seruauntes, were all together, thre hundred and two and nyntye.
And these went vp from, Thelmelah, and from Thelharsa, Cherub, Addon and Immer. But they coulde not discerne theyr fathers house and theyr sede, whether they were of Israel.
The children of Delaia, the chyldren of Tobia, the chyldren of Necoda, syxe hundred and two and fyfty.
And of the chyldren of the prestes. The chyldren of Hebaia, the chyldren of Hakoz, the chyldren of Berzilai, which toke one of the daughters of Berzilai the Gileadite to wyfe, and was called after theyr name:
these sought theyr euidence amonge them that had the register of byrth, and were not founde therin, therfore were they put from the presthod.
And Hathirsatha sayd vnto them, that they shuld not eate of the most holy, till ther rose vp a preste to weare Urim and Thumim.
The whole congregacion together, was .xlij. thousand, thre hundred and threscore:
besyde their seruauntes and maydens, of whom there were seuen thousand, thre hundred, and seuen and thyrtye. And there were amonge them two hundred syngynge men and wemen.
Their horses were seuen hundred and syxe Ꟶ thirty. Their mules, two hundred, and fyue and fourtye:
and their camels, foure hundred and fyue and thirty. Theyr asses, syxe thousande, seuen hundred and twentye.
And certayne of the chefe fathers, when they came because of the house of the Lorde at Ierusalem, they offered them selues wyllynge for the house of God, to sett in hys place,
and gaue gold after their habilite vnto the treasure of the worcke, euen one and threscore thousande peces, and fyue thousande pounde of syluer, and an hundred prestes garmentes.
So the prestes and the leuites, and a certayne of the people and the syngers, and the porters, and the Nethinims dwelt in their cyties, and all Israell in theyr cyties.
And when the seuenth moneth came, and the children of Israel were nowe in theyr cyties, the people came togeather (euen as one man) vnto Ierusalem.
And there stode vp Iesua the sonne of Iosedec and his brethren the prestes, and zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel Ꟶ hys brethren, and buylded the aultar of the God of Israel, to offre burntoffrynges theron, as it is writen in the lawe of Moses the man of God
and the aultar set they vpon hys socketes (for ther was a fearfulnes amonge them because of the nacions and landes) therfore they offered burntoffringes theron vnto the Lord in the morning Ꟶ at euen.
And they helde the feaste of tabernacles as it is writen, Ꟶ offered burnt sacrifices dayly, acording to the nombre Ꟶ custome, daye by daye.
Afterwarde they offred dayly burntoffringes also, Ꟶ in the new mones and in all the feast dayes that were consecrate vnto the Lorde, and for all them whych dyd (of their awne fre wyll) offre vnto the Lord.
From the first daye of the seuenth moneth beganne they to offre burntsacryfyces vnto the Lorde: euen whan the foundacyon of the temple of the Lord was not yet layed.
They gaue money also vnto the masons and carpenters, and meate and dryncke and oyle vnto them of zidon and of Tire, to brynge them Cedre tymbre from Libanus by see vnto Ioppa, accordyng to the graunt that they had of Cyrus the kynge of Persia.
In the seconde yere of their comming vnto the place of the house of God at Ierusalem in the second moneth, beganne zorobabel the sonne of Salathiell, Ꟶ Iesua the sonne of Iosedec, and the remnaunt of theyr brethren the prestes and leuites, and all they that were come out of the captiuyte vnto Ierusalem, Ꟶ appoynted the leuytes from twentye yeare olde and aboue, to se, that the worcke of the house of the Lorde went forwarde.
And Iesua stode with his sonnes and brethren, and Cadmiell with his sonnes, and the chyldren of Iuda, to forther the worckemen of the house of God, euen the children of Henadab, with their children and their brethren the leuites.
And whan the builders layd the foundacyon of the temple of the Lorde, the preastes stode in theyr araye, with trompetes. And the leuites the chyldren of Asaph with cymbales, to prayse the Lorde after the maner of Dauid kyng of Israell.
And they sang together, whan they gaue prayse Ꟶ thankes vnto the Lord, because he is gracious, and because his mercy endureth for euer vpon Israell. And all the people shouted loude in praysyng the Lord, because the foundacion of the house of the Lorde was layde.
Many also of the preastes and leuites and auncient fathers, which had sene the first house (when the foundacion of thys house was layed before theyr eyes) wepte with a loude voyce. And many shouted with ioye,
so that the noyse gaue a greate sounde, in so moch that the people coulde not discerne the ioyful sounde and gladnes, from the noyse of the wepynge amonge the people: for the people shouted wyth a loude cry, and the noyse was herde farre of.
But the aduersaryes of Iuda and Beniamin hearde, that the children of the captiuite buylded the temple vnto the Lord God of Israel.
And they came to zorobabel and to the principall fathers, and sayde vnto them: We will builde with you: for we seke the Lorde youre God lyke as ye do. And we haue done sacrifyce vnto hym, sence the tyme of Asor Hadon the kynge of Assur which brought vs vp hyther.
And zorobabel and Iesua and the other auncient fathers of Israel sayde vnto them: It cannot be, that you and we together shuld buylde the house vnto our God: for we oure selues wyll buylde alone vnto the Lord our God of Israel, as Cyrus the king of Persia hath commaunded vs.
And it came to passe, that the folke of the land hyndered the people of Iuda, and troubled them as they were buyldynge,
and hyred councelers against them, to hynder their deuyce, as longe as Cyrus the kyng of Persia lyued, vntyll the raygne of Darius king of Persia.
And in the raygne of Ahasuerus, (euen in the begynnyng of his raygne) wrote they vnto him a complaynte agaynst the inhabitours of Iuda and Ierusalem.
And in the dayes of Arthaxerses, wrote Mithridath Tabeel and the other of hys councell, vnto Arthaxerses the king of Persia with fayre wordes. And the scripture of the letter was writen in the Sirians speach, and interpretated in the language of the Sirians
Rehum the recorder and Samsai the scribe wrote a letter from Ierusalem to Arthaxerses the kyng, as it foloweth.
Then Rehum the recorder, Ꟶ Samsai the scribe, and other of their companye of Dina, of Arphasath, of Tarpla, of Persia, of Arach, of Babylon, of Susan, of Deha, of Elan,
Ꟶ other of the people who the greate Ꟶ noble Asnapar brought ouer, and sett in the cytes of Samaria, Ꟶ other, that are now on this syde the water.
Thys is the copye of the letter that they sent vnto kyng Artaxerses. Thy seruauntes, Ꟶ the men that are now on thys syde the water.
Be it knowne vnto the king, that the Iewes which came vp from the to vs, are come vnto Ierusalem (a cytie sedicyous and frowarde) and buylde the same, and sett vp the walles therof, and laye the foundacions.
Be it knowne now also vnto the kynge, that yf this cytie be buylded, and the walles therof made vp agayne, then shall not they geue, tolle, tribute, and custome, and the kynges profyte shall incurre dammage.
And now in the meane season we haue destroyed the temple, and wolde no longer se the kynges dishonoure: Therfore sent we out also, and certifyed the kynge:
that it maye be sought in the boke of the Chronycles of thy progenitours, and so shalt thou fynde in the booke of the Chronycles, and perceaue that this cytie is sedicious and noysome vnto kynges and landes, and that they cause other also among them to rebell of olde, Ꟶ for the same cause was thys cytie destroyed.
Therfore do we certyfye the kynge that yf this cyte be buylded agayne, and the walles therof made vp, thou shalt herafter haue no porcion on this fyde the water.
Then sent the kyng a answere vnto Rehum the recorder, Ꟶ Simsai the scribe, and to the other of theyr companyons that dwelt in Samaria, Ꟶ vnto the other that were beyonde the water, in Selan and Cheheth.
The letter which ye sent vnto vs, hath bene openly redd before me,
and I haue commaunded to make search: Ꟶ it is founde, that this cytie of olde hath made insurreccion agaynst kynges, and that rebellion and sedicion hath bene commytted therin.
There haue bene myghtie kinges also at Ierusalem, which haue raygned ouer all countrees beyonde the water: and tolle, trybute, Ꟶ custome was geuen vnto them:
Geue ye now therfore commaundement, that the same men be forbydden, and that the cytie be not buylded agayne, tyll I haue geuen another commaundement.
Take hede now that ye be not negligent to do this: for why shulde the kynge haue harme there thorowe?
Now when the copye of kynge Artaxerses letter was red before Rehum and Simsai the Scribe and their companyons, they went vp in all the haste to Ierusalem vnto the Iewes, and forbad them with violence and power.
Then ceassed the worcke of the house of God at Ierusalem, and continued so vnto the seconde yere of Darius kynge of Persia
The prophetes, Aggeus and zachary the sonne of Iddo, prophecied vnto the Iewes that were in Iuda and Ierusalem, in the name of the God of Israel.
Then gat vp zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel, and Iesua the sonne of Iosedec, and beganne to buylde the house of God at Ierusalem, and with them were the prophetes of God, which helped them.
At the same tyme came to them Tathnai which was captayne on thys syde the water, and Starbaznai, and their companyons, and sayde thus vnto them. Who hath commaunded you to buylde thys house, and to make vp these walles?
Then tolde we them the names of the men, that made thys buyldynge.
But the eye of their God was vpon the elders of the Iewes, that they coulde not cause them to ceasse, tyll the matter was brougth to Darius, and then they answered by letters ther vnto
This is the copye of the letter, that Tathnai (which was captayne on thys syde the water) and Starbaznai, and the councellers of Apharsah (which were on this syde the water) sent vnto kyng Darius.
And the matter that they sent vnto him, was written thus within the lettre: Unto Darius the kynge, all peace.
Be it knowne vnto the kyng, that we went into the lande of Iewry to the house of the great God, which is buylded wt mighty greate stones, and beames are layed in the walles, and the worcke goeth fast forth, and prospereth in their handes.
Then asked we the Elders, Ꟶ sayde vnto them as it foloweth: Who commaunded you to buylde this house, Ꟶ to make vp the walles therof?
We asked their names also, that we might certifie the, and wryte the names of the men that were theyr rulers.
But they answered vs with these wordes, and sayde. We are the seruauntes of him that is God of heauen and earth, and buylde the house that was buylded many yeres agoo which a greate kynge of Israel buylded, and set vp.
But after that oure fathers had prouoked the God of heauen vnto wrath, he gaue them ouer into the hande of Nabuchodonozer the king of Babilon, Ꟶ of the Caldees, which brake downe this house, and caried the people awaye captiue vnto Babilon.
But in the fyrst yere of Cyrus the kyng of Babylon, the same kyng Cyrus gaue commaundement concernyng thys house of God, that it shulde be builded agayne.
And the vesselles of golde Ꟶ syluer of the house of God, which Nabuchodonozer toke out of the temple that was at Ierusalem, Ꟶ brought them into the temple at Babilon, those dyd Cyrus the kynge take out of the temple at Babilon, and they were delyuered vnto one Sasbazar by name, whom he made captayne,
and sayde vnto him. Take these vessels, and go thy waye, and sett them in the temple that is at Ierusalem, and lett the house of God be buylded in hys place.
Then came the same Sasbazar, and layde the foundacyon of the house of God which is at Ierusalem. Sence that tyme also vntyll now hath it bene in buyldynge, and yet is it not fynished.
Yf it please the kynge now therfore, lett there be searche made in the kynges library which is there at Babylon, whether it haue bene kyng Cyrus commaundement, that thys temple of God at Ierusalem shulde be buylded and let hym sende vs the kynges mynde concernynge the same matter.
Then commaunded kynge Darius, and they made search in the library, euen in the place where they layde vp the treasure at Babilon.
And there was founde in a coffer (in the place that is in the lande of the Medes) a volume: and ther in was it thus wrytten, and soche a memoriall:
In the fyrst yeare of kyng Cyrus, gaue the same kynge Cyrus commaundement concernynge the house of God at Ierusalem, that the same house shulde be buylded in the place where they offre the sacrifices, and to ioyne the walles together of threskore cubytes heygth, and threskore cubytes bredth.
Thre rowes of roughe stones, and one rowe of tymber, and the expences shalbe geuen of the kynges house.
And let the golde and syluer vessell of the house of God (which Nabuchodonozor toke out of the temple at Ierusalem, and brought vnto Babylon) be restored, and brought agayne vnto the temple at Ierusalem to their place in the house of God.
Get you farre from them therfore, thou Thahnai captayne beyonde the water, and Stharbuzanai, and youre councelers Ꟶ Aphersechei, which are beyonde the water, get ye awaye from them.
Let the worcke of the house of this God alone, that the captayne of the Iewes and their Elders maye buylde the house of God in his place.
I haue commaunded what shalbe done to the Elders of Iuda for the buylding of the house of God, that there shalbe diligent hede taken of the kynges goodes, euen of the rentes beyonde the water, and geuen vnto the men, that they be not hyndred
And yf they haue nede of calues, rammes Ꟶ lambes, for the burntofferynge of the God of heauen, wheate, salt, wyne and oyle, after the custome of the preastes at Ierusalem, let the same be geuen them daylie with out anye delaye,
that they maye offre swete sauoures vnto the God of heauen, and praye for the kynges lyfe, and for his chyldren.
And soch a commaundement haue I geuen that what man soeuer he be that altereth thys worde, there shall a beame be taken from hys house, and set vp, and he shalbe hanged theron, and his house shalbe made a donghyll for the same thynge,
And the God that set hys name there, destroye all kynges, Ꟶ people, that put to their hande to alter Ꟶ to breake downe the house of God which is at Ierusalem. I Darius haue commaunded, that this be done with spede.
Then Thathnai the captaine of the countrey beyonde the water, and Stharboznai with theyr councelers (to whom kynge Darius had sent) did their diligence:
And the Elders of the Iewes builded, and they prospered thorow the prophecienge of Aggeus the prophet and zachary the sonne of Iddo: and they builded, and layed vp the foundacion, according to the commaundement of the God of Israell, and after the commaundement of Cyrus, and Darius Ꟶ Arthaxerses kynges of Persia.
And the house was fynisshed the thyrde daye of the moneth Adar, euen in the syxte yere of the raygne of kynge Darius.
And the children of Israell, the preastes, the Leuites, and the other children of the captiuite helde the dedicacion of this house of God with ioye,
and offered at the dedicacion of this house of God, and hundred oxen, two hundred rammes, foure hundred goates: and for the reconcilinge of all Israel twelue he goates, accordynge to the nombre of the tribes of Israel,
Ꟶ set the preastes in their sondry courses, Ꟶ the Leuites in their diuerse offices to minister vnto God at Ierusalem, as it is written in the boke of Moses.
And the children of the captiuite helde Passeouer vpon the fourtenth daye of the fyrst moneth:
for the preastes and Leuytes were purified, so that they were all cleane together, and kylled Passeouer for all the children of the captiuite, and for their brethren the preastes, and for them selues.
And the children of Israel which were come agayne out of captiuite, and all soche as had separated them selues vnto them from the fylthynesse of the Heythen of the lande: to seke the Lorde God of Israel, did eate,
and helde the feast of vnleuened bread seuen dayes with ioye: for the Lorde had made them glad, and turned the hert of the kyng of Assur vnto them, to strengthen their handes in the worcke of the house of God, euen the God of Israel.
After these actes, there was in the raygne of Arthaxerses kyng of Persia, one Esdras the sonne of Saraiah, the sonne of Asaria, the sonne of Helkia,
the sonne of Sallum, the sonne of zadoc, the sonne of Ahitob,
the sonne of Amaria, the sonne of Asaria, the sonne of Meraioth,
the sonne of zeraia, the sonne of Uzi, the sonne of Bucki,
the sonne of Abisua, the sonne of Phinebes, the sonne of Eleazar, the sonne of Aaron the chefe preast.
This Esdras also went vp from Babilon, and was a perfite scribe in the lawe of Moses, which the Lord God of Israel did geue. And the kyng gaue him all that he requyred, because the hande of the Lorde hys God was vpon him.
And there went vp certayne of the children of Israel, of the preastes. Leuites, syngers, porters, and of the Nethinims vnto Ierusalem, in the seuenth yere of kynge Arthaxerses.
And he came to Ierusalem in the fyfth moneth, euen in the seuenth yere of the kynge.
For vpon the fyrst daye of the fyrst moneth, beganne he to go vp from Babilon: Ꟶ on the fyrst daye of the fyfth moneth came he to Ierusalem, because the good hande of God was vpon him.
For Esdras prepared his hert to seke the lawe of the Lorde, and to do it, and to teach the precept and iudgement in Israel.
And this is the copye of the letter, that kyng Arthaxerses gaue vnto Esdras the preast Ꟶ scrybe, which was a wryter of the wordes and commaundementes of the Lorde and of his statutes ouer Israel.
Arthaxerses a king of kynges, Unto Esdras the preast Ꟶ scrybe of the lawe of the God of heauen, peace and salutacion.
I haue commaunded, that all they of the people of Israel, and of the preastes and Leuites in my realme (which are mynded of their awne good wyll to go vp to Ierusalem) go with the:
and therfore art thou sent of the kyng and of his seuen councelers, to vyset Iuda and Ierusalem, accordinge to the lawe of thy God, which is in thy hande:
And that thou shuldest take with the syluer and golde, which the kynge and his councelers offre of their awne good wyll vnto the God of Israell (whose habitacyon is at Ierusalem)
and all the syluer and golde that thou canst fynde in all the countre of Babylon, wt it that the people offre of theyr awne good wyll and the preastes geue for the house of theyr God which is at Ierusalem.
Take thou the same, and bye diligently with the same money, oxen rammes, and lambes, with their meateofferinges and drinckofferynges, and thou shalt offer them vpon the aultare of the house of youre God which is at Ierusalem.
And loke what it lyketh the and thy brethren to do with the remnaunt of the money, that do after the wyll of youre God.
And the vessels that are geuen the for the ministracion in the house of thy God, those deliuer thou before God at Ierusalem.
And whatsoeuer thyng more shall be nedefull for the house of thy God, which is necessary for the to spende, thou shalt receaue the charges out of the kynges treasure house.
I kyng Arthaxerses haue commaunded all the treasures beyonde the water, that loke whatsoeuer Esdras the preaste and scrybe in the lawe of the God of heauen, requireth of you, that ye fulfyll the same spedely,
vntyll an hundred talentes of syluer, vntyll an hundred quarters of wheate, and tyll an hundred Batthes of wyne, Ꟶ tyll an hundred Batthes of oyle, Ꟶ salt without measure.
Whatsoeuer also belongeth to the lawe of the God of heauen, let the same be done without anye delaye for the house of the God of heauen, that he be not wroth agaynst the realme, Ꟶ agaynst the kynge, and hys chyldren.
And we certifye you, that ye haue no auctorite to requyre taxinge and custome, and yearly rentes vpon any of the preastes, Leuites, syngers, porters, Nethinims and ministers in the house of his God.
And thou Esdras (after the wysdome of thy God, that is in thy hande) sett iudges and arbiters (by my auctorite) to iudge all the people that is beyonde the water, euen all soch as knowe the lawe of thy God: and them that knowe it not, those se that ye teach.
And whosoeuer wyll not fulfyll the lawe of thy God, and the kynges lawe, let him haue his iudgement without delaye, whether it be vnto death, or to be rooted out, or to be condemned in goodes, or to be put in preson.
Blessed be the Lorde God of oure fathers, which so hath inspired the kynges hert, to garnysh the house of the Lorde, that is at Ierusalem:
and hath enclyned his mercy vnto me in the presence of the kyng, Ꟶ his councelers, and before all the kynges hye estates. And I was conforted (euen as the hande of the Lorde my God was vpon me) Ꟶ so geathered I the heades of Israell together, that they myghte go vp with me.
These are the principall fathers of them, and this is their register that wente vp with me from Babilon, what tyme as kynge Arthaxerses raygned.
Of the chyldren of Phinehes, Gersom: of the chyldren of Ithamar, Daniel: of the chyldren of Dauid, Hatus:
of the chyldren of zecania amonge the children of Pharos, zachary, and with him were nombred an hundred and fyftie men.
Of the chyldren of the captayne of Moab, Elioenai the sonne of zerahia, and with him two hundred men.
Of the children of zechania the sonne of Iahasiel, and with him thre hundred men.
Of the children of Adin, Abed the sonne of Ionathan, and with him fyftie men.
Of the children of Elam, Isai the sonne of Athalia, and with him seuentie men.
Of the children of Sapharia, zebadia the sonne of Michael, and with hym foure score men.
Of the children of Ioab, Obadia the sonne of Iehiel, and with hym two hundred and eyghtene men,
Of the children of Selomith the sonne of Iosephia, and with him and hundred and thre score men.
Of the children of Bebai, zachary the sonne of Bebai, and with him eyght and twentie men.
Of the children of Asgad, Iohanan, the sonne of Hakatan, and with him an hundred and ten men.
Of the chyldren of Adonicam, that were the last, whose names were these: Eliphelet, Iehiel and Samaiah, and with them thre score men.
Of the chyldren of Biguai, Uthai, and zabud, and with them seuentie men.
And I gathered them together by the water that renneth towarde Ahaua, and there abode we thre dayes. And I loked amonge the people and the preastes Ꟶ founde there none of the children of Leui.
Then sent I to Elieser, to Ariel, Semeia, Elnachan, Iarib, Elnathan, Nathan, zachary and to Mesullam the rulers, and to Ioiarib and Elnathan which were men of vnderstandyng,
and to those gaue I commaundement vnto Iddo the chefest at Casphia, that they shulde fetch vs minysters for the house of oure God, and I tolde them what they shulde saye vnto Iddo, and to his brethren the Nethinims at Casphia.
And (thorow the good hande of oure God vpon vs) they broughte vs a wyse man from amonge the children of Moholi the sonne of Leui, the sonne of Israel, and Sarabia with hys sonnes and his brethren, euen eyghtene.
And Hasabia, and with him Isai of the chyldren of Merari, with his brethren and theyr sonnes, twentie.
And of the Nethinims, whom Dauid Ꟶ the Princes gaue to mynister vnto the Leuites, two hundred Ꟶ twentye of Nethinims, which all were named by name.
And euen there at the water, besyde Ahaua, I proclamed a fast, that we myghte humble oure selues before oure God, and seke of him a ryghte waye for vs, and for oure children and for all oure substaunce.
For I was ashamed to requyre of the kynge, soudyers Ꟶ horsmen, to helpe vs agaynst the enemy in the waye: but we sayd vnto the kynge: The hande of oure God is vpon all them that seke hym in goodnes, and hys violence and wrath is agaynst all them that forsake him.
So we fasted, and be soughte oure God for this, and he hearde vs.
And I toke out twelue of the chefe preastes, Sarabia and Hasabia, and ten of their brethren with them,
and weyed them the syluer and golde, Ꟶ vessels that were appoynted for the house of oure God, which the kynge and his councellers and his Lordes, and all Israell that were there at hande, had geuen together.
And I weyed vnto their hande sixe hundred Ꟶ fyftie talentes of syluer, Ꟶ in syluer vessel an hundred talentes, Ꟶ in golde an hundred talentes:
twentie basens of golde of a thousande peces, and two costly ornamentes of good brasse, as cleare as golde:
and I sayde vnto them: Ye are consecrate vnto the Lorde, lyke as the vessels are holy also, and the golde and syluer are geuen of a good wyll vnto the Lorde God of youre fathers.
Watch ye, and kepe it: for ye shall weye it downe before the chefe preastes and Leuites, and auncient fathers of Israel at Ierusalem in the treasuries of the house of the Lord.
Then toke the preastes and Leuites that weyed syluer and golde and vessel, to bringe it to Ierusalem, vnto the house of oure God.
And we brake vp, from the water of Ahaua on the twelueth daye of the fyrst moneth, to go vnto Ierusalem: and the hande of oure God was vpon vs, and deliuered vs from the hande of the enemies, and of soch as layde wayte for vs by the waye.
And we came to Ierusalem, and abode there thre dayes.
But on the fourth daye was the syluer and golde and vessell weyed in the house of oure God, by the hande of Meremoth the sonne of Uria the preaste, and with hym was Eleazar the sonne of Phinehes, Ꟶ with them was Iosabad the sonne of Iesua, and Noadia the sonne of Benoi the Leuites.
According to the nombre and weyght of euery one, was the weyght all wrytten vp at the same tyme.
And the children of the captiuite, which were come out of preson, offered burntofferynges vnto the God of Israel: twelue bullockes for all Israell, syxe and nynetye rammes, seuen and seuentie lambes, twelue hegoates for a synofferynge, all to the burntofferynge of the Lorde.
And they delyuered the kynges commission vnto the kynges officers, Ꟶ to the capitaynes that were on thys syde the water. And they promoted the people and the house of God.
When these thynges were done, the rulers came to me, and sayde. The people of Israel, and the preastes, and Leuites are not separated from the people of the landes (as touchynge their abhominacyons) namely of the Cananites, Hethites, Pheresites, Iebusites, Ammonites, Moabites, Egypcians, and Amorites.
For they haue taken the daughters of the same to them selues and to their sonnes, and the holy sede is mixte with the nacions in the lande: and the hande of the princes Ꟶ rulers hath bene principall in this trespace.
And when I hearde this saying, I rente my clothes and my rayment, and pluckte of the heer of my heade, and of my beerd, and sate mourninge.
And there resorted vnto me all soch as feared the wordes of the Lorde God of Israel, because of the transgression of the people of the captiuite. And I sate mournynge vntyll the euenynge sacryfice.
And aboute the euenynge sacrifice, I rose vp fro my heuynes, and rente my clothes and my rayment, and fell vpon my knees, and spred out my handes vnto the Lorde my God,
and sayde. My God, I am ashamed, and darre not lyfte vp myne eyes vnto the my God: for oure wyckednesses are growne ouer oure heed, and oure trespace is waxen greate vnto the heauen.
Sence the tyme of oure fathers haue we bene in greate trespace vnto this daye, and because of oure wyckednesses haue we and oure kynges bene deliuered into the hande of the kynges of the nacyons, into the swerde, into captiuite, into shame, and into confusion of face, as it is to se this daye.
And now is there a lytle Ꟶ sodayne graciousnes come from the Lorde oure God, in causynge some of vs to escape, and that he maye geue vs a nayle in hys holy place, and that oure God maye lyghte oure eyes, and geue vs a lytle lyfe to take breth in oure bondage.
For we are bondmen, Ꟶ oure God hath not forsaken vs in oure bondage, and hath enclyned mercy vnto vs in the syghte of the kynges of Persia, to geue vs lyfe, to sett vp the house of oure God, and to redresse the desolacion therof, and to geue vs a wall in Iuda and Ierusalem.
And now, O oure God, what shall we saye after this? for we haue forsaken thy commaundementes,
whych thou hast commaunded by thy seruauntes the prophetes, sayeng: The lande vnto which ye go to possesse, it is an vncleane land, because of the fylthynes of the people of the landes, whych with theyr abhominacions haue made it full of vncleanesse on euery syde.
Therfore shall ye not geue youre daughters vnto their sonnes, and their daughters shall ye not take vnto your sonnes, ner seke their peace Ꟶ welth for euer, that ye maye be strong, Ꟶ enioye the good in the land, Ꟶ that ye Ꟶ youre chyldren maye haue the enheritaunce of it for euermore.
And after that all these thinges are come vpon vs (because of oure euell dedes Ꟶ greate trespaces) thou oure God hast thrust downe oure wickednesses, Ꟶ hast geuen vs a delyueraunce,
And yf we turne backe agayne, to let go thy commaundementes, and make contracte with the people of these abhominacions, wilt thou not then be wroth at vs (Ꟶ not without cause) tyl we be vtterly consumed, so that nothyng remayne, and tyll there be no delyueraunce?
O Lord God of Israel, thou art ryghteous, for we remayne yet escaped, at it is to se this daye. Behold also, in thy presence are we in oure trespaces, Ꟶ because of it maye we not stande before the.
And when Esdras prayed after this maner, Ꟶ knowleged, wepte, Ꟶ laye before the house of God, there resorted vnto him out of Israell a very greate congregacyon of men and wemen, and chyldren: Ꟶ the people wepte very sore.
And Sechania the sonne of Iehiel one of the children of Elam, answered, and sayde vnto Esdras. We haue trespaced agaynst oure God, and haue taken straunge wyues of the people of the land. Now there is hope yet in Israel concerning this thyng:
For now we wyll make a couenaunt with oure God, and put awaye all the wyues (and soch as are borne of them) accordinge to the councell of the Lord, and we wylbe in the feare of the commaundementes of oure God, that we maye do accordyng to the lawe.
Get the vp, for thys matter belongeth vnto the. We also wyll be wyth the, be of good conforte therfore, and do it.
Then rose Esdras, and toke an oth of the chefe preastes and Leuites, and of all Israell, that they shulde do accordynge to thys worde: Ꟶ they sware.
And Esdras stode vp from before the house of God, and went into the chamber of Iohanan the sonne of Eliasib. And when he came thither, he dyd eate no bred, nor drancke water: for he mourned because of the transgression of the people that had bene in captyuite.
And they caused a proclamacyon to go thorow out Iuda and Ierusalem, vnto all the chyldren which had bene in captiuyte, that they shuld geather themselues togeather vnto Ierusalem.
And that whosoeuer came not wyth in thre dayes accordyng to the deuyce of the rulers and Elders, all hys substaunce shulde be forfett, and he shulde be put out from the congregacyon of the captyue.
Then all the men of Iuda and Ben Iamin geathered them selues togeather vnto Ierusalem wythin thre dayes, euen the twentie daye of the nyenth moneth: and all the people sate in the strete before the house of God, and trembled because of thys matter, Ꟶ for the rayne.
And Esdras the preaste stode vp, and sayde vnto them. Ye haue transgressed, and haue taken straunge wyues, to make the trespace of Israel yet more:
confesse now therfore vnto the Lorde God of youre fathers, and do hys pleasure, and separate youre selues from the people of the lande, Ꟶ from the straunge wyues.
And all the congregacyon answered, and sayd with a loude voyce: It shalbe so, and we will do as thou hast sayde.
But the people are many, and it is a raynie wether, and the people are to faynt to tarye without in the strete, nether is this a worcke of one daye or two, for we haue offended very sore in this thyng.
Let oure rulers stand therfore in all the congregacyon, and lett all them whych haue taken straunge wyues in oure cyties come at the tyme appoynted, and let the Eldres of euery cytye and theyr Iudges be with them, tyll they haue turned the wrath of oure God awaye from vs concernyng this matter.
Then were appoynted Ionathan the sonne of Asahel, and Iahasia the sonne of Thekua ouer thys matter: And Mosullam and Sabatha the Leuytes helped them.
And the chyldren of the captyuite dyd euen so. And Esdras the preast, and the auncient heades thorow the house of theyr fathers, all men of great fame, separated them selues, and sat them downe on the fyrst daye of the tenth moneth, to examen the matte
And vntyll the fyrst daye of the fyrst moneth they were fynishyng the busynes wyth all the men that had taken straunge wyues.
And amonge the chyldren of the Preastes there were men founde that had taken straunge wyues, namely amonge the chyldren of Iesua the sonne of Iosedec and of hys brethren, Masiah, and Eliezer, Iarib and Gedalia,
and they gaue theyr handes there vpon, that they wolde put awaye their wyues: and for their trespasse offeryng, to geue a ramme for their trespasse.
And among the chyldren in Emer, Honany and zabadia.
Amonge the chyldren of Harim, Maasia, Elia, Someiah, Iehiel, and Usia.
Amonge the chyldren of Phashur, Elioenai, Maasia, Ismael, Nethanel, Iosabad,
Simei and Kelaia (whych same is Kalithah) Pathahiah, Iuda, and Eleazar.
Among the syngers also Eliasib. And amonge the porters Sellum, and Telem and Uri.
And of Israel. Amonge the chyldren of Pharhos, Remia, Iesiah, Malchia, Miamin, Eleazar, Malchia and Banaia.
Amonge the chyldren of Elam, Methania, zachary, Ieheil, Abdi, Ierimoth and Elia.
Amonge the chyldren of zathu, Elioenai, Eliasib, Mathania, Ierimoth, zabad and Aziza.
Amonge the chyldren of Bebai, Iehohanan, Hanania, zabai, and Athalai.
Amonge the chyldren of Beni, Mesulam, Maluc, Adaiah, Iasub, Saal and Ierimoth,
Among the chyldren of the captayne Moab, Adna, Cholal, Benaia, Masia, Mathania, Bezelel, Benui and Manasse.
Among the chyldren of Harim, Eliezer, Iesia, Malchia, Semeia, and Simeon:
Ben Iamin, Malluch and Samaria.
Amonge the chyldren of Hasum, Mathanai, Mathathah, zabad, Eliphelet, Ieremy, Manasse and Simei.
Amonge the chyldren of Bani, Madai, Amram, Huel,
Banea, Cheluhi, Badaiah,
Uaniah, Maremoth, and Eliasib,
Mathania, Mathanai, Iaesai,
Bani, Beni, and Semeiah,
Selemia, Nathan, and Adaia,
Machnadbai, Sasai and Sarai,
Asarel, Selemiahu, Ꟶ Samariah,
Sallum, Amaria, and Ioseph.
Amonge the chyldren of Nebo, Iehiel, Mathathia, zabad, zabina, Iadai, Ioel, and Banaia.
All these had taken straunge wiues. And among the same, there were some, that had chyldren by the wyues.
The wordes of Nehemia the sonne of Hachalia. It fortuned in the moneth Chisleu in the twentie yere, that I was in the castell at Susan:
Ꟶ Hanani one of my brethren came with certayne men of Iuda, and I asked them how the Iewes dyd that were delyuered an escaped from the captyute, and how it went at Ierusalem.
And they sayde vnto me: The remnaunt of the captyuyte are there in the lande in greate misfortune and rebuke. The wall of Ierusalem also is broken downe, and the gates therof are brent with fyre.
It fortuned, that when I hearde these wordes, I sat me downe and wepte, and mourned certayne dayes, Ꟶ fasted, Ꟶ prayed before the God of heauen,
Ꟶ sayde, O Lorde God of heauen, thou greate Ꟶ terrible God, thou that kepest couenaunt and mercy for them that loueth the, and obserue thy commaundementes:
let thyne eares hearken, I beseche the, and let thyne eyes be open, that thou mayest heare the prayer of thy seruauntes, whych I praye now before the, daye Ꟶ nyghte, for the chyldren of Israel thy seruauntes, and knowledge the synnes of the chyldren of Israel, which we haue synned agaynst the. I and my fathers house haue synned.
We haue bene vtterly dispersed from thy lawe, and haue not kepte the commaundementes, statutes and lawes, which thou commaundedst thy seruaunt Moses.
I besech the, call to remembraunce the worde that thou commaundedst thy seruaunt Moses, Ꟶ saydest: Ye wyll transgresse, and I will scater you abroade among the nacions.
But yf ye turne vnto me, and kepe my commaundementes Ꟶ do them: though ye were cast out vnto the vttermost parte of heauen, yet will I gather you from thence, and wyll brynge you vnto the place, that I haue chosen to set my name there.
They are thy seruauntes, and thy people, whom thou hast deliuered thorowe thy great power Ꟶ in thy myghtie hand.
O Lord, I besech the, let thyne eare herken to the prayer of thy seruaunt, and to the prayer of thy seruauntes, whose desyre is to feare thy name, and let thy seruaunt prospere this daye, and graunte hym mercy in the syght of thys man: for I was the kynges buttelar.
It fortuned, that in the moneth Nisan in the twentyeth yeare of kynge Arthaxerses, the wyne stode before hym, and I toke vp the wyne, and gaue it vnto the kynge, and I was heuy in his presence.
And the kyng sayde vnto me: why lokest thou so sadly, whan thou art not sycke? it is nothynge els, but that thou art heuy herted. And I was sore afrayed,
and sayed vnto the kynge: God saue the kynges life for euer. How shulde I not loke sadly, whan the cytie and place of my fathers buryall lyeth waste, and the gates therof are so consumed with fyre?
And the kyng sayde vnto me: what is then thy request? I made my prayer also to the God of heauen,
and sayde vnto the kyng: yf it please the kyng, and yf thy seruaunt haue founde fauoure in thy syghte, sende me into Iuda vnto the cytie of my fathers buryall, that I maye buylde it.
And the kynde sayde vnto me (the quene his wyfe sytting by him) howe longe shall thy iourney continue, and when wylt thou come agayne? And it pleased the kynge to sende me, and I sett him a tyme,
Ꟶ sayde vnto the kyng: yf it please the kyng, let him geue me letters to the captaynes which are beyonde the water, that they maye conuaye me ouer, tyll I come into Iuda:
and letters vnto Asaph the Lord of the kinges wood, that he maye geue me tymber to make beames for the gates of the palace (which is harde by the house) Ꟶ for the walles of the cytie, and for the house that I shall entre into. And the kynge gaue me accordinge to the hande of my God, which was good vpon me.
And when I came to the captaynes beyonde the water, I gaue them the kynges letters And the kynge had sent captaynes and horsmen with me.
Sanabalat also the Horonite and Tobia a seruaunt (the Ammonite) hearde of it, and it greued them sore, that there was come a man which soughte the welth of the chyldren of Israel.
And I came to Ierusalem, Ꟶ was there thre dayes,
and I gat me vp in the night season, and a fewe men with me: nether tolde I anye man, what God had geuen me in my hert to be at Ierusalem: and there was not one beast with me saue it that I rode vpon.
And I departed in the nyghte by the valley porte, before the Dragon well, Ꟶ to the Donge porte, and considered the walles of Ierusalem, how they were broken downe, and the portes therof consumed with the fyre.
And I went ouer vnto the wellporte, and to the kynges condyte, and there was no rowme for the beast that was vnder me, to passe.
Then wente I on in the nyght by the brooke syde and consydered the wall, and turned backe, and came home agayne by the valley porte.
And the rulers knewe not whither I wente or what I dyd: neyther dyd I as yet tell it vnto the Iewes, to the preastes, to the noble men, to the rulers, and to the other that laboured in the worcke.
Then sayde I vnto them: ye se the miserye that we are in, how Ierusalem lyeth waste, and how the gates therof are brent with fyre: come therfore, that we maye buylde vp the wall of Ierusalem, Ꟶ that we be no more a rebuke.
And I told them of the hande of my God, (that it was gracious ouer me) and the kynges wordes that he had spoken vnto me. And they sayde: let us get vp and buylde: and they strengthed their hande to goode.
But when Sanabalat the Horonite, and Tobia the seruaunt (an Ammonite,) and Gesem the Arabian herde it, they laughed vs to skorne, and mocked vs, and sayde: what is thys that ye do? Wyll ye fall awaye from the kynge?
Then answered I them, and sayde: the God of heauen, he it is that hath graunted vs prosperite: and we be his seruauntes. Let vs get up and buylde. As for you, ye haue no porcyon nor right, nor remembraunce in Ierusalem.
And Eliasib the hie preast gat him vp with hys brethren the preastes, Ꟶ they buylded the Shepegate. They repayred it, Ꟶ set vp that dores of it: euen vnto the tower Mea repayred they it, and vnto the tower of Hananeel.
Nexte vnto him also buylded the men of Iericho. And besyde him buylded Sachur the sonne of Amri.
But the fyshe porte dyd the chyldren of Sanaa buyld, which also layed the beames therof, an set on the dores, lockes and barres of it.
And nexte vnto him builded Meremoth the sonne of Uria, the sonne of Hakoz: and nexte vnto them buylded zadoc the sonne of Baana.
And nexte vnto him buylded they of Thekoa. But the great men that were amonge them, put not theyr neckes to the worcke of their Lorde.
The Oldegate buylded Iehoiada the sonne of Paseah, and Mesulam the sonne of Besodia, they layde the beames therof, and set on the dores, lockes and barres of it.
Nexte vnto them, buylded Malatiah of Gibeon, and Iadon of Merano, men of Gibeon, and of Mispa, where he that was captayne of this syde the water had a mansion.
Nexte vnto him buylded Usiel the sonne of Harhaiah the goldsmyth. Nexte vnto him also builded Hananiah the sonne of Harakahim, and they repayred Ierusalem vnto the brode wall.
Nexte vnto them buylded Raphaiah the sonne of Hur, the ruler of the halfe parte of Ierusalem.
Nexte vnto hym buylded Iedata the sonne of Harumaph ouer agaynst his house: and nexte vnto him buylded Hatus the sonne of Hasabnia.
But Melchia the sonne of Harim and Hasub the sonne of the captayne of Moab buylded the other pece, and the tower besyde the fornaces.
Nexte vnto him buylded Sallum a syngers sonne, the ruler of the halfe parte of Ierusalem, he and his daughters.
The valley gate buylded Hanum, Ꟶ the cytesyns of zanoa. They buylded it, and set on the dores, lockes and barres therof, and a thousande cubites on the wall, vnto the Donge porte.
But the Donge porte buylded Melchiah the sonne of Rechab, the ruler of the fourth parte of Bethcharem: he repayred it, and set on the dores, lockes and barres therof.
But the wellgate repayred Sallum the sonne of Cholhosah, the ruler of the fourth parte of Mispa. He buylded it, and layed the beames, and set on the dores, lockes, and barres therof, and the wall vnto the pole of Siloah by the kynges garden, and vnto the steppes that go downe from the cytie of Dauid.
After him buylded Nehemiah the sonne of Afbok, the ruler of the halfe parte of Bethzur, vntyll the other syde ouer agaynst the sepulchres of Dauid, and to the pole that was repayred, and vnto the house of the myghtie.
After him buylded the Leuites, Rehum the sonne of Bani: and nexte vnto him buylded Hasabia the ruler of the halfe parte of Keilah in hys quarter.
After hym buylded theyr brethren. Bauai the sonne of Henadad the ruler of the halfe parte of Keilah:
and after hym buylded Ezer the sonne of Iesua the ruler of Mispa the other pece, harde ouer agaynst the goynge vp to the house of ordinaunce that was in the corner.
Agayne, after hym brake forth Baruch the sonne of zachai of indignacyon, and repayred the other pece from the turnyng corner vnto the dore of the house of Eliasib the hye prest.
After hym also buylded Merimoth the sonne of Uria the sonne of Hacos the other pece, from the dore of the house of Eliasib, euen as longe as the house of Eliasib extended.
After hym buylded the preastes, the men of the playne.
After hym buylded BenIamin and Hasub ouer agaynst theyr house: and after hym wrought Asaria the sonne of Maasia the sonne of Anania nexte vnto hys house.
After hym also buylded Benui the sonne of Hanadad the other pece, from the house of Asaria vnto the turnynge of the wall, and vnto the corner.
After hym buylded Pala the sonne of Usai ouer agaynst the corner and the hye tower, which lyeth out ouer from the kynges house, that was besyde the courte of the preson. After hym Phedaia the sonne of Pharhos
(as for the Nethinims they dwelt in the strong holde vnto the watergate, towarde the east, and to the tower that lyeth out.)
After hym buylded they of Thekua the other pece ouer agaynst the greate tower, that lyeth outwarde, vnto the wall of the stronge holde.
But from aboue the Horsgate forth, buylded the preastes, euery one ouer agaynst his house.
And after them buylded zadok the sonne of Immer ouer agaynst his house. After hym buylded also Semeia the sonne of Sechania the keper of the Eastgate.
After him buylded Hanania the sonne of Selemia, and Hanun the sonne of zalaph the syxte, the other peace. And after him buylded Mesulam the sonne of Barachia ouer agaynst his store house.
After him buylded Malachia the goldsmythes sonne, vntyll the house of Nithinims, and of the merchauntes ouer agaynst the gate of Mephkad, and to the parler in the corner.
And betwene the parlour of the corner vnto the Shepegate buylded the goldsmytes and the merchauntes.
But when Sanabalat heard that we buylded the wall, he was wroth in hym selfe, and toke greate indignacion, Ꟶ mocked the Iewes,
and sayde before his brethren Ꟶ the souldyers of Samaria: what do these impotent Iewes? wyll the hethen suffre them? shall they offre? shall they perfourme it in one daye? shal they make the stones whole agayne that are brought to dust, and brent?
And Tobiah the Ammonite was besyde him, and sayde: Though they buylde, yet yf a foxe go vp, he shall breake downe theyr stonye wall.
Heare (O thou oure God) for we are despised, turne their shame vpon their awne heade, Ꟶ geue them ouer into despisynge in the lande of their captiuite.
Couer not their wickednesse, Ꟶ let not their synne be put out in thy presence: for they haue prouoked the buylders.
And so buylded we the wall, Ꟶ it was ioyned whole together, vnto the half heygth therof. And the people were mynded to laboure.
And it fortuned, that when Sanabalat, and Tobiah, Ꟶ the Arabians, Ammonites, Ꟶ Asoodites heard, that the walles of Ierusalem were mad vp, and that the gappes beganne to be stopped, they were very wroth,
Ꟶ conspired all together to come, Ꟶ fyght against Ierusalem, and to make the people an hynderaunce therin.
Neuertheles, we made our prayer vnto our God, Ꟶ set watchmen by them, which buylded daye Ꟶ nyght ouer agaynst them.
And Iuda sayd: the strength of the bearers is to feble, Ꟶ there is yet moch more morter, Ꟶ we are not able to buyld on the wall.
And our aduersaries sayd: they shall not knowe nether se, tyll we come in the middes amonge them, and slaye them, and hinder the worcke.
But it fortuned that when the Iewes (which dwelt besyde them) came, they tolde vs as good as ten tymes, that in all places where ye go vnto, they are appointed to fal vpon vs.
Therfore set I the people after their kinredes wt their swerdes, speares Ꟶ bowes beneth in the lowe places behynd the wal,
Ꟶ I loked, Ꟶ gat me vp, Ꟶ sayd vnto the chefe men, to the rulers, Ꟶ to the other people, be not ye afrayed of them, but thincke rather vpon the greate Lord, whych ought to be feared, Ꟶ fight for your brethren, your sonnes, yor daughters, your wiues, Ꟶ your houses.
Neuertheles, it chaunced that when our enemies hearde, that we had gotten worde of it. God brought their councel to naught, Ꟶ we turned all againe to the wal, euery one vnto his labor.
And from that time forth it came to passe that the half parte of the yong men did the laboure, Ꟶ the other half parte of them helde the speares, shyldes, bowes, and brestplates: Ꟶ the rulers stode behynde all the house of Iuda,
which buylded on the wall, and bare burthens from those that laded them. With one hande dyd euery one worcke, Ꟶ wt the other helde he hys weapen.
And euery one that buylded, had his swerd, gyrde by hys thygh, and so buylded they. And the trompet blewe besyde me.
And I sayd vnto the principal men, to the rulers, and to the other people: the worke is great and large, Ꟶ we are separated vpon the wall one farre from another.
Loke in what place therfore ye heare the noyse of the trompet, resorte ye thyther vnto vs, Ꟶ our God shal fight for vs,
Ꟶ we will be labouryng in the worcke. And the halfe part of them helde the speares from the mornyng spryng, tyll the starres came forth.
And at the same tyme said I vnto the people: euery one abyde with hys seruaunt at Ierusalem, that in the night season we maye watch, and labour on the daye tyme.
As for me and my brethren, my seruauntes, and the men of the watch (which were behynde me) we put neuer of oure clothes, nomore then the other dyd theyr harnesse, saue onely because of the water.
And there arose a great complaynte of the people, and of theyr wyues agaynst their brethren the Iewes.
For there were some that sayd: our sonnes and daughters and we are to many, therfore wyll we take corne for them, that we maye eate, and lyue.
Some also there were that sayde: let vs sett our landes, vyneyardes and houses to pledge, and take vp corne in the darth.
But som there were that sayde: let vs borowe money for the kynges trybute Ꟶ that vpon our landes and vyneardes.
Behold, oure bodyes as the bodyes of oure brethren, and oure chyldren as theyr chyldren: elles shulde we subdue our sonnes and daughters vnto bondage, and some of oure daughters are subdued vnto bondage all ready, Ꟶ no strength is there in houre handes, and other men haue our landes and vyneyardes.
And when I heard their complaynte and soch wordes, it displeased me sore,
and I aduised so in my mynde, that I rebuked the councelers, and the rulers, and sayde vnto them: Euery one of you is to chargeable vnto hys brother. And I brought a greate congregacyon agaynst them,
and sayd vnto them we (after oure abilite) haue bought our brethren the Iewes, which were solde vnto the heathen. And wyll ye sell your brethren agayne vnto the heathen, after that they haue bene solde vnto vs? Then helde they theyr peace, and coulde fynde nothynge to answere.
And Nehemia sayde: It is not good that ye do. Ought ye not to walke in the feare of God, because of the rebuke of the heathen that are our enemyes?
I and my brethren, and my seruauntes do lend them money Ꟶ corne: but as for vsurye, let vs leaue it.
Therfore, thys same daye I pray you se that ye restore them theyr landes agayne, theyr vineyardes, oyle gardens, and their houses, and remytte the hundred part of the money, of the corne, wyne and oyle that ye haue wonne of them.
Then sayd they: we will restore them agayne, Ꟶ wyll requyre nothing of them, and will do as thou hast spoken. And I called the prestes, Ꟶ toke an oth of them, that they shuld do so.
And I shoke my lappe, Ꟶ sayde. God shake out euery man after the same maner from hys house Ꟶ laboure, that maynteyneth not this word: euen thus be he shaken oute, and voyde. And all the congregacyon sayde: Amen, and praysed the Lord. And the people dyd so.
And from the tyme forth that (the kyng) committed vnto me to be a captayne of them that were in the land of Iuda, euen from the .xx. yere vnto the .xxxij. yeare of kynge Arthaxerses (that is .xij. yere) I wt my brethren lyued not of soch sustenaunce as was geuen to a captayne.
For the olde captaynes that were before me, had bene chargeable vnto the people, and had taken of them bread and wyne, and .xl. sycles of syluer: yee, and their seruauntes had oppressed the people. But so dyd not I, and that because of the feare of God.
But I laboured also in the worcke vpon the wal, and bought no lande. And all my seruauntes came thyther together vnto the worke.
More ouer, there were at my table an .C. and .l. of the Iewes and rulers, which came vnto me from among the heathen, that are about vs.
And ther was prepared for me dayly an oxe and .vj. chosen shep, and byrdes, Ꟶ euer once in .x. dayes a greate summe of wyne. Yet requyred not I the lyuyinge of a captayne, for the bondage was greuous vnto the people.
Thincke vpon me my God vnto the best, according to all that I haue done for thys people.
And when Sanabalat, Tobiah, Ꟶ Gesem the Arabian, and the other of our enemyes heard that I had buylded the wall: and that ther were no mo gappes therin (howbeit at the same tyme had I not hanged the dores vpon the gates)
Sanabalat Ꟶ Gesem sent vnto me, sayenge: that we maye mete and take councell together in the villages that are in the playne of the cytie Ono. Neuerthelesse, they thought to do me euell.
And I sent messengers vnto them, sayenge: I haue a great busynes to do, and I cannot come downe. The worcke shulde stande stil, yf I were neclygent, and came downe to you.
Howbeit, they sent vnto me as good as foure times after the same maner. And I gaue them the same answere.
Then sent Sanabalat hys seruaunt agayne vnto me the fyfth tyme, wt an open letter in hys hand,
wherin was writen: it is tolde the heathen, and Gesem hath sayde it, that thou and the Iewes thincke to rebell: for the which cause thou buyldest the wall, that thou mayest be their kyng in these matters,
and hast ordeyned the prophetes to preach of the at Ierusalem, and to saye: He is kynge of Iuda. And now shall thys come to the kynges eares: come now therfore, and let vs take our councell together.
And I sent vnto hym, sayinge: there is no soch thynges done as thou sayst: for thou faynest them out of thyne awne herte.
For they were all mynded to make vs afrayed, sayinge: they shall withdrawe their handes from the worcke, that it shall not be fynisshed. Howbeit, I strengthed my hande the more.
And I came vnto the house of Semaia the sonne of Delaia the sonne of Mehetabeel, and he had shut hym self within, and sayde: let vs come together into the house of God, euen vnto the myddes of the temple, and shutte the dores of the temple: for they wyll come to slaye the, yee, euen in the nyght wyll they come to put the to death.
And I sayde: shulde any soch man as I flye? Who is that, beyng as I am, that wil go into the temple, to saue his lyfe? I wyll not go in.
And I perceaued, that God had not sent hym. Yet spake he prophecy vpon me, neuerthelesse, Tobiah and Sanabalat had hyred him for money.
Therfore toke he the money that through feare I shulde so do, and synne: that they might haue an euell reporte of me, to blaspheme me.
My God, thinke thou vpon Tobiah and Sanabalat accordynge vnto these theyr workes, and of the prophet Noadia, and of the other prophetes, that wolde haue put me in feare.
And the wall was fynysshed on the fyue and twentye daye of the moneth Elul, in two and fyfty dayes.
And when all our enemyes hearde therof, all the heathen that were about vs, were afrayed, and theyr courage fayled them. And they perceaued, that thys worcke came of our God.
And at the same tyme were ther many of the chefe of Iuda, whose letters wente vnto Tobiah, and agayne from Tobiah vnto them
(for there were many in Iuda, that were sworne vnto him: for he was the sonne in lawe of Sechania, the sonne of Arah, Ꟶ his sonne Iehonathan had the daughter of Mesullam, the sonne of Barachia,
and they spake good of hym before me, and tolde hym my wordes) and Tobiah sent letters, to put me in feare.
Now when the wall was buylded, I hanged on the dores also, and the porters, syngers Ꟶ leuites were appoynted.
And I commaunded my brother Hanani, and Hanania the ruler of the castel at Ierusalem: for he was a faithfull man, and feared God more then dyd many other,
and I sayde vnto them let not the gates of Ierusalem be opened, vntyll the sonne be whote. And whyle they were standinge in the watch, they shutt the dores and barred them. And we appoynted certayne cytesins of Ierusalem, appoynted to be watchmen, euery one to kepe hys watch, and euery one to be ouer against his house.
As for the cite, it was large of rowme, and great, but the people were fewe therin, and the houses were not buylded.
And my God gaue me in my hert, that I gathered togeather the principall men, Ꟶ the officiers, and the people, to nombre them, and I founde a register of the nombre of them which came vp before out of the captiuyte:
Ꟶ founde wryten therin: these are the sonnes of the land that wente vp from the captiuyte of the caryinge awaye (whom Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon had brought awaye) Ꟶ came agayne to Ierusalem Ꟶ Iuda, euery one vnto his cytie.
They which came wt zorobabel are these: Iesua, Nehemia, Asariah, Raamia, Nahamani, Mardochee, Belsam, Mesperath, Beguai, Nahum and Baanah. This is the nombre of the men of the people of Israel.
The chyldren of Pharos were two thousand, an hundred Ꟶ two Ꟶ seuentye:
the chyldren of Saphatiah, thre hundred and two Ꟶ seuentye:
the children of Arah, syxe hundred and two and fyftye:
the chyldren of the captayne of Moab amonge the chyldren of Iesua Ꟶ Ioab, two thousande, eyght hundred, and eyghtene:
the chyldren of Elam, a thousande, two hundred and foure and fyftye:
the chyldren of zathua, eyght hundred and fyue Ꟶ fortye,
the chyldren of zachai seuen hundred and threskore:
the chyldren of Banui: sixe hundred Ꟶ eyght Ꟶ fortie:
the chyldren of Bebai, syxe hundred Ꟶ eyght Ꟶ twentye:
the chyldren of Asgad, two thousande, thre hundred and two and twentye:
the chyldren of Adonicam, syxe hundred thre skore and seuen:
the chyldren of Begoai, two thousande, thre skore Ꟶ seuen:
the chyldren of Adin, syxe hundred and fyue an fyftie:
the chyldren of Ater of Hezekia, eyght and nyentye.
The chyldren of Hasom, thre hundred and eyght Ꟶ twentye:
the chyldren of Bezai, thre hundred and foure and twentye:
the children af Hariph, an hundred Ꟶ twelue:
the chyldren of Gibeon, nynetye Ꟶ fyue:
the men of Bethlehem Ꟶ Nethophah, an hundred foure skore and eyght:
the men of Anathoth, an hundred Ꟶ eyght Ꟶ twentie:
the men of Beth Asmaneth, two and fourtye:
the men of Kariath Iarim, Cephirah Ꟶ Beeroth, seuen hundred Ꟶ thre Ꟶ fortye:
the men of Ramah and Geba, syxe hundred Ꟶ one Ꟶ twentye:
the men of Michmas, an hundred and two and twentye:
the men of Bethel and Ai, an hundred and thre and twentye:
the men of Nebo, an hundred and two and fyftie:
the chyldren of the other Elam, a thousande, two hundred and foure and fyftye:
the chyldren of Harim: thre hundred and twentye:
the chyldren of Iericho: thre hundred Ꟶ fyue and fortye:
the chyldren of Lodhadid Ꟶ Ono, seuen hundred and one and twentye:
the chyldren of Sanaa, thre thousande, nyne hundred and thyrtye.
The preastes. The chyldren of Iedaiah of the house of Iesua, nyne hundred and thre and seuentye:
the chyldren of Immer, a thousande and two Ꟶ fyftye:
the chyldren of Phashur, a thousand, two hundred Ꟶ seuen Ꟶ fortye:
the chyldren of Harim, a thousande Ꟶ seuentene.
The Leuytes. The chyldren of Iesua of Cadmiel and of the chyldren of Hoduah, foure Ꟶ seuentye.
The syngers. The chyldren of Asaph, an hundred and eyght and fortye.
The porters: The chyldren of Sallum, the chyldren of Ater, the chyldren of Talmon, the chyldren of Acub, the chyldren of Hatita, the chyldren of Sobai, all together an hundred and eyght and thyrtye.
The Nethinims. The chyldren of ziha, the chyldren of Hasupha, the chyldren of Tebahoth,
the chyldren of Ceros, the chyldren of Sia, the chyldren of Phadon,
the chyldren of Lebanah, the chyldren of Hagaba, the chyldren of Salmat,
the chyldren of Hanan, the chyldren of Gidel, the chyldren of Gaher,
the chyldren of Reaia, the chyldren of Rezin, the chyldren of Necoda,
the chyldren of Gasam, the chyldren of Usa the chyldren of Phaseah,
the children of Besai, the chyldren of Meunim, the chyldren of Nephussim,
the chyldren of Bachur, the chyldren of Hacupha, the chyldren of Harhur,
the chyldren of Bazlith, the chyldren of Mehida, the chyldren of Harsa,
the chyldren of Barcos, the chyldren of Sissera, the chyldren of Thamah,
the chyldren of Neziah, the chyldren of Hatipha.
The chyldren of Salomons seruauntes: the chyldren of Sotai, the chyldren of Sophereth, the chyldren of Pherida,
the chyldren of Iaala, the chyldren of Darcon, the chyldren of Giddel,
the chyldren of Saphatiah, the chyldren of Hatil, the chyldren of Pochereth of zabaini, the chyldren of Amon.
All these Nethinims and the children of Salomons seruauntes, were thre hundred Ꟶ nynetie and two.
And these wente vp also of Thel Mela, Thel Harsa, Cherub, Adon and Immer: but they coulde not shewe theyr fathers house nor theyr sede, and that they were of Israel.
The chyldren of Dalaiah, the chyldren of Tobia and the chyldren of Necoda, syxe hundred and two and fortye.
And of the preastes, the chyldren of Habaiah: the chyldren of Hacos, the chyldren of Bersilai, whych toke one of the daughters of Bersilai the Gileadite to wyfe, and was named after their name.
These soughte theyr writyng in the register of theyr generacion, but they were not founde, therfore they were put from the presthode.
And Hathirsata sayd vnto them, that they shulde not eate of the moost holy, tyll there came vp a Preaste whych shulde were Urim and Thumin.
And so the whole congregacyon together was two Ꟶ fortye thousande, thre hundred, Ꟶ thre skore:
besyde their seruauntes and maydens, of whom there were seuen thousande, thre hundred and seuen and thirtye. And they had two hundred and seuen and fortye syngynge men and wemen.
Their horses, seuen hundred and syxe Ꟶ thirtye, Ꟶ their Mules: two hundred Ꟶ fyue Ꟶ fortye.
The camels, foure hundred Ꟶ fyue Ꟶ thirtye: syxe thousande, seuen hundred and twentye Asses.
And certayne of the auncyent fathers gaue vnto the worcke. Hathirsatha gaue to the treasure a thousand peces of gold, fyftie basens, fyue hundred Ꟶ thirtye prestes garmentes.
And some of the chefe fathers gaue vnto the treasure of the worke, twentie thousande peces of gold Ꟶ two thousande Ꟶ two hundred pounde of syluer.
And the other people gaue twentye thousande peces of golde, and two thousande pounde of syluer and thre skore and seuen preastes garmentes.
And the preastes Ꟶ Leuites, the Porters, and the syngers, Ꟶ the other of the people, and the Nethinims, Ꟶ all Israel, dwelt in their cyties. And the seuenth moneth came, and the chyldren of Israel were in theyr cyties.
And all the people geathered them selues together as one man in the strete that was before the watergate, and they sayde vnto Esdras the scrybe, that he shulde fetch the boke of the lawe of Moses, whych the Lorde commaunded to Israel.
And Esdras the preast brought the lawe before the congregacion both of men and wemen, and all that coulde vnderstande dyd herken vnto it, vpon the fyrst daye of the seuenth moneth,
and he red therin in the strete that was before the watergate (from the mornynge vntyll the noone daye) before men and wemen that dyd herken to it: and the eares of all the people were inclyned vnto the booke of the lawe.
And Esdras the scrybe stode vpon an hye pulpit of wood, whych they had made for the preachinge, Ꟶ besyde hym stode Mathathia, Sema, Anania, Uriah, Helkia, and Maaseia, on hys ryghte hande: and on hys lefte hande stode Pedaia, Misael, Malchia, Hasum, Hasebadana, zachary, and Mesulam.
And Esdras opened the boke before all the people, for he stode aboue all the people. And when he opened it, all the people stode vp.
And Esdras praysed the Lorde the greate God. And all the people answered Amen, Amen, with their handes vp, Ꟶ bowed them selues, and worshypped the Lorde, fallynge downe vpon their faces to the grounde.
And Iesua, Baam, Serabiah, Iamin, Acub, Sebathai, Hadaia, Maasia, Celita, Azaria, Iozabad, Hanan, Pelaia: and the Leuites caused the people to geue hede vnto the lawe, Ꟶ the people stode in their place.
And they red in the boke of the lawe of God distinctly Ꟶ playnly, so that men vnderstode the thinge that was red.
And Nehemiah (which is Hathirsatha) Ꟶ Esdras the preast Ꟶ scrybe, and the Leuites that caused the people to take hede, sayd vnto all the people: thys daye is holy vnto the Lorde youre God: be not ye sory, and wepe not. For all the people wepte, when they herde the wordes of the lawe.
And he sayd vnto them: go youre waye, and eate the fat, Ꟶ drincke the swete, Ꟶ sende parte vnto them also that haue not prepared them selues: for thys daye is holy vnto oure Lorde, be not ye sory therfore: for the ioye of the Lorde is youre strength.
And the Leuites stylled all the people, and sayd: holde youre peace, for the daye is holy, vexe not ye youre selues.
And all the people wente theyr waye to eate and drincke, and to sende parte vnto other, and to make greate myrth, because they had vnderstand the wordes that were declared vnto them.
And on the nexte daye were geathered together the chefe fathers amonge all the people and the preastes and Leuites, vnto Esdras the scrybe, that they myght vnderstand the wordes of the lawe.
And they founde wrytten in the lawe (which the Lorde had commaunded by Moses) that the children of Israel shulde dwell in bothes in the feast of the seuenth moneth:
Ꟶ that they shulde cause it to be declared and proclamed in all theyr cyties, Ꟶ thorow out Ierusalem, sayenge: go forth vnto the mount, and fetch Olyue braunches, Pyne braunches, Myrbraunches, Palmebraunches, and braunches of thicke trees, to make bothes, as it is wrytten.
And so the people went forth, and sett them, and made them bothes, euery one vpon the rofe of his house, Ꟶ in theyr courtes, Ꟶ in the courtes of the house of God, and in the strete by the watergate, and in the strete by porte Ephraim.
And all the congregacion of them that were come agayne out of the captiuite, made bothes, Ꟶ sat vnder the bothes: for sence the tyme of Iosua the sonne of Nun vnto this daye, had not the chyldren of Israel done so, and ther was very greate gladnesse.
And euery daye from the fyrst daye vnto the last, red Esdras in the boke of the lawe of God. And seuen dayes helde they the feast, and on the eyght daye, they geathered together, accordinge vnto the maner.
In the foure Ꟶ twentye daye of this moneth came the children of Israel together agayne, wyth fastinge and sack clothes, and erth vpon them,
and they that were of the sede of Israel were separated from all the straunge children, Ꟶ stode Ꟶ knowleged theyr synnes, Ꟶ the wyckednesses of theyr fathers,
Ꟶ stode vp in theyr place, Ꟶ red in the boke of the lawe of the Lord their God foure tymes on the daye, and they knowleged, Ꟶ worshipped the Lord their God foure tymes on the daye.
And the Leuytes stode on hye, namely Iesua, Bani, Cadmiel, Sabaniah, Buni, Sarebiah, Bani, Ꟶ Chanani, Ꟶ cryed loude vnto the Lord theyr God.
And the Leuites, Iesua and Cadmiel Bani and Hasabnia, Serebia Ꟶ Hodia, Sebania, and Phathahia, sayde: stande vp, and prayse the Lord yor God for euer: Ꟶ let thankes be geuen vnto the name of thy glorye, which excelleth all thankesgeuynge Ꟶ prayse.
Thou art Lord alone. Thou hast made heauen, Ꟶ the heauen of all heauens, with all theyr hoost, the earth Ꟶ all thinges that are therin, the see Ꟶ all that is therin: Ꟶ thou preseruest them all, and the hoost of heauen worshippeth the.
Thou art the Lord God, that hast chosen Abram, Ꟶ broughtest hym out of Ur in Chaldea, and calledst him Abraham,
and foundest hys hert faythfull before the and madest a couenaunt wyth him, to geue vnto hys sede the lande of the Cananites, Hethites, Amorites, Pheresites, Iebusites and Gersites, and hast made good thy wordes: for thou art ryghteous
and hast consydered the mysery of oure fathers in Egypte, and hearde their complaynte by the reed see,
and shewed tokens Ꟶ wonders vpon Pharao, and on all hys seruauntes, and on all the people of hys lande: for thou knewest, that they were presumptuous and cruell agaynst them, and so madest thou the a name, as it is thys daye.
And the reed see dydest thou deuyde in sunder before them, so that they went thorow the myddes of the see drye shode: and theyr persecuters threwest thou into the depe (as a stone) in the myghtie waters,
Ꟶ leddest them on the daye tyme in a cloudy pyller, Ꟶ on the nyghte season in a pyller of fyre, to shewe them lyghte in the waye that they wente.
Thou camest downe also vpon mount Sinai, Ꟶ spakest vnto them from heauen, and gauest them right iudgmentes, true lawes good commaundementes and statutes,
and declaredst vnto them thy holy Saboth, and commaundest them preceptes, ordinaunces, and lawes, by the hand of Moses thy seruaunt:
and gauest them bred from heauen when they were hongrye, Ꟶ broughtest forth water for them out of the rock when they were thyrstye: and promysedst them, that they shuld go in, and take possessyon of the land, ouer whych thou haddest lyfte vp thyne hand for to geue them.
But they Ꟶ oure fathers were proude and hardnecked, so that they folowed not the commaundementes,
and wolde not obeye, nether were myndefull of the wonders that thou dyddest for them: but became obstynate and heady, in so moche, that they turned backe to theyr bondage for theyr disobedyence. And thou my God forgauest, and wast gracyous, mercyfull, pacyent, and of greate goodnesse, and forsokest them not
And though they made a moulten calfe (Ꟶ sayde: Thys is thy goddes that brought the out of the land of Egypte) and dyd greate blasphemyes,
yet forsokest thou them not in the wyldernes, accordyng to thy greate mercy. And the cloudy pyller departed not from them on the daye tyme to leade them the waye, nether the pyller of fyre in the nyght season, to shewe them lyghte in the waye that they wente.
And thou gauest them thy good sprete, to enfourme them, and withheldest not thy Manna from theyr mouth, and gauest them water when they were thyrstye.
Fortye yeares longe madest thou prouisyon for them in the wyldernesse, so that they lacked nothynge, their clothes waxed not olde, and their fete swelled not.
And thou gauest them kyngedomes and nacyons, Ꟶ partedst them accordynge to their porcions, so that they possessed the lande of Sehon kyng of Hesebon, and the lande of Og the kynge of Basan.
And their chyldren multiplyedst thou as the starres of heauen, and broughtest them into the lande, wherof thou haddest spoken vnto theyr fathers, that they shulde go into it, and haue it in possessyon.
And the chyldren went in, and possessed the land, and thou subduedst before them the inhabyter of the lande, euen the Cananites, and gauest them into theyr hande, with their kynges and the people of the lande, that they might do with them what they wolde.
And they wanne theyr stronge cyties, and a fat lande, and toke possessyon of houses that were full of all maner of goodes, welles digged out, vineyardes, oylegardens, and many frutefull trees: and they dyd eate, Ꟶ were fylled, and became fat, and lyued in welth thorow thy greate goodnes.
Neuertheles they were disobedient, Ꟶ rebelled agaynst the, and cast thy lawe behynde their backes, and slewe thy prophetes (which exhorted them earnestly, that they myght bring them agayne vnto the) Ꟶ dyd greate blasphemyes.
Therfore, thou gauest them ouer into the hand of their enemyes, that vexed them. And in the tyme of their trouble whan they cryed vnto the, thou hardest them from heauen: Ꟶ thorow thy greate mercy thou gauest them sauiours, whych helped them out of the hande of their enemyes.
But when they came to rest, they turned back agayne, to do euell before the: therfore leftest thou them in the hande of theyr enemyes, so that they had the dominyon ouer them. And whan they conuerted, and cryed vnto the, thou herdeft them from heauen, Ꟶ many tymes hast thou delyuered them accordyng to thy greate mercy,
Ꟶ testyfyedst vnto them, that thou myghtest bryng them agayne vnto thy lawe. Not withstandyng, they were proude, Ꟶ herkened not vnto thy commaundementes, but synned in thy lawes (whych yf a man do he shall lyue in them,) and turned the shoulder awaye, and were styffnecked, and wolde not heare.
And many yeares dyddest thou forbeare them, Ꟶ testifyedst vnto them thorow thy sprete, euen by the hande of thy prophetes, and yet wolde they not heare. Therfore gauest thou them into the hande of the nacions in the landes.
And for thy great mercyes sake thou hast not vtterly consumed them, nether forsaken them: for thou art a gracyous and mercyfull God.
Now therfore oure God, thou greate God, myghtye and terrible, thou that kepest couenaunt Ꟶ mercy, regarde not a lytle all the trauayle that hath happened vnto vs, and oure kinges, oure princes, our preastes, oure prophetes, Ꟶ our fathers, and all thy people, sence the tyme of the kynges of Assur vnto thys daye.
And truly, thou art iust in all that thou hast broughte vpon vs: for thou hast done ryght.
As for vs, we haue bene vngodly, Ꟶ oure kynges, Ꟶ oure princes, oure preastes, Ꟶ oure fathers haue not done after thy lawe, nor regarded thy commaundementes, Ꟶ thy earnest exhortacyons, wherwith thou hast exhorted them,
Ꟶ they haue not serued the in their kyngdome, Ꟶ in thy greate goodes that thou gauest them, and in the large and plenteous lande which thou gauest before them, Ꟶ haue not conuerted from their wycked worckes.
Beholde, we are in bondage this daye: Ꟶ so is the lande that thou gauest vnto oure fathers, to enioye the frutes Ꟶ goodes therof, beholde, there are we bondmen.
And greate is the increase of it vnto the kynges, whom thou hast set ouer vs, because of oure synnes, Ꟶ they haue domynion ouer oure bodyes and catell (euen as they will them selues,) and we are in great trouble.
And in all this make we a sure couenaunt, Ꟶ wryte it, and oure princes, Leuites Ꟶ preastes seale vnto it,
The sealers were: Nehemiah (that is) Hathirsatha the sonne of Hachaliah and zedekia,
Saraia, Asariah, and Ieremy,
Phashur, Amaria, Malchia,
Hatus, Sebaniah, Malluch,
Harim, Merimoth, and Obadia,
Daniel, Ienthon, Ꟶ Baruch,
Mesulam, Abia, and Miamin,
Maasia, Belgai and Semeia, these were preastes.
The Leuytes were: Iesua the sonne of Azania, Benui amonge the chyldren of Henadad and Cadmiel.
And their brethren: Sechania, Hodia, Celita, Pelaia, Hanan,
Micha, Rehob, and Hasabiah,
Sachur, Serebia, Sabania,
Hodia, Bani Ꟶ Beninu.
The heades of the people were: Phares, the captayne of Moab, Elam, zathu, and Bani,
Boni, Asgad, Bebai,
Adonia, Begoai, Adin,
Ater, Hezekia, Asur,
Hodia, Hasum, Bezai,
Harip, Anathoth, Ꟶ Nebai,
Magphias, Mesulam, Hesir,
Mesesabel, zadoc, Iaddua,
Phalatia, Hanan, Anaia,
Hosea, Hanania, Hasub,
Halohes, Phaleha, Sobek,
Rehum, Hasebna, Maasia,
Ahia, Hanan, Ꟶ Anan,
Malluch, Harim Ꟶ Baana.
And the other people, the preastes, Leuites, porters, syngers, Nethinims, Ꟶ all they that had separated them selues from the people in the landes vnto the lawe of God, wt their wiues, their sonnes, and their daughters, and as many as coulde vnderstonde,
Ꟶ theyr lordes that had rule of them, receaued it for theyr brethren. And they came to sweare, and to bynde them selues with an ooth to walke in Gods lawe, whych was geuen by Moses the seruaunt of God, and that they wolde obserue Ꟶ do accordynge vnto all the commaundementes, iudgementes Ꟶ statutes of the Lord our God:
and that we wolde not geue oure daughters vnto the people in the londe, nether to take their daughters for our sonnes.
And yf the people of the lande broughte ware on the saboth, Ꟶ all maner of vitayles to sell, that we wolde not take it of them on the saboth Ꟶ on the holy dayes. and that we wolde let the seuenth yeare be fre, concernynge all maner of charge.
And we decreed a statute vpon oure selues to geue yearly the thyrde parte of a sycle to the mynistracion in the house of oure God,
to the shewbred, to the daylye meatofferynge, to the daylye burntofferynge of the sabothes, of the newe mones, and feast dayes, Ꟶ to the thynges that were sanctifyed, Ꟶ to the offerynges of attonement, to reconcyle Israel wyth all, and to all the busynes in the house of oure God.
And we cast the lot amonge the preastes, Leuites and the people, for offerynge of the wood to be brought vnto the house of or God from yeare to yeare, after the houses of oure fathers that it myght be brent at tymes appoynted, vpon the aultare of the Lorde God, as it is wrytten in the lawe:
and to bryng the fyrstlinges of oure land, Ꟶ the fyrstlynges of oure frutes of all trees, yeare by yeare, vnto the house of the Lorde:
and the fyrstlinges of oure sonnes, and of oure catell, as it is wrytten in the lawe: and the fyrstlinges of oure oxen Ꟶ of oure shepe, whych we shulde bring to the house of oure God, vnto the preastes that mynister in the house of oure God:
and that we shuld bryng the fyrstlynges of oure dowgh, and of oure heueofferynges, and the frutes of all maner of trees, of wyne also and of oyle, vnto the preastes to the chestes of the house of oure God. And the tythes of our lande vnto the Leuites, that the Leuytes myght haue the tithes in all the cyties of oure minystracyon.
And the preast the sonne of Aaron shall wyth the Leuites haue also of the tithes of the Leuites, so that the Leuites shal brynge vp the tythes of theyr tithes vnto the house of oure God, to the store houses and to the treasure houses.
For the chyldren of Israel Ꟶ the chyldren of Leui shall brynge vp the heueofferynges of the corne, wyne and oyle vnto the store houses, there as are the vessels of the sanctuary, and the preastes that minister, Ꟶ the porters and syngers, that we forsake not the house of oure God.
And the rulers of the people dwelt at Ierusalem. The other people also cast lottes, that amonge ten, one parte shulde go to Ierusalem into the holy cytie to dwell, and nyne partes to be in the cyties.
And the people thanked all the men, that were wyllynge to dwell at Ierusalem.
These are the heades of the lande, that dwelt in Ierusalem and in the cyties of Iuda, euery one in hys possessyon, and in theyr cyties: they of Israell, the preastes, Leuytes, the Nethinims, and the chyldren of Salomons seruauntes.
And at Ierusalem dwelt certayne of the chyldren of Iuda and of BenIamin. Of the chyldren of Iuda: Athaia the sonne of Usia, the sonne of zachary, the sonne of Amaria, the sonne of Saphatia, the sonne of Mahalaleell, of the chyldren of Phares.
And Maasia the sonne of Baruch, the sonne of Chal Hose, the sonne of Hasaia, the sonne of Adaia, the sonne of Ioiarib, the sonne of zachary, the sonne of Siloni.
All these were the chyldren of Phares that dwelt at Ierusalem: euen foure .C. thre score and eyght valeaunt men.
These are the children of BenIamin: Sallu the sonne of Mesullam, the sonne of Ioed, the sonne of Pedaia, the sonne of Calaia, the sonne of Masia, the sonne of Ithiel, the sonne of Isai.
And after hym Gabai, Selai nyne hundreth and eyght Ꟶ twentye.
And Ioel the sonne of zichri had the ouersyght of them: and Iuda the sonne of Senua was next ouer the cytie.
Of the preastes: Iedaiah the sonne of Ioiarib, Iachin.
Saraiah the sonne of Helkia the sonne of Mesullam, the sonne of zadoc, the sonne of Meraioth, the sonne of Ahitob, was prince in the house of God:
and hys brethren that perfourmed the worke in the temple .viij.C. and .xxij. And Adaia the sonne of Ieroham, the sonne of Plalaliel, the sonne of Amzi, the sonne of zachary, the sonne of Phashur the sonne of Malchia
and his brethren chefe amonge the fathers: two hundreth and two and fortye. And Amasai the sonne of Isarel the sonne of Ahasai, the sonne of Moselemoth, the sonne of Immer:
and hys brethren were valiaunt men, an hundreth and eyght Ꟶ twentye. And theyr ouersear was zabdiel a sonne of one of the great men.
Of the Leuytes: Semeia the sonne of Hasub the sonne of Aserikam, the sonne of Hasabia the sonne of Bunni:
and Sabathai and Iosabab of the chefe of the Leuites, had the ouersight of the outwarde busynes of the house of God.
And Mathania the sonne of Micha, the sonne of zabdi, the sonne of Asaph, was the principall to begynne the thankesgeuynge and prayer. And bakbukia the seconde amonge hys brethren, and Abda the sonne of Sammua, the sonne of Galai, the sonne of Ieduthun.
All the Leuites in the holy cytie were two hundreth foure skore and foure.
And the porters Acub and Talmon, Ꟶ theyr brethren that kepte the portes, were an hundreth and two and seuentye.
As for the resydue of Israel, the preastes and Leuites, they were in all the cyties of Iuda, euery one in hys inherytaunce.
And the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel: and ziba and Gispa was set ouer the Nethinims.
The ouersear of the Leuites at Ierusalem, was Usi the sonne of Baani, the sonne of Hasabia, the sonne of Mathania, the sonne of Micha. Of the chyldren of Asaph there were syngers aboute the busynes in the house of God:
for it was the kynges commaundement concernyng them, that the syngers shulde deale faythfully euery daye as was accordynge.
And Pathaia the sonne of Mesebabel of the chyldren of zerah the sonne of Iuda nexte the kynge in all matters concernynge the people, and theyr vyllages, and landes.
And some of the chyldren of Iuda that were wythout in the townes of theyr lande dwelt at Kariath Arbe, and in the vyllages therof, at Didon, and in the vyllages therof:
and at Iecabzeel, and in the vyllages therof: at Iesua, Moladah, Bethphalet
in the towne of Sual: Beerseba, and in theyr vyllages,
at Sikelag and Moconah, and in theyr vyllages:
And at Enremon, zarah, Ierimuth,
zonoa, Odollam and in theyr vyllages: At Lachis, and in the feldes therof: At Aseka, Ꟶ in the villages therof: and they dwelt from Bersabe vnto the valley of Hinnon.
The chyldren also of BenIamin of Geba, dwelt a Machinas, Aia, Bethel and in theyr vyllages.
And at Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah,
Hazor, Ramah, Gethaim,
Hadid, zeboim, Nabalath,
Lod, and Ono, the carpenters valley.
And the Leuytes had possessyon both in Iuda and in BenIamin.
These are the preastes and Leuites that wente vp with zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel Ꟶ with Iesua: Sararia, Ieremi, Ꟶ Esdras,
Amaria, Maluch, Hatus,
Sechania, Rehum, Merimoth,
Iddo, Genthoi, Abia,
Miamin, Maaria, Belga,
Semaia, Ioiarib, Iadaia,
Salu, Amok, Helkia, and Iadaia. These were the heades among the preastes, and theyr brethren, in the dayes of Iesua.
The Leuytes were these: Iesua, Bennui, Cadmil, Sarabia, Iuda and Mathania which was ouer the offyce of thankesgeuynge, he and hys brethren:
Bacbukia and Himni and theyr brethren, were aboute them in the watches.
Iesua begat Ioakim. Ioakim also begat Eliasib, Ꟶ Eliasib begat Ioiada.
Ioiada begat Ionathan, and Ionathan begat Iadua.
In the dayes of Ioakim were these the chefe fathers amonge the prestes: vnder Sararia, Maraia: vnder Ieremy, Hanania:
vnder Esdras, Mesulam: vnder Amaria, Iehoanan:
vnder Milico, Ionathan: vnder Sebania, Ioseph:
vnder Harim Adna: vnder Maraioth, Helca:
vnder Iddo, zachary: vnder Genthon, Mesullam:
vnder Abia, zichri: vnder Miniamin and Moadia, Piltai:
vnder Belga, Samua: vnder Senieia, Iehonathan:
vnder Ioiarib, Mathenai, vnder Iadaia, Usi:
vnder Selai, Kelai: vnder Amok, Eber:
vnder Helchia, Hasabia: vnder Iadaia, Nathanael.
And in the tyme of Eliasib: Ioiada, Iohanan Ꟶ Iadua, were the chefe fathers amonge the Leuites and the preastes, written vnder the raygne of Darius the Persian.
The chyldren of Leui, the principall fathers were written in the Chronicles, vntill the tyme of Ionathan the sonne of Eliasib.
And these were the chefe among the Leuites, Hasabia, Serebia and Iesua the sonne of Cadmiel, and theyr brethren in their presence, to geue prayse Ꟶ thankes, accordynge as Dauid the man of God had ordeyned it, one watch ouer agaynst another.
Mathania, Balbukia, Obadia, Mesullam, Talmon and Abub were porters in the watch at the thresholdes of the gates.
These were in the dayes of Ioiakim the sonne of Iesua the sonne of Iosedec, and in the dayes of Nehemia the captayne, and of the preaste Esdras the scrybe.
And in the dedycacyon of the wall at Ierusalem, they sought the Leuites out of all theyr places, that they myghte be brought to Ierusalem, to kepe the dedicacion Ꟶ gladnesse, wyth thankesgeuynges, and singinge wyth Cymbales, Psalteries, and harpes.
And the chyldren of the syngers geathered them selues together from euery syde out of the playne countre aboute Ierusalem, and from the vyllages of Netho phathi,
from the house of Gilgal, and out of the countrees of Geba and Asmaueth: for the syngers had buylded them vyllages rounde aboute Ierusalem.
And the preastes and Leuites were purifyed, and clensed the people, and the gates and the wall.
And I brought the princes of Iuda vp vpon the wall, and appoynted two greate queers of men to geue thankes, whych wente on the ryghte hande of the wall towarde the Donggate,
and after them wente Hosaia, and halfe of the prynces of Iuda,
and Asaria, Esdras, and Mesullam,
Iuda, BenIamin, Semia and Ieremy:
and certayne of the preastes chyldren wyth trompettes, namely zachary the sonne of Ionathan, the sonne of Semeia, the sonne of Mathania, the sonne of Michaia, the sonne of zacur, the sonne of Asaph,
and hys brethren Semeia, Alarael, Melalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nathanael Ꟶ Iuda and Hanani, wyth the musicall instrumentes of Dauid the man of God. And Esdras the Scrybe went before them,
and besyde the wellgate, they wente vp ouer agaynst them vpon the steppes of the cytye of Dauid at the goynge vp of the wall beyonde the house of Dauid, vnto the Watergate Eastwarde.
The other queer of them that gaue thankes, went ouer agaynst them, and I after them, and the halfe parte of the people vpon the wall, beyonde the fornacegate, vntyll the brode wall,
and beyonde the porte of Ephraim, Ꟶ beyonde the Oldgate, beyonde the fyshgate, and the tower of Hananeel, and the tower of Mea, vntyll the Shepegate. And they stode styll in the presongate,
and so stode the two queers (of them that gaue thankes) in the house of God, and I and the halfe of the rulers wyth me,
and the Preastes, namely Eliakim, Maasia, Miniamin, Michaia, Elioenai, zachary and Hanania, wyth trompettes,
and Maasia, Semeiah, Eleasar, Ursi, Iehohanan, Melchiah, Elam and Ser. And the syngers sange loude, hauynge Iestahiah for theyr ouerseer.
And the same daye, they offred greate sacrifyces and reioysed: for God had geuen them greate gladnesse, so that both the wyues and chyldren were ioyfull, and the myrth of Ierusalem was herde farre of.
At the same tyme were there men appoynted ouer the treasure houses (wherin were the Heue offerynges, the fyrstlynges Ꟶ the tythes) that they shulde geather them out of the feldes aboute the cytyes, to destribute them vnto the preastes Ꟶ Leuites according to the lawe: for Iuda was glad of the preastes, Ꟶ Leuites, that they stode Ꟶ wayted
vpon the office of their God, which is a pure office. And the singers Ꟶ porters stode after the commaundment of Dauid Ꟶ of Salomon his sonne:
for in the tyme of Dauid Ꟶ Asaph, were the chefe syngers founded, Ꟶ the songes of prayse Ꟶ thankesgeuyng vnto God.
In the tyme of zorobabel Ꟶ Nehemia, dyd all they of Israel, geue porcions vnto the syngers and porters, euery daye hys porcion, and they gaue tythes vnto the Leuites: and the Leuites gaue tythes agayne, vnto the children of Aaron.
And that daye dyd they reade in the boke of Moses, Ꟶ the people herkened therto, Ꟶ there was found writen therin, that the Ammonites Ꟶ Moabites shulde neuer come into the congregacion of God,
because they mett not the children of Israel wt bread and water, but hyred Balaam agaynst them, that he shuld curse them: and oure God turned the curse into a blessing.
Now when they herde the lawe, it fortuned, that they separated from Israell euery one that had myxte hym selfe therin
And before this had the preast Eliasib the ouer syght of the treasury of the house of oure God, Ꟶ he was kynsman vnto Tobia:
Ꟶ had made him a great chambre, Ꟶ there had they afore tyme layed the offeringes, frankencense, vessell, Ꟶ the tythes of corne, and wyne and oyle (accordyng to the commaundement geuen to the Leuites, syngers and porters) and the heueofferynges of the preastes:
But in all this tyme was not I at Ierusalem: for in the two Ꟶ thyrtie yeare of Artaxerses kyng of Babylon, came I vnto the kyng, and after certayne dayes optayned I lycence of the kyng
to come to Ierusalem. And I gat knowlege of the euell that Eliasib dyd vnto Tobia, in that he had made him a chambre in the court of the house of God,
and it greued me sore, Ꟶ I cast forth all the vessels of the house of Tobia out of the chambre,
and commaunded them to clense the chambres. And thither brought I agayne the vessels of the house of God, with the meatoffering, and the incense.
And I perceaued, that the porcions of the Leuites were not geuen them, and that euery one fled to his land, euen the Leuites and syngers that executed the worke.
Then reproued I the rulers, Ꟶ sayd? why is the house of God forsaken? And I gathered them together, Ꟶ set them in their place.
Then brought all Iuda the tythes of corne, Ꟶ wyne and oyle vnto the treasure.
And I made treasurers ouer the treasure, euen Selemiah the preast, Ꟶ zadoc the scrybe, and of the Leuites, Phadaia, Ꟶ vnder their hand was Hanan the sonne of zacur the sonne of Mathania: for they were counted faythfull, and their office was to distribute the porcions vnto their brethren.
Thyncke vpon me O my God here in, and wipe not out my mercy that I haue shewed on the house of my God, and on the offices therof.
At the same tyme sawe I some tredynge wyne presses on the Saboth, Ꟶ bryngyng in shefes, Ꟶ asses laden wt wyne, grapes, figges Ꟶ brynging all maner of burthens vnto Ierusalem, vpon the Sabaoth daye. And I rebuked them earnestly the same daye that they sold the vitayles.
There dwelt men of Tyre also therin, which brought fysh and all maner of ware, Ꟶ solde on the Saboth vnto the children of Iuda in Ierusalem.
Then reproued I the rulers in Iuda, Ꟶ sayde vnto them: what euell thyng is this that ye do, Ꟶ breake the Saboth daye?
Dyd not youre fathers euen thus, Ꟶ our God brought all thys plage vpon vs Ꟶ vpon this cytie? And ye make the wrath more yet vpon Israel, in that ye breake the Saboth.
And it fortuned, that when the portes of Ierusalem beganne to be darke in the euenyng before the Saboth, I commaunded to shutt the gates, and charged, that they shuld not be opened tyll after the Saboth Ꟶ some of my seruauntes set I at the gates, that there shulde no burthen be brought in on the Saboth daye.
Then remayned the chapmen Ꟶ marchauntes once or twyce ouer nyght without Ierusalem wyth all maner of wares.
Then reproued I them sore, and sayde vnto them: why tary ye all nyght about the wall? If ye do it once agayne, I wyll laye handes vpon you. From that tyme forth came they nomore on the Saboth.
And I sayde vnto the Leuites that they shulde clense them selues, and that they shulde come and kepe the gates, to halowe the Saboth daye. Thynke vpon me (O my God) concernyng this also, Ꟶ spare me, accordyng to thy great mercy.
And at the same tyme sawe I Iewes, that maried wyues of Asdod, of Ammon and of Moab,
Ꟶ their childen spake halfe in the speach of Asdod, Ꟶ coulde not speake in the Iewes language, but by the tong myght a man perceaue euery people.
Then I reproued them, Ꟶ cursed them, Ꟶ smote certayne men of them, Ꟶ made them bare, and toke an ooth of them by God: Ye shal not geue your daughters vnto their sonnes, nether shall ye take their daughters vnto youre sonnes, or for youre selues.
Dyd not Salomon the kyng of Israel synne for soch? and yet among many Heythen was there no kynge lyke him, whych was deare vnto his God, Ꟶ God made him kynge ouer all Israel, Ꟶ yet neuertheles, outlandysh wemen caused him to synne?
Shall we then obeye vnto you, to do all this great euell, Ꟶ to transgresse agaynst oure God, and marye straunge wyues?
And one of the children of Iehoiada the sonne of Eliasib the hye preast, had made a contracte with Sanabalat the Horonite: but I chaced him from me.
(O my God) thynke thou vpon them that defyle the presthode, Ꟶ the couenaunt of the presthode Ꟶ of the Leuites.
Thus clensed I them from all soch as were outlandish, and appoynted the courses of the preastes Ꟶ Leuites, euery one in his office,
Ꟶ to offre the wod at tymes appoynted, and the fyrst frutes. Thinke thou vpon me (O my God) for the best.
It fortuned in the dayes of Ahasuerus whych raygned from India vnto Ethiopia (ouer an hundreth and seuen and twenty landes)
euen in those dayes whan the kyng Ahasuerus sate on his seate royall, which was in Susan the chefe cytie,
in the thirde yeare of his raygne, he made a feast vnto all his princes Ꟶ seruauntes. And the myghtye men of Persia Ꟶ Media, the capitaynes also Ꟶ rulers of his countrees were before him,
Ꟶ he shewed the riches and glorye of his kyngdome, Ꟶ the glorious worshippe of hys greatnesse, many dayes longe, euen an hundreth and foure score dayes.
And when these dayes were expyred, the kyng made a feast vnto all the people, that were in Susan the chefe cytie, both vnto great and small, seuen dayes long in the court of the garden by the kynges palace:
where there hanged white, grene Ꟶ yalow clothes, fastened with coardes of fyne sylke Ꟶ purple in syluer rynges, vpon pylers of Marble stone. The benches also were of golde Ꟶ syluer made vpon a pauement of grene, white, yalow and black Marble.
And they dranke in vessels of golde, Ꟶ chaunged vessell after vessell. And the kynges wyne was moch, accordyng to the power of the kyng.
And the drinke was so apoynted that none shulde compell anye man, for so the kyng had commaunded by the officers of his house, that euery one shuld do as it liked him.
And the quene Uasti made a feast also for the wemen in the palace of Ahasuerus.
And on the seuenth daye when the kyng was mery after the wyne, he commaunded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, Abagthan, zethar Ꟶ Carchas, the seuen chamberlaynes (that dyd seruice in the presence of kyng Ahasuerus)
to fetch the quene Uasti with the crowne regal into the kynges presence that he myght shewe the people and princes her fairnesse, for she was bewtifull.
But the quene Uasthi wolde not come at the kinges word by his chamberlaynes. Then was the kyng very wroth, Ꟶ his indignacion kyndled in him.
And the kyng spake to the wyse men, that had vnderstanding in the ordinaunces of the land, for the kynges matters must be handled before all soch as haue knowledge of the lawe and iudgement:
and the next vnto him were, Carsena, Sethar, Admata, Tharsis, Mares, Marsena, Ꟶ Mamucan, the seuen princes of Persia, and Media, whych sawe the kynges face, Ꟶ sat aboue in the kyngdom
what lawe (saieth the king) shuld be executed vpon the quene Uasthi, because she dyd not accordyng to the worde of the kyng Ahasuerus, whych he commaunded by his chamberlaynes?
And Memucan answered before the kyng and the princes: the quene Uasthi hath not onely done euell agaynst the kynge, but also agaynst all the princes and agaynst all the people that are in all the landes of kyng Ahasuerus:
for this dede of the quene shall come abrode vnto all wemen, so that they shall despised their husbandes before their eyes, and shal saye: the kyng Ahasuerus commaunded Uasthi the quene to be brought in before hym, but she wold not come.
And so shall the princesses in Persia and Media saye likewyse vnto all the kynges princes, when they heare of this dede of the quene, thus shall there aryse to moch despitefulnes Ꟶ wrath.
If it please the kyng therfore, let there go a commaundment from him, Ꟶ let it be written according to the lawes of the Persians and Medians (and not to be transgressed) that Uasthi come nomore before kyng Ahasuerus, Ꟶ let the king geue her kingdome vnto another, that is better then she.
And when this commaundement of the kyng (which shalbe made) is published thorow out all his empire (whych is greate) all wemen shall hold their husbandes in honoure both among great and small.
This pleased the kyng Ꟶ the prynces: and the kyng dyd according to the word of Memucan.
For he sent letters forth in to all the kynges landes, in to euery land, accordyng to the wryting therof, Ꟶ to euery people after their language, that euery man shulde be lord in his awne house. And this caused he to be spoken after the language of his people.
After these actes, when the displeasure of king Ahasuerus was now layed, he thought vpon Uasthi, Ꟶ what she had done, and what was concluded agaynst her.
Then sayd the kynges seruauntes that ministred vnto him: Let there be fayre young virgins sought for the kyng,
and the kyng appointed certayne men in all the landes of his empyre, whom he charged that they shuld bryng together all the fayre yong virgins vnto Susan the head cite, to the wemens buylding, vnder the hand of Hagei the kynges chamberlayne, that kepte the wemen, to geue them their apparell.
And that the damsell whych pleased the kynge shuld be quene in Uasthis steade. And this pleased the kyng, and he dyd so.
In the cyte of Susan there was a Iewe, whose name was Mardocheus, the sonne of Iair, the sonne of Semei, the sonne of Cis a man of Iemini,
which was caryed awaye from Ierusalem, whan Iekonia the kyng of Iuda was led awaye, (whom Nabuchodonozor the kyng of Babilon caryed thence)
Ꟶ he norished Hadassa (that is Esther) his vncles daughter: for she had nether father nor mother, and she was a fayre Ꟶ beutyfull damsell: whom Mardocheus (when her father Ꟶ mother was deed) receaued for his awne daughter.
So it fortuned that when the kynges commaundement Ꟶ commission was published, and many damosels were brought together in the cite of Susan vnder the hande of Hagei. Esther was brought also vnto the kynges house vnder the hand of Hagei the keper of the wemen,
Ꟶ the damsell pleased him, and she founde fauoure in his syght. And he caused ornamentes to be geuen her Ꟶ soch thynges as belonged to her, and appoynted her seuen comlye damsels out of the kynges house, Ꟶ fauoured both her and her gentyll wemen singularly in the house of the wemen.
But Esther shewed not her people Ꟶ her kynred: for Mardocheus had charged her, that she shuld not tell it.
And Mardocheus walked euery daye before the court of the wemens house, that he myght knowe howe Esther dyd, and what shulde become of her.
And when the appoynted tyme of euery damsell came, that she shuld go into the kyng Ahasuerus, after that she had bene twelue monethes in the deckynge of the wemen (for their deckynge must haue so moch tyme, namely syxe monethes with Balme Ꟶ Myrre, and syxe monethes with good spices, so were the wemen beutyfyed)
then went there one damosell vnto the kyng, and whatsoeuer she requyred that must be geuen her to go wyth her out of the wemens buylding vnto the kynges palace.
In the euenyng she went, and in the morow agayne into the seconde house of the wemen abyding vnder the hand of Saasgas the kynges chamberlayne, whych kept the concubines. And she came in vnto the kyng nomore, excepte it pleased the kyng to haue her, and that he called her by name.
Now when the tyme came of Esther the daughter of Abihan the vncle of Mardocheus (whych had receaued her as hys awne daughter) that she shuld come into the kyng, she desyred nothyng, but what Hagei the kynges chamberlayne the keper of the wemen, sayde. And Esther found fauoure in the syght of all them that loked vpon her.
And Esther was taken vnto kyng Ahasuerus into his house royall, in the tenth moneth which is the moneth Tebeth, in the seuenth yeare of his raygne.
And the kyng loued Esther aboue all the wemen, Ꟶ she found grace and fauoure in hys syght before all the virgins: so that he set the crowne of the kyngdome vpon hir head, and made her quene in steade of Uasthi.
And the kyng made a great feast vnto all his princes and seruauntes (which feast was because of Esther) Ꟶ caused the landes to be in quyernes, Ꟶ gaue giftes, as became the royaltye of a king.
And when the virgins were gathered together the seconde tyme, Mardocheus sat in the kynges gate.
And as yet had not Esther shewed her kynred and her people, accordinge as Mardocheus had bydden her: for Esther dyd after the worde of Mardocheus, lyke as yf she had bene yet vnder hys gouernaunce.
At the same tyme, whyle Mardocheus sat in the kynges gate, two of the kynges chamberlaynes Bigthan and Theres which kept the dore, were wroth, Ꟶ sought to laye their handes on the kyng Ahasuerus:
wherof also Mardocheus gat knowledge, and tolde it vnto quene Esther, Ꟶ Esther certifyed the kyng therof in Mardocheus name.
And when inquisicion was made, it was founde so. And they were both hanged on tre: and it was written in the Chronycles before the kynge.
After these actes dyd the kynge Ahasuerus promote Haman the sonne of Amadatha the Agagite, Ꟶ set him hye, Ꟶ set hys seat aboue all the princes that he had with him.
And all the kynges seruauntes that were in the kynges gate, bowed their knees, and worshypped Haman: for the kyng had so commaunded concernyng him. But Mardocheus bowed not the knee, and worshypped him not.
Then the kynges seruauntes whych were in the kynges gate, sayde vnto Mardocheus: why transgressest thou the kynges commaundment?
And when they spake thus daylie vnto him, he folowed them not, and they tolde Haman, that they myght se how Mardocheus matters wolde endure: for he had told them, that he was a Iewe.
And when Haman sawe, that Mardocheus bowed not the knee vnto him, nor worshipped him, he was full of indignacion,
and thought it to lyttell to laye handes onely on Mardocheus: for they had shewed him the nacion of Mardocheus, wherfore he sought to destroye all the Iewes, that were thorow out the whole empyre of Ahasuerus, and that were of the nacion of Mardocheus.
In the fyrst moneth (that is the moneth Nisan) in the twelueth yeare of kyng Ahasuerus they cast Phur (that is a lott) before Haman from daye to daye, and from moneth to moneth, to the twelueth moneth that is the moneth Adar.
And Haman sayde vnto kynge Ahasuerus: There is here a people scatered abrode and dispersed among all people in all the landes of thyne empyre, Ꟶ they haue their lawes contrary from all people, Ꟶ do not after the kynges lawes, nether is it the kynges profet to suffre them after thys maner.
If it please the kynge, let it be wrytten, that they maye be destroyed, Ꟶ so wyll I weye downe ten thousand talentes of syluer, by the handes of the worckmen, to be brought into the kynges treasure.
And the kyng toke his rynge from his hand, Ꟶ gaue it vnto Haman the sonne of Amidatha the Agagite the Iewes enemye.
And the kynge sayde vnto Haman: Let the syluer be geuen the, and do with that people as it pleaseth the.
Then were the kynges scrybes called on the thirtenth daye of the fyrst moneth and there was written (according as Haman commaunded) vnto all the kynges officers Ꟶ to the captaynes that were in all the landes, and to the rulars of euery people in the countreyes on euery syde, accordyng to the wryting of euery nacion, and after their language, in the name of kyng Ahasuerus was it wrytten and sealed with the kynges rynge.
And the wrytynges were sent by postes into all the kynges landes, to rote out, to kyll, and to destroye all Iewes, both yong Ꟶ olde, chyldren Ꟶ wemen in one daye (namely vpon the thirtenth daye of the twelueth moneth, whych is the moneth Adar) Ꟶ to spoyle their goodes.
This was the summe of the wryting, that there shulde be a commaundement geuen in all landes, and publisshed vnto all people, that they shulde be ready agaynst the same daye.
And the postes went in all the hast, accordyng to the kynges commaundement. And in Susan the chefe cytie was the commaundement deuised. And the kyng Ꟶ Haman sate Ꟶ drancke: whan in the meane tyme the cytie of Susan was disquieted.
When Mardocheus perceaued all that was done, he rente his clothes and put on sack cloth, with asshes, and went out into the myddes of the cytie, and cryed loud and lamentably,
Ꟶ came before the kynges gate: but he myght not entre within the kynges gate, because he had sack cloth on.
And in all landes, countrees, Ꟶ places, as farre as the kynges worde and commaundment extended, there was greate lamentacion among the Iewes, fasting, weping, and mourning, and many laye in sack clothes Ꟶ in asshes.
So Esthers damosels and her chamberlaynes, came Ꟶ told it her. Then was the quene exceadyngly astonnied. And she sent rayment, that Mardocheus shulde put on, and laye the sack cloth from him. But Mardocheus wold not take them.
Then called Esther Hathath one of the kynges chamberlaynes (whych stode before her) and gaue him a commaundment vnto Mardocheus, that he might knowe what it were, wherfore he dyd so.
So Hathat went forth to Mardocheus vnto the strete of the cytie, whych was before the kynges gate.
And Mardocheus tolde him of all that had happened vnto him, and of the summe of syluer that Haman had promised to weye downe into the kynges treasury, because of the Iewes yf he wolde destroye them
(Ꟶ he gaue hym the copye of the kynges commaundement, that was deuysed at Susan, to destroye them, that he might shewe it vnto Esther) and to speake to her, and charge her, that she shuld go into the kyng, and make her prayer and supplicacion vnto him for her people.
And when Hathath came in, he told Esther the wordes of Mardocheus.
And agayne, Esther spake vnto Hathath, Ꟶ commaunded him to saye vnto Mardocheus:
all the kynges seruauntes, Ꟶ the people in the landes of the kynge, knowe that whosoeuer commeth within the court vnto the kyng, whether it be man or woman, whych is not called, the commaundment is, that the same shall dye, excepte the kynge holde out the golden scepter vnto him for then he shall lyue. As for me, I haue not bene called to come into the kyng now this thyrtie dayes.
And they certifyed Mardocheus of Esthers wordes,
Ꟶ Mardocheus bad saye agayne vnto Esther, thynke not to saue thyne awne lyfe, while thou art in the kynges house, before all Iewes:
for yf thou holdest thy peace at this tyme, then shall the Iewes haue helpe and deliueraunce out of another place, Ꟶ thou Ꟶ thy fathers house shalbe destroyed. And who knoweth whether thou art come to the kyngdom, for this causes sake?
Esther had them geue Mardocheus this answer:
Go thou thy waye, and gether together all the Iewes that are found at Susan, and fast ye for me, that ye eat not and drynke not in thre dayes, nether daye nor nyght. I and my damosels will fast lykewise, and so will I go into the kyng, which thing yet, is contrary to the commaundment: and yf I perishe, I perishe.
So Mardocheus went his waye, Ꟶ dyd all that Esther had commaunded him.
And on the thyrde daye it fortuned, that Esther put on her royall apparell, Ꟶ stode in the court of the kynges palace within, ouer agaynst the kynges house. And the kyng sate vpon his royall seate in the kynges palace ouer agaynst the gate of the house.
And when the kyng sawe Esther the quene standyng in the court, she found grace in hys syght. And the kyng helde out the golden scepter that was in his hande towarde Esther. So Esther stepte forth, and touched the toppe of the scepter.
Then sayde the kynge vnto her: What wylt thou quene Esther? and what requyrest thou? aske euen the halfe of the empire, and it shall be geuen the.
And Esther answered. If it please the kyng, let the kyng Ꟶ Haman come this daye vnto the bancket, that I haue prepared for hym.
And the kyng sayde: cause Haman to make hast, that he maye do as Esther hath sayde. So the kyng Ꟶ Haman came to the banket that Esther had prepared,
Ꟶ the kyng sayde vnto Esther at the bancket of wyne: what is thy peticyon? that it maye be geuen the. And what requyrest thou? If it be euen the halfe of the empire, it shalbe done.
Then answered Esther, and sayd, my peticion and desyre is,
yf I haue founde grace in the syght of the kyng, and yf it please the kyng, to geue me my peticion, Ꟶ to fulfyll my request, then let the kyng Ꟶ Haman come to the bancket that I shall prepare for them, and so will I do tomorow, as the kyng hath sayde.
Then went Haman forth the same daye ioyfull and mery in his mynde. And when the same Haman sawe Mardocheus in the kynges gate, that he stode not vp Ꟶ kneled before hym, he was full of indignacion at Mardocheus.
Neuertheles, Haman refrayned him selfe: Ꟶ when he came home, he sent, and called for his frendes, Ꟶ zares his wyfe,
and Haman tolde them of the glory of his ryches, and the multitude of his children, Ꟶ all together howe the kyng had promoted him so greatly and howe that he had set him aboue the princes and seruauntes of the kyng.
Haman sayd moreouer: Yee Ꟶ Esther the quene dyd let no man come in with the kyng vnto the bancket that she had prepared, excepte me, Ꟶ tomorow am I bidden vnto her also with the kyng.
But in all this am I not satisfyed, as longe as I se Mardocheus the Iewe syttynge at the kynges gate.
Then sayd zares hys wyfe and all hys frendes vnto him: Let them make a galowse of fyftye cubites hye, and tomorow speake thou vnto the kyng, that Mardocheus maye be hanged theron, Ꟶ go thou in merely wyth the kynge vnto the bancket. And Haman was wel content with all, Ꟶ caused the galowes to be made.
The same nyght could not the king slepe, and he commaunded to bryng the Chronicles and storyes: whych when they were red before the kyng
they happened on the place where it was wrytten, how Mardocheus had told that Bigthana and Theres the kynges two chamberlaynes (which kept the thresholdes) sought, to laye handes on kyng Ahasuerus.
And the kyng sayd: what worshyppe Ꟶ good haue we done to Mardocheus therfore? Then sayde the kynges seruauntes that mynistred vnto hym: There is nothynge at all done for hym.
And the kyng sayde: Who is in the courte? (for Haman was gone into the court wythout before the kinges house, that he myght speake vnto the kynge to hange Mardocheus on the tre, that he had prepared for hym.)
And the kynges seruauntes sayde vnto hym: beholde, Haman standeth without in the court. And the kyng sayd: let him come in.
And when Haman came in, the kyng sayd vnto hym: what shall be done vnto the man, whom the the kynge volde fayne brynge vnto worshippe? Haman thought in his hert: Whom desyreth the kyng to bryng vnto worshippe more then me?
And Haman answered the kyng Let the man whom the kyng pleaseth to bring vnto worshippe, be brought hyther,
that he maye be arayed with the royall garmentes which the kyng vseth to weare: Ꟶ the horse that the kyng rydeth vpon, and that the crowne royall maye be set vpon his heed.
And let this rayment and horse be delyuered vnder the hand of one of the kynges princes, that they maye araye the man withall (whom the kyng is disposed to bryng to honoure) Ꟶ cary hym vpon the horse thorow the strete of the cytie, and proclayme before him: thus shalt it be done to the man, whom the kynge pleaseth to bryng to honoure.
And the kyng sayde: make hast, and take as thou hast sayde, the rayment Ꟶ the horse: and do euen so vnto Mardocheus the Iewe, that sytteth before the kynges gate, Ꟶ let nothing fayle of all that thou hast spoken.
Then toke Haman the rayment Ꟶ the horse, and arayed Mardocheus, and brought him on horsbacke thorow the strete of the cytie, and proclaymed before him: Euen thus shall it be done vnto the man whom the kyng is disposed to honoure.
And Mardocheus came agayne to the kynges gate, but Haman gat hym home in all the hast mournynge bare headed,
and tolde zares his wyfe and all hys frendes, euery thing that had happened him. Then sayd his wyse men and zares his wyfe vnto him: It yf be Mardocheus, of the sede of the Iewes, before whom thou hast begonne to fall, thou shalt not preuayle agaynst hym, but shalt surely fall before him.
And whyle they were yet talkyng with him, came the kynges chamberlaynes, Ꟶ caused Haman to make hast, to come vnto the bancket that Esther had prepared.
And the kyng and Haman came into the bancket that quene Esther had prepared,
and the kyng sayd vnto Esther on the seconde daye at the bancket of wyne: what is thy peticion (quene Esther) that it maye be geuen the? And what requyrest thou? Yee, aske euen half of the empyre, Ꟶ it shall be done.
And Esther the quene answered, Ꟶ sayd: If I haue found grace in thy syght (O kyng) and yf it please the kyng, then graunt me my lyfe at my desyre and my people, for my peticions sake:
for we are solde, I Ꟶ my people, to be destroyed, to be slayne Ꟶ to perishe. And wold God we were solde to be bondmen and bond wemen, then wold I hold my tonge: For the enemye pondreth not the kynges harme.
The kynge Ahasuerus answered, and sayde vnto quene Esther: who is he? And where is he, that darre presume in hys mynde, to do after that maner?
And Esther sayd: the enemye and aduersary is this wicked Haman. Haman, was exceadingly afrayed before the kyng and the quene.
And the kynge arose from the bancket and from the wyne in hys displeasure, Ꟶ went into the palace garden. And Haman stode vp, Ꟶ besought quene Esther for his lyfe: for he sawe, that there was a mischefe prepared for him of the king all ready.
And when the kyng came agayne out of the palace garden into the place where they dranke wyne, Haman had layed him vpon the bed, that Esther sat vpon. Then sayd the kyng: wyll he force the quene also before me in the house? As sone as that worde went out of the kynges mouth they couered Hamans face.
And Harbona one of the chamberlaynes that stode before the kyng, sayde: Beholde, there standeth a galowes in Hamans house fyftie cubytes hye, whych he had made for Mardocheus, that spake good for the kyng. The kyng sayde: hang him theron.
So they hanged Haman on the galowes, that he had made for Mardocheus. Then was the kynges wrath pacified.
The same daye dyd kyng Ahasuerus geue the house of Haman the Iewes enemye, vnto quene Esther. And Mardocheus came before the king: for Esther tolde, howe that he belonged vnto her.
And the kyng put of his fynger rynge, whych he had taken from Haman, Ꟶ gaue it vnto Mardocheus. And Esther set Mardocheus ouer the house of Haman.
And Esther spake yet more before the kyng: Ꟶ fell downe at his fete wepyng, Ꟶ besought him, that he wold put awaye the wickednes of Haman the Agagite, and hys deuyce that he had ymagined agaynst the Iewes.
And the kynge helde out the golden scepter toward Esther. Then rose Esther, and stode before the kynge,
and sayd: yf it please the kyng, Ꟶ yf I haue found grace in his syght, and yf it be acceptable before the kynge, then let it be wrytten, that the letters of the deuyce of Hamam the sonne of Hamadatha the Agagite, maye be called agayne: whych letters he wrote, to destroye the Iewes, which are in all the kynges landes.
For how can I suffre and se the euell, that shall happen vnto my people? Or how can I loke vpon the destruccion of my kynred?
And the kyng Ahasuerus sayd vnto quene Esther, Ꟶ to Mardocheus the Iewe: Behold, I haue geuen Esther the house of Haman, whom they haue hanged vpon a tre, because he layed hand vpon the Iewes.
Wryte ye also for the Iewes, as it lyketh you in the kynges name, Ꟶ seale it with the kynges ryng (for the writynges that were wrytten in the kynges name, and sealed with the kynges rynge, durst no man dysanull.)
Then were the kynges scribes called at the same tyme, euen in the thirde moneth, that is the moneth Siuan, on the thre and twentyeth daye. And it was written (accordynge to all as Mardocheus commaunded) vnto the Iewes, and to the princes, to the Debityes and captaynes in the landes which are from India vntill Ethiopia, namely an hundred and seuen and twentye landes, vnto euery one accordynge to the writing therof, Ꟶ vnto euery people after theyr speche, Ꟶ to the Iewes accordynge to theyr wrytinge and language.
And he wrotte in the kinge Ahasuerus name, and sealed it with the kynges ringe. And by postes that rode vpon horses, and swyfte yong Mules, sent he the wrytinges,
wherin the kyng graunted the Iewes (in what cyties soeuer they were) to gather them selues together, and to stande for their lyfe, and for to rote out, to slaye, Ꟶ to destroye all the power of the people and land that wold trouble them. with chyldren and wemen, and to spoyle their good
vpon one daye in all the landes of kyng Ahasuerus, namely vpon the thyrtenth daye of the twelueth moneth, which is the moneth Adar.
The some of the wrytynge was, how there shulde be a commaundment geuen in all landes and publisshed among all people, and that the Iewes shulde be ready agaynst that daye, and to auenge them selues on their enemyes.
And so the postes that rode vpon the swift horses and Mules, made hast with all spede, to execute the kinges worde: Ꟶ the commaundement was deuised in Susan the chefe cytie.
And Mardocheus went out from the kynge, in royall apparell of yelow and whyte, and with a great crowne of golde, beyng arayed with a garment of sylke and purple, and the cytie of Susan reioysed and was glad:
and vnto the Iewes there was come lyght and gladnesse, ioye and worshippe.
In all landes Ꟶ cyties, into what places soeuer the kynges worde and commaundement reched, there was ioye Ꟶ myrth, prosperite Ꟶ good dayes among the Iewes: in somoch, that many of the people in the lande became of the Iewes belefe, and the feare of the Iewes came vpon them.
In the twelueth moneth, that is the moneth Adar, vpon the thirtenth daye of the same, whan the kynges word and commaundement shulde be done, euen vpon the same daye that the enemyes shulde haue destroyed the Iewes to haue oppressed them, it turned contrary wyse, euen that the Iewes shulde subdue their enemyes.
For then gathered the Iewes together in their cyties wythin all the landes of kynge Ahasuerus, to laye hand on soch as wolde do them euell, and no man coulde withstand them: for the feare of them was come ouer all people.
And all the rulers in the landes, and princes Ꟶ Debites, Ꟶ officers of the kyng, promoted the Iewes, for the feare of Mardocheus came vpon them.
For Mardocheus was greate in the kynges house, and the reporte of him was noysed in all landes, how he increased and grewe.
Thus the Iewes smote all theyr enemyes with a sore slaughter, and slewe Ꟶ destroyed, and dyd after their wyll vnto soche as were their aduersaries.
And at Susan the chefe cytie slew the Iewes, and destroyed fyue hundreth men:
Ꟶ slewe Pharsandatha, Dalphou Asphatha,
Phoratha, Adalia, Aridatha,
Pharmastha, Arisai, Aridai, and Uaizatha,
the ten sonnes of Haman the sonne of Hamadata the enemye of the Iewes: but on his goodes they layed no handes.
At the same tyme was the kyng certyfied of the nombre of those that were slayne in the cyte of Susan.
And the kyng sayde vnto quene Esther. The Iewes haue slayne and destroyed fyue hundreth men in the cytie of Susan, Ꟶ the ten sonnes, of Haman. What haue they done thynkest thou in the other landes of the kynge? And what is thy peticion, that it maye be geuen the? or what requirest thou more to be done?
Esther answered: If it please the kynge, let him suffre the Iewes tomorow also to do accordynge vnto this dayes commaundement, that they maye hang Hamans ten sonnes vpon the tre.
And the kynge charged to do so, and the commaundement was deuised at Susan, Ꟶ they hanged Hamans ten sonnes.
For the Iewes that were in Susan gathered them selues together, vpon the fourtenth daye of the moneth Adar, Ꟶ slew thre hundreth men at Susan, but on their goodes they layed no handes.
As for the other Iewes that were in the kynges landes, they came together, and stode for their lyues, that they myght haue rest from their enemies: Ꟶ slew of their enemyes fyue and seuentye thousand, howbeit, they layed no handes on their goodes.
This they dyd on the thirtenth daye of the moneth Adar, and on the fourtenth daye of the same moneth rested they, which daye they helde wt feastinge and gladnesse.
But the Iewes that were at Susan, came together both on the thyrtenth daye and on the fourtenth, and on the fyftenth daye of the same they rested, and helde that daye with feastyng and gladnes.
And therfore the Iewes that dwelt in the villages and vnwalled townes, helde the fourtenth daye of the moneth Adar, with gladnes and feastynge, and kepte holy daye, and euery one sent gyftes vnto another.
And Mardocheus wrote these actes, and sent the writynges vnto all the Iewes that were in all the landes of kynge Ahasuerus, both nye Ꟶ farre
that they shuld make a law among them selues Ꟶ holde the fourtenth and fiftenth daye of the moneth Adar,
as the dayes wherin the Iewes came to rest from their enemyes, and as a moneth wherin their payne was turned to ioye, Ꟶ their sorowe into a holy daye, Ꟶ that in those dayes they shuld make feastes and gladnes, Ꟶ one to sende gyftes vnto another, Ꟶ to distribute vnto the poore.
And the Iewes were content with it that they had begonne to do, and that Mardocheus wrote vnto them:
how that Haman the sonne of Hamadatha all the Iewes enemy, had deuised against the Iewes, how he might destroye them and caused to cast Phur (that is a Lot) for to put them in feare, Ꟶ to bryng them to naught:
Ꟶ how Hester went, and spake to the kynge, that thorowe letters his wicked deuyce (which he ymagined agaynst the Iewes) myght be turned vpon his awne heed, Ꟶ how hee Ꟶ his sonnes were hanged on the tre.
For the which cause they called this daye Phurim, because of the name of the lott, and because of all the wordes of this writing: Ꟶ what they them selues had sene, Ꟶ what had happened vnto them.
And the Iewes set it vp, and toke it vpon them and their sede, and vpon all soch as ioyned them selues vnto them, that they wolde not misse but obserue these two dayes yerely, accordynge as they were wrytten and appoynted,
how that these dayes are not to be forgotten, but to be kepte of childers children among all kynredes in all landes and cyties. They are the dayes of Phurim, which are not to be ouerslipte among the Iewes, Ꟶ the memoriall of them ought not to perisshe from their sede.
And quene Esther the daughter of Abihail and Mardocheus the Iew wrote wt all auctorite (to confirme this seconde writting of Phurim)
and sent the letters vnto all the Iewes in the hundreth Ꟶ seuen and twentye landes of the empyre of Ahasuerus, wt frendly and faythfull wordes,
to confirme these dayes of Phurim, in their tyme appoynted, accordynge as Mardocheus the Iew Ꟶ Esther the quene had appoynted them. And they bound their soule and their sede to fasting, Ꟶ prayer.
And Esther stablisshed the wordes of these lottes, as it is written in the boke.
And the kynge Ahasuerus layed trybute vpon the lande, and vpon the Iles of the see.
And all that he dyd by his power and auctorite, Ꟶ the great worshippe of Mardocheus, which the kyng gaue him, be they not written in the Chronycles of the kynges of Media and Persia?
For Mardocheus the Iewe was the seconde next vnto kyng Ahasuerus and greate among the Iewes, and accepted among the multitude of his brethren, as one that seketh the welth of his people, and speaketh the best for all hys sede.
In the lande of Hus there was a man whose name was Iob: Ꟶ the same was a perfect Ꟶ iust man, soch a one as feared God Ꟶ exchued euell.
And he had seuen sonnes, Ꟶ thre daughters
His substaunce also was seuen .M. shepe, Ꟶ thre .M. camels, .v.C. youck of oxen, Ꟶ fyue .C. she asses, and a very greate housholde: so that he was one of the most principall men among all them of the east countre.
And his sonnes went and made banckettes: one daye in one house, another daye in another, and sent for theyr thre systers, to eat Ꟶ drincke with them.
And it fortuned, that when they had passed ouer the tyme of their bancketting rounde aboute, Iob sent for them, and sanctified them, and gat vp early, and offered for euery one a brentofferynge. For Iob sayde: lest peraduenture my sonnes haue done some offence, Ꟶ haue bene vnthankfull to God in their hertes. Thus did Iob euery daye.
And vpon a daye when the children of God cam Ꟶ stode before the Lord, it fortuned that Sathan cam also among them.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Sathan. From whence commest thou? Sathan answered the Lord, and sayde: I haue gone about the lande, and walcked thorow it.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Sathan: hast thou not considered my seruaunt Iob, how that there is none lyke him in the land? a perfect Ꟶ a iust man: soch a one as feareth God, and exchueth euell?
Sathan answered, and sayde vnto the Lord. Doth Iob feare God for naught?
hast thou not preserued him, Ꟶ his house, and all that he hath on euery syde? Thou hast blessed the worckes of hys handes, and hys possessyon is encreased in the lande.
But laye thyne hand now vpon hym and touch all that he hath, and he shal curse the to thy face.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Satan: lo, all that he hath, be in thy power: onely vpon hym selfe se that thou laye not thyne hande. And Satan went forth from the presence of the Lorde.
And vpon a certayn daye it fortuned, that his sonnes and daughters were eatyng and drincking wyne in their eldest brothers house,
and there came a messenger vnto Iob, and sayde: Whyle the oxen were a plowyng, and the asses goynge in the pasture besyde them,
the Sabees came in vyolently, and toke them awaye: yee, they haue slayne thy seruauntes with the edge of the sweard, and I onely ranne my waye, to tell the.
Whyle he was yet speakyng, there came another, and sayde: The fyre of God is fallen from heauen, and hath brent vp all thy shepe and seruantes, and consumed them: Ꟶ I onely ranne my waye, to tell the.
And whyle he was yet speakinge, there came another, and sayde: The Caldees made thre armyes, and fell in vpon the camels, and haue caryed them awaye, yee, and slayne thy seruauntes with the swearde: and I onely am gotten awaye, to tell the.
And whyle he was yet speakyng, there came another, and sayde: Thy sonnes and thy daughters were eatynge and drynckynge wyne in theyr eldest brothers house,
and beholde, there came a myghtye greate wynde out of the south, and smote the foure corners of the house: which fell vpon thy children, and they are deed, and I am gotten a waye alone to tell the.
Then Iob stode vp, and rent his clothes, and shaued hys heade, fell downe vpon the grounde, worshipped,
and sayd: Naked came I out of my mothers wombe, and naked shall I turne thyther agayne. The Lord gaue, and the Lorde hath taken awaye blessed be the name of the Lord.
In all these thynges dyd Iob not offende, ner murmured foolyshly agaynst God.
And the children of God came and stode before the Lorde, and Satan came also amonge them, and stode before the Lorde.
And the Lord sayde vnto Satan: From whence commest thou? Satan answered the Lorde, and sayde: I haue gone about the land, and walcked thorow it.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Satan: hast thou not consydered my seruaunt Iob? for there is none lyke him in the land. For he is a perfect and iust man, soch a one as feareth God, and exchueth euell, Ꟶ contynueth styll in hys godlynesse. And thou mouedest me agaynst him, that I shulde punysh him for naught.
And Satan answered the Lord, Ꟶ sayde: Skyn for skynne? yee, a man wyll geue all that euer he hath, for his lyfe.
But laye thyne hand now vpon him, and touch once his bone and flesh, and he shall curse the to thy face.
And the Lorde sayde vnto Satan: lo, there hast thou hym in thy power, but spare hys lyfe.
So went Satan forth from the presence of the Lord, and smote Iob with maruelous sore byles, from the sole of hys fote vnto hys crowne:
so that he sat vpon the ground in the asshes, and scraped of the fylth of hys sores with a potsherde.
Then sayde hys wyfe vnto hym: Dost thou contynue yet in thy perfectnesse? curse God Ꟶ dye.
But Iob sayde vnto her: Thou speakest lyke a folysh woman. Shal we receaue prosperite at the hand of God, and not receaue aduersite? In all these thinges, did not Iob synne with his lyppes.
Now when Iobs frendes hearde of all the trouble, that happened vnto hym, there came thre of them, euery one from hys awne place: namely, Eliphas the Themanite, Bildad the Suhite, Ꟶ zophad the Naamathite. And they were agreed together to come, to shewe their compassion vpon him, and to comforte hym.
So when they lyfte vp theyr eyes a farre of, they knewe him not. Then they cryed, and wepte: Ꟶ euery one of them rente his clothes, and sprynckled dust vpon theyr heades in the ayre.
They sat them downe by hym also vpon the grounde seuen dayes and seuen nyghtes. Nether was there any of them that spake one worde vnto hym: for they sawe, that hys payne was very greate.
After this opened iob his mouth and cursed hys daye.
And Iob answered, and sayde:
lost be that daye, wherin I was borne, and the nyght, in the which it was sayde: there is a man chylde conceaued.
The same daye be turned to darckenes, and not regarded of God from aboue, nether lett hym shyne vpon it with lyght,
but let it be stayned with darcknesse, and the shadowe of death. Let the dymme cloude fall vpon it, and lett it be lapped in with sorowe on the daye tyme.
Let the darcke storme ouercome that nyght, and lett it not be ioyned vnto the dayes of the yeare, ner counted in the monethes.
Desolate be that night, and without gladnesse, lett them that curse the daye,
and that be ready to rayse vp mournyng, geue it also their curse.
Let the starres of that night be dymme thorow darcknesse of it. Let it loke for lyght, but lett it se none, nether the rysynge vp of the fayre mornynge:
because it shut not vp the wombe that bare me. For then shulde these sorowes haue bene hyd from myne eyes.
Alas, why dyed I not in the byrth? Why dyd not I perysh, as sone as I came oute of my mothers wombe?
Why set they me vpon their knees? Why gaue they me suck with theyr brestes?
Then shulde I now haue lyen styll, I shulde haue slepte, and bene at reste,
lyke as the kynges and lordes of the earthe, which haue buylded them selues special places.
Or as the prynces that haue had greate substaunce of golde, and theyr houses full of syluer.
Or why was I not hyd, as a thynge borne out of tyme, ether as yonge chyldren, which neuer sawe the light?
There must the wycked ceasse from theyr tyrannye, and ther soch as are ouerlaboured be at rest:
ther are those lett out fre, which haue bene in preson, so that they heare nomore the voyce of the oppressoure.
There are small Ꟶ great, and the seruaunt is fre from hys master.
Wherfore is the lyght geuen to hym that is in mysery? and lyfe vnto them, that haue heuy hertes?
Whych longe for death (and though it come not) wolde dygg it oute of hyd places
which also wolde be excedyng glad and reioyce, yf they coulde fynde theyr graue any where.
That shuld be ioye to that man whose waye is hyd, and God kepeth it backe from him.
For my syghes come before I eate, and my roaringes fall out like the water.
For the thynge that I feared, is come vpon me: and the thynge that I was afrayed of, is happened vnto me.
Was I not happy? Had I not quyetnesse? Was I not in rest? And now commeth soch mysery vpon me
And Eliphas the Themanyte answered, and sayde:
Yf we begynne to commen with the, wylt thou be discontent? but who can withhold him selfe from speakinge?
Behold, thou hast bene a chastener of many, and hast comforted the weery handes.
Thy wordes haue set vp those that were fallen, thou hast refresshed the weake, knees.
But now that the plage is come vpon the, thou art greued: now that it hath touched thy selfe, thou art faynt harted.
Is not this thy feare, thy stedfastnesse, thy pacience, and the perfectnesse of thy wayes?
Consydre (I praye the) whoeuer perysshed beynge an innocent? Or, when were the godly destroyed?
For (as I haue proued by experience) they that plowe iniquytie, Ꟶ sowe wretchednesse, reape the same.
With the blast of God they perish, and with the breth of hys nastrels are they consumed awaye.
The roaryng of the lyon, and the voyce of the lyon, Ꟶ the teeth of the lyons whelpes are pulled out.
The lyon perissheth for lacke of praye, and the lyons whelpes are scatered abrode.
And vnto me came the worde secretly, Ꟶ myne eare hath receaueth a lytell therof.
In the thoughtes and visyons of the night (when slepe commeth on men)
feare came vpon me, and drede, which made all my bones to shake.
The wynde passed by, before my presence, and made the heares of my flesh to stande vp.
He stode there, and I knew not hys face, an ymage ther was before myne eyes, and in the stylnesse hearde I a voyce.
Shall man be more iust than God? Or shall a man be purer than hys maker?
Beholde, He founde no treuth in hys seruauntes, and in hys aungels ther was foly.
How moch more in them that dwell in houses of claye, and whose foundacyon is but dust: which shalbe consumed as it were with a Moth?
They shalbe smitten from the mornynge vnto the euenyng: yee, they shall perysh for euer, when no man thincketh theron.
It is not their royaltye gone awaye with them: they shal dye trulye, and not in wysdome.
Crye (I praye the) yf happlye there be any that wyll answere the, and loke thou vpon eny of the holy men.
As for the foolysh man, displeasure kylleth hym, and anger slayeth the ignoraunt
I haue sene my selfe, when the folysh was depe roted, and sodenly. I cursed hys habitacyon.
Hys chyldren were without prosperite, and they were slayne in the gate, and there was no man to delyuer them.
Hys haruest was eaten vp of the hungry, Ꟶ the weapened man spoyled it, and the thurstye droncke vp theyr laboure. It is not the earth that bryngeth forth iniquyte,
nether commeth sorowe out of the ground:
but man is borne vnto laboure, lyke as the sparkes flye vp out of the hote coles.
But I wyll aske councell at the Lorde, Ꟶ wyll talke with God:
which doth thynges, that are vnsearcheable, and maruels without nombre.
He geueth rayne vpon the erth, and poureth water vpon the stretes,
to set vp them that be of lowe degre, and that those which are in heuynesse may come to prosperite.
He destroyeth the deuyces of the sotyll, so that their handes are not able to performe any stedfast thing.
He compaseth the wyse in their awne craftynes, and ouerthroweth the councell of the wycked.
In somoche that they runne into darcknes by fayre daye, and grope aboute them at the none daye, lyke as in the nyght.
He shall delyuer the pore from the sweard, and from the threatenynges of the vngodly, and from the violence of the myghty.
He is the hope of the poore, and the mouth of the wicked shalbe stopped.
Beholde, happye is the man, whom God punissheth: therfore, refuse not thou the chastenynge of the almyghtye.
For though he make a wounde, he geueth a playster: though he smyte, hys hande maketh whole agayne.
He shall delyuer the in syxe troubles, and in the seuenth there shall no euell come to the.
In honger he shall saue the from death: and when it is warre, from the power of the swearde.
Thou shalt be kept from the euell tonge, and when trouble commeth, thou shalt not nede to feare.
In destruccion and derth thou shalt be mery, and shalt not be afrayed of beastes of the earth.
For the stones of the lande shalbe confederate with the, Ꟶ the beastes of the felde shall geue the peace.
And thou shalt knowe that thy dwellyng place shalbe in rest: and thou shalt go and beholde thy habytacyon, and shalt not synne.
Thou shalt se also, that thy sede shall encreace, and that thy posteryte shalbe as the grasse vpon the earth.
Thou shalt come also to thy graue in a fayre age, lyke as when they take vp a corne shefe in due season.
Lo, thys we oure selues haue proued by experience, and euen thus it is. Herken thou to it also, that thou mayest take hede to thy selfe.
Iob answered also, Ꟶ sayde:
O that the displeasure which I haue were truly weyed, and my punishment layed in the balaunces togeather:
for now is it heuyer then the sande of the see. And thys is the cause, that my wordes are so sorowfull.
For the arowes of the almighty are round about me, whose indygnacyon hath droncke vp my sprete, and the terrible feares of God are sett agaynst me.
Doth the wylde asse roare when he hath grasse? Or cryeth the oxe, when he hath foder ynough?
That which is vnsauery, shalt it be eaten without salte, or is there any taste in the whyte of an egge?
The thynges that some tyme I myght not awaye withall, are now my meate for very sorowe.
O that I myght haue my desyre: and that God wolde graunte me the thynge that I longe for.
O that God wold begynne and smyte me: that he wolde let hys hande go, and take me cleane awaye.
Then shulde I haue some comforte: yee, I wolde desyre hym in my payne, that he shulde not spare, for I wyll not be agaynst the wordes of the holy one.
For what power haue I to endure? And what is myne ende, that my soule myght be pacient?
Is my strength the strength of stones? Or, is my flesh made of brasse?
Is it not so that there is in me no helpe: and that my substaunce is taken from me.
He that is in tribulacyon ought to be comforted of hys neyghbour: but the feare of the Lord is cleane awaye.
Myne awne brethren passe ouer by me as the water brooke, and as the ryuer of water, do hastely go awaye.
But they that feare the hore frost, the snowe shall fall vpon them.
When theyr tyme commeth, they shalbe destroyed and peryshe: when they be sett on fyre, they shalbe remoued out of theyr place,
for the pathes that they go in, are croked: they haste after vayne thynges, and shall perysh.
They turne them to the pathes of Theman, and to the wayes of Saba, wherin they haue put their trust.
Confounded are they that put eny confydence in them. For whan they come to obtayne the thynges that they loke for, they are brought to confusion.
Euen so are ye also come vnto me: but now that ye se my misery, ye are afrayed.
Dyd I desyre you, to bryng vnto me, or to geue me eny of youre substaunce?
To delyuer me from the enemyes hande, or to saue me from the hande of tyrauntes?
Teache me, and I wyll holde my tonge: and whan I do erre, shewe me wherin.
How stedfast are the wordes of treuth?
And which of you can rebuke and reproue them? Do ye take deliberacyon to check mens sayinges, and iudge a pore worde spoken in vayne?
Ye fall vpon the fatherles and go about to ouerthrowe your awne frende.
And therfore be content, and loke now vpon me, and I wyll not lye before youre face.
Turne (I praye you) be indifferent iudges, turne agayne, and ye shall se myne vngyltinesse:
whether there be eny vnrighteousnesse in my tong, or vayne wordes in my mouth.
Hath man any certayn tyme vpon earthe? Are not hys dayes also lyke the dayes of an hyred seruaunt?
For lyke as a bonde seruaunt desyreth the shadowe, and as an hyrelynge wolde fayne haue an ende of hys worcke.
Euen so haue I laboured whole monethes longe (but in vayne) and many a carefull night haue I tolde.
When I laye me downe to slepe, I saye: O when shall I rise? Agayne, I longed sore for the nyght. And in the meane tyme am I full of sorowes vntyll the twylyght.
My flesh is clothed with wormes and dust of the earth: my skynne is withered, and become horryble,
my dayes passe ouer more spedely, then a weeuer can weeue out his webbe: and are gone or I am aware.
O remembre, that my lyfe is but a mynde, and that myne eye shall nomore se pleasures therof,
yee, Ꟶ that none other mens eye shall se me eny more. For yf thou fasten thyne eye vpon me, I come to naught.
The cloude is consumed and vanysshed awaye, euen so he that goeth downe to the graue, shall come nomore vp,
ner turne agayne into hys house nether shall hys place knowe hym eny more.
Therfore, I will not spare my mouth, but wyll speake in the trouble of my sprete, and muse in the bytternesse of my mynde.
Am I a see or a whalfysh, that thou kepest me so in preson?
When I saye: my bedd shall comforte me. I shall haue some refresshynge by talcking to my selfe vpon my couche.
Then troublest thou me with dreames, and makest me so afrayed thorow visions,
that my soule wissheth rather to perish and dye, then my bones to remayne.
I can se no remedy, I shall lyue nomore: O spare me then, for my dayes are but vayne.
What is man, that thou hast hym in soch reputacyon, Ꟶ settest somoch by hym?
Thou visytest hym early, and euery daye, sodenly doest thou trye hym.
Why goest thou not fro me, ner lettest me alone, so longe tyll I maye swalow downe my spetle?
I haue offended, and what shall I do vnto the, O thou preseruer of men? Why hast thou made me to stande in thy waye, and am so heuy a burden vnto my self?
Why doest thou not forgeue me my synne? Wherfore takest thou not awaye my wyckednes? Beholde, now must I slepe in the dust, and yf thou sekest me to morow in the mornyng, I shalbe gone.
Then answered Baldad the Suhite, and sayde:
How longe wilt thou talke of soch thynges? how longe shall thy mouth speake so proude wordes?
Doth God peruerte the thynge that is laufull? Or doth the almyghtye destroye the thynge that is ryght?
For seyng that thy sonnes synned agaynst hym, dyd not he punysh them for theyr wyckednesse?
If thou woldest now resort vnto God by tymes, and make thyne humble prayer to the almyghty:
yf thou woldest lyue a pure and a godly lyfe: shulde he not awake vp vnto the immediatly, and geue the, the bewtye of ryghtewesnesse agayne?
In so moche, that where in so euer thou haddest lytle afore, thou shuldest now haue greate aboundaunce.
Enquere (I praye the) of them that haue bene before the, and search diligently amonge theyr fathers.
For we are but of yesterdaye, and consydre not, that oure dayes vpon earth are but a very shadowe.
Shall not they shewe the, and tell the, yee, and gladly confesse the same?
Maye a rysshe be grene without moystnesse? Or maye the grasse growe without water?
No: but (or euer it be shot forth, Ꟶ or euer it be gathered) it withered, before eny other herbe.
Euen so goeth it with all them, that forget God: and euen thus also shall the ypocrites hope come to naught.
Hys confydence shalbe destroyed, and hys trust shalbe a spiders webbe.
He shall leane vpon his house, but it shall not stande: he shall holde hym fast by it, yet shall it not endure.
It is euen as a grene tree before the sonne, Ꟶ shoteth forth the braunches in hys garden.
It taketh many rotes by a well syde, in so moch that it is lyke an house of stones.
But yf it be taken out of hys place, euery man denyeth it, sayenge: I knowe the not.
Lo, thus is it with him, that reioyseth in his awne doynges: and as for other, they growe out of the earth.
Behold, God will not cast awaye a vertuous man, nether wyll he helpe the vngodly.
Thy mouth shall he fyll with laughing, and thy lyppes with gladnesse.
They also that hate the, shalbe confounded, and the dwellinge of the vngodly shall come to naught.
Iob answered, Ꟶ sayde:
I know it is so of a treuthe: For how maye a man (compared vnto God) be iustifyed?
If he will argue with him, he shall not be able to answere hym vnto one amonge a thousande.
Concernynge soch as be wyse of herte, or myghtye in strength, who euer prospered, that toke part against hym?
He translateth the mountaynes, or euer they be aware. It is he that ouerthroweth them in hys wrath.
He remoueth the earthe oute of her place, that the pylers therof shake with all.
He commaundeth the sonne, and it riseth not: he closeth vp the starres, as it were vnder a sygnett.
He him self alone spredeth out the heauens, and goeth vpon the waues of the see.
He maketh the waynes of heauen the Orion the seuen starres, and the secrete places of the south.
He doth greate thynges, soch as are vnsearcheable, yee, and wonders withoute nombre.
Lo, whan he goeth ouer by me, I shall not se hym. And whan he departeth, by me, I shall not loke vpon hym. I shall not perceaue hym.
If he be hasty to take eny thynge awaye, who wyll make him restore it agayne? Or who wyll saye vnto hym what doest thou?
He is God, whose wrath no man maye withstande: but the proudest of all must stoupe vnder hym.
How shulde I then answere hym? Or what wordes shulde I fynde oute agaynst hym?
Yee, though I were ryghteous, yet myght I not geue hym one worde agayne, but mekely submytte my self to hym as my iudge.
Yf I had called vpon hym, and he had answered me: yet wold I not beleue, that he herd my voyce:
he troubleth me so with the tempest, and woundeth me out of measure without a cause.
He wyll not lett my sprete be in rest, but fylleth me wt bytternesse.
If men wyll speake of strength, lo, he is stronge: yf men wyll speake of ryghteousnes, who darre be my recorde.
If I wyll iustifye my selfe, my awne mouth shall condempne me: yf I wyll put forth my selfe for a perfecte man, he shall proue me a wycked doer.
For though I be an innocent, and my conscience cleare, yet am I weery of my lyfe
One thyng it is and therfore I sayed. He destroyeth both the righteous and vngodly.
And though he staye sodenly with the scourge, yet wyll he laugh at the punyshement of the innocent.
As for the worlde, it is geuen ouer into the hand of the wicked, and he shal couer the faces of the iudges therof. Is it not so? where is there eny, but he is soch one?
My dayes are more swyfte then a runner: they are gone Ꟶ haue sene no good thing.
They are passed awaye, as the shyppes that be good vnder sayle, and as the aegle that flieth to the praye.
When I am purposed to forget my complayning, to leaue of fro my wrath, and to comforte my selfe,
then am I afrayed of all my sorowes, for I knowe, that thou wylt not iudge me innocent.
If I be then a wicked doer, why laboure I in vayne?
If I washe my selfe with snowe water, and make myne handes neuer so cleane, at the wel,
yet shalt thou dyppe me in the myer: and myne awne clothes shall defyle me.
For he that I must geue answere vnto, and with whom I go to lawe, is not a man as I am.
Nether is there eny dayesman to laye hys hande betwene vs.
Lett hym take hys rod awaye fro me, yee, lett him make me nomore afrayed of him,
and then shall I answere him without eny feare. For as longe as it is thus, I can make no answere.
It greueth my soule to lyue. I wyl make my complaynte, and wyll speake out of the very heuynesse of my soule.
I wyll saye vnto God: O do not condempne me, but shewe me the cause, wherfore thou contendest so with me?
Thinckest thou it well done, to oppresse me, to cast me of (beynge the worckes of thy handes) and to mainteyne the councel of the vngodly?
Hast thou fleshy eyes: or doest thou loke as a man loketh?
Or are thy dayes as the dayes of man, and thy yeares as mans yeares?
that thou makest soch inquisicyon for my wickednes, Ꟶ searchest out my synne?
where as (not withstandinge) thou knowest that I am no wycked person, and that there is no man able to delyuer me out of thyne hande.
Thy handes haue made me, and fasshioned me all together rounde aboute, wilt thou then destroye me sodenly?
O remembre (I beseke the) how that thou madest me of the moulde of the erth, Ꟶ shalt bringe me into dust agayne.
Hast thou not turned me, as it were mylck, and turned me to cruddes lyke chese?
Thou hast couered me with skynne and fleshe, and ioyned me together with bones and synnewes.
Thou hast graunted my life, and done me good: and the diligent hede that thou tokest vpon me, hath preserued my sprete.
Thou hast hyd these thynges in thyne hert. I am sure, that thou remembrest thys thynge.
If I dyd synne, thou haddest an eye vnto me, and shalt not declare me innocent because of myne offence.
Yf I haue done wickedly, wo is me therfore. Yf I haue done righteously, yet darre I not lift vp my hede: so full am I of confusion, and se myne awne misery.
Thou huntest me out (being in heuynes) as it were a lyon, Ꟶ troublest me out of measure.
Thou bryngest fresh wytnesse agaynst me, and thy wrath increasest thou vpon me, very many are the plages that I am in.
Wherfore hast thou brought me oute of my mothers wombe? O that I had perisshed, and that no eye had sene me.
Yf they had caryed me to my graue assone as I was borne, then shuld I be now, as though I had neuer bene
Are not my dayes feawe? Lett hym then leaue of fro me and let me alone, that I may ease my selfe a lytle
afore I go thyther, from whence I shall not turne agayne: euen to the lande of darcknesse and shadowe of death:
yee, into that darck clowdy land and deadly shadowe, where as is no ordre, but terrible feare as in the darcknesse.
Then answered Sophar the Naamathite, and sayde:
Shulde not he that maketh many wordes, be answered? Shuld he that bableth moch, be commended therin?
Shulde men geue eare vnto the onely? Thou wilt laugh other men to scorne, and shal no body mock the againe?
Wylt thou saye vnto God. The thyng that I take in hande is perfecte, and I am cleane in thy syght?
O that God wolde speake, and open his lyppes agaynst the,
that he myght shewe the (out of his secrete wysdome) why he rewardeth the double as he was appoynted to do: then shuldest thou knowe, that God had forgotten the because of thy synne.
Art thou able to fynde out the secretes of God? Or wylt thou attayne to the perfectnesse of the almyghtye?
He is hyer then heauen, what arte thou able to do? Deper then the hell, how wilt thou then know him?
His length exceadeth the length of the earth, and hys bredth the bredth of the see.
Though he turne all thinges vp syde downe, close them in, gather them togeather, who wyll turne hym from his purpose?
For it is he that knoweth the vanite of men: he seyth theyr wyckednesse also, shulde he not then considre it?
A vayne body exalteth hym selfe, and man new borne is lyke a wylde asses colte.
If thou haddest nowe a ryght hert, and lyftedst vp thyne handes towarde hym:
yf thou woldest put awaye the wickednes which thou hast in hande, so that no vngodlynesse dwell in thy house.
Then myghtest thou lyft vp thy face without shame, and then shuldest thou be sure, and haue no nede to feare.
Then shuldest thou forget thy miserye, Ꟶ thyncke nomore vpon it then vpon the waters that runne by.
Then shuld the residue of thy lyfe be as cleare as the noone daye, and sprynge forth as the mornyng.
Then mightest thou haue comforte, in the hope that thou hast: and slepe quyetly, when thou art buried.
Then shuldest thou take thy rest, Ꟶ no man to make the afrayed, yee, many one shuld set moch by the.
As for the eyes of the vngodly, they shalbe consumed, and not escape: theyr hope shalbe misery and sorow of mynde.
So Iob answered, and sayd:
Then (no doute) ye are the men alone, Ꟶ wysdome shall perysh with you.
But I haue vnderstandyng as wel as ye, and am no lesse then ye. Yee, who knoweth not these thynges?
Thus he that calleth vpon God, and whom God heareth, is mocked of hys neyghboure: the godly and innocent man is laughed to scorne.
Godlynes is a lyght despysed in the hertes of the ryche, and is set for them to stomble vpon.
The houses of robers are in wealth Ꟶ prosperite: and they that malyciously medle agaynst God, dwell without care, in those thynges that God hath geuen rychely with hys hande.
Aske the catell, and they shall infourme the: the foules of the ayre, and they shall tell the.
Or the increace of the earth, and it shall shewe the. Or the fysshers of the see, and they shall certifye the.
What is he, but he knoweth that the hande of the Lorde made all these?
In whose hande is the soule of euery liuyng thynge, and the breth of the flesh of all men.
Haue not the eares pleasure in hering, and and the mouth in tastynge the thynge that it eateth?
Amonge olde personnes there is wisdome, and in age is vnderstandyng.
Yee, with God is wysdome and strength, it is he that hath councell and forknowledge.
Beholde, If he breake downe a thyng, who can set it vp agayne? If he shut a thynge, who will open it?
Behold, yf he witholde the waters, they drye vp. If he let them go, they destroye the erth.
With him is strength Ꟶ wysdome: he knoweth both the disceauer Ꟶ hym that is disceaued.
He carieth awaye the wyse men, as it were a spoyle, and bryngeth the iudges oute of theyr wittes.
He taketh awaye the subieccion of the people from their kinges, and gyrdeth theyr loynes with a bonde.
He ledeth awaye the greate men into captiuyte, and turneth the mightye vpsyde downe.
He taketh the veryte from out of the mouth, and disapointeth the aged of theyr reason.
He poureth the confusion vpon prynces, and comforteth them that haue bene oppressed.
Loke what lyeth hyd in darcknes, he declareth it openly: and the very shadowe of death bryngeth he to lyght.
He both increaseth the people, and destroyeth them. He maketh them to multyplye, and dryueth them awaye.
He chaungeth the herte of them that rule the people of the earthe, and disapoynteth them: so that they go wandrynge out of the waye,
and grope in the darcke without lyght: he maketh them also to stacker to and fro lyke droncken men.
Lo, all thys haue I sene with myne eye, heard with myne eare, and vnderstande it.
Loke what ye knowe, that same do I knowe also, nether am I inferior vnto you.
Neuerthelesse, I talke with the almyghtye, and my desire is to comen with God.
As for you, yeare worckmasters of lyes, and vnprofytable Phisicyans all together.
Wold God ye kepte your tonge, for then myght ye be taken for wyse men.
Now heare my chydyng, and pondre the sentence of my lyppes.
Do ye speake iniquite against God? and talke agaynst hym with disceate?
Wyll ye not accepte the person of hym? Or wyll ye contende with God?
Shall that helpe you, when he calleth you to rekeninge. For as one man mocketh another, so do ye mocke hym.
He shall punysh you, and reproue you, yf ye do secretly accept any personne.
Shall he not make you afrayed, when he sheweth hym selfe? Shall not hys terrible feare fall vpon you?
youre remembraunce is lyke vnto a sparke, and youre bodyes lyke the claye.
Holde your tonges for my sake, that I also maye speake, and my sorow shalbe the lesse.
Wherfore do I beare my flesh in my teth, and put my soule in myne handes?
Lo, though he slaye me, yet wyll I put my trust in hym. But I wil reproue myne awne wayes in his sight,
he shall make me whole: and there maye no ypocrite come before hym.
Heare my wordes, and pondre my sayenges with your eares.
Beholde, now haue I prepared my iudgement, and knowe that I shalbe founde ryghteous.
What is he, that wil go to lawe with me? that I maye nowe holde my tonge, and dye.
Neuertheles, graunt me two thynges, and then wyll I not hyde my selfe from the.
Withdrawe thyne hande from me, and let not the fearfull drede of the, make me afrayed.
And then call me, and I wil answere: or els, let me speake, and geue me thou an answere.
How many are my mysdedes Ꟶ synnes? Lett me knowe my transgressyons and offences?
Wherfore hydest thou thy face, Ꟶ holdest me for thyne enemye?
Wylt thou be so cruel and extreme vnto a flyeng leafe, and folowe vpon drye stubble?
for thou layest sharpely to my charge, and punysshest me for the synnes of my youth.
Thou puttest my fete also in the stockes: and lokest narowly vnto all my pathes, and marckest the steppes of my fete:
where as I (notwithstandynge) must consume lyke as a foule carion, Ꟶ as a cloth that is motheaten.
Man that is borne of woman, hath but a short tyme to lyue, and is full of miserye.
He commeth vp and is cutt downe lyke a floure. He flyeth as it were a shadowe, and neuer contynueth in one state.
Doest thou open thyne eyes vpon soche one, and bryngest me in thy iudgement?
Who can make cleane, that commeth of an vncleane thynge? Nobody.
The dayes of man surely are determyned, the nombre of his monethes are knowne onely vnto the. Thou hast appoynted hym hys boundes, whych he can not go beyonde.
God from hym, that he maye rest vntyll hys daye come: which he loketh for, lyke as an hyrelynge doth.
If a tre be cut downe, there is some hope yet, that it wyll sproute, and shute forth the braunches agayne.
For though the rote of it be waxen olde, and the stock therof be dead in the ground, yet when it
getteth the sent of water, it wyll budde, and brynge forth bowes, lyke as a tre that is planted.
But as for man, when he is dead, perisshed and consumed awaye, what becommeth of hym?
The floudes when they be dryed vp, and the ryuers when they be empty, are filled agayne thorowe the flowynge waters of the see:
but when man slepeth, he ryseth not agayne, (of hys awne strength) vntyll the heauen perysh: he shall not wake vp ner ryse out of hys slepe.
O that thou woldest kepe me, and hyde me in the hell, vntyll thy wrath were stylled: and to appoynte me a tyme, wherin thou myghtest remembre me.
Maye a dead man lyue agayne? All the dayes of my lyfe wyll I waite styll, tyll my chaungynge shall come.
Thou shalt call me, and I shall answere the: despyse not thou the worke of thyne awne handes.
For now thou nombrest all my goinges, yet be not thou to extreme vpon my synnes.
My iniquite is sealed vp, as it were in a bagg but be mercyfull vnto my wickednesse.
The mountaynes fall awaye at the last, the rockes are remoued out of theyr place,
the waters pearse thorowe the very stones by lytle and lytle, the floudes wasshe a waye the grauell and earth. And destroyest thou the hope of man?
Thou preuaylest styl agaynst him, so that he passeth awaye: thou chaungest hys estate, and puttest hym from the.
And whether hys chyldren come to worshyp or no, he cannot tell. And yf they be men of lowe degre, he knoweth not.
Whyle he lyueth, hys flesh must haue trauayle, and while the soule is in hym, he must be in sorowe.
Then answered Eliphas the Themanite, and said:
Shal a wyse mans answer be the scyence of the wynde, and fil any mans Bely as it were with the wynde of the east?
Shal he reproue wt a word, that is nothyng worth: and speake the thinges, which can do no good?
As for shame, thou hast sett it asyde, elles woldest thou not make so many wordes before God:
but thy wyckednesse teacheth thy mouth, and so thou hast chosen the a craftye tonge.
Thyne awne mouth condempneth the, and not I: yee, thyne awne lyppes shape an answer agaynst the.
Art thou the fyrste man, that euer was borne? Or, wast thou made before the hylles?
hast thou hearde the secrete councell of God, that all wysdome is to lytle for the?
What knowest thou, that we knowe not? And what vnderstandest thou, but we can the same?
With vs are both olde and aged men, yee, soch as haue lyued longer then thy father.
Thynckest thou it a small thynge of the consolacyons of God? with the is a lyenge word.
Why doth thyne hert so be wytch the? And wherfore wynckest thou wyth thyne eyes,
that thy mynde is so puft vp agaynst God, and lettest soch wordes go oute of thy mouth?
What is man, that he shulde be cleane? what hath he (which is borne of a woman) wherby he myght be righteous?
Behold, he doth not trust hys saynctes: yee, the very heauens are not cleane in hys syght.
Howe moch more then an abhomynable and vyle man, which drincketh wickednesse lyke water?
I wyll tell the, heare me: and I wyll shewe the that I haue sene:
which wyse men haue tolde, and hath not bene hyd from their fathers
vnto whom onely the earthe was geuen, and no straunger went amonge them.
The vngodly soroweth all the dayes of hys lyfe as it were a woman with a childe, and the nombre of a tyrauntes yeares is vnknowne.
A fearfull sounde is euer in hys eares, and when it is peace, yet feareth he destruccyon.
He beleueth neuer to be delyuered oute of darckenes, for the swearde is alwaye before hys eyes.
When he goeth forth to get his lyuying, he seeth plainely, that the daye of darcknesse is at hande.
Sorowe and carefulnesse wyll make hym afrayed, and compasse hym rounde aboute, lyke as it were a kynge with hys hoost ready to the batayll.
For he hath stretched out hys hande agaynst God, and armed hym selfe agaynst the almyghtye,
He runneth proudly vpon hym, and with a styff necke fyghteth he agaynst hym:
where as he couereth hys face with fatnesse, and maketh hys body well lykynge.
Therfore shall hys dwellynge be in desolate cyties, and in houses which no man inhabyteth, but are become heapes of stones.
He shall not be riche, nether shall hys substaunce contynue, ner encrease vpon earthe.
He shall neuer come oute of darcknesse, the flame shall drye vp hys braunches: with the blast of the mouth of God shall he be taken awaye.
He beleueth not that he is in vanyte, and yet he is out of the waye, and vanyte shalbe hys recompence.
He shall perysh, afore hys tyme be worne out, and hys braunche shall not be grene.
He shalbe pluckt of as an vntymely grape from the vyne, Ꟶ shall lett his floure fall, as the olyue doth.
For the congregacyyon of ypocrites shalbe desolate and vnfrutefull, and the fyre shall consume the houses of soch as are gredy to receaue giftes.
He conceaueth trauayle, and beareth vanyte, and theyr bodye bryngeth forth disceate.
Iob answered, and sayde:
I haue oft tymes hearde soch thynges. Myserable geuers of conforte are ye, all the sorte of you.
Shall not vayne wordes come yet to an ende? Or, hast thou yet eny more to saye?
I coulde speake, as ye do also. But wold God, that youre soule were in my soules steade: then shuld I heape vp wordes agaynst you, and shake my heade at you.
I shuld comforte you with my mouthe, and release youre payne with the talkyng of my lippes.
For all my wordes, my sorow wyll ceasse: and though I holde my tonge, yet wyll it not departe from me.
But now that God hath sente me aduersytie, thou hast troubled all my congregacyon.
And that thou hast fylled me wyth wrynckles, my fleshe is recorde, and my leanesse ryseth vp agaynst me, and beareth wytnesse agaynst me.
He is angrye at me, he hateth me and gnassheth vpon me wyth hys teth. Myne enemye skouleth vpon me wyth hys eyes.
They haue opened their mouthes wyde vpon me Ꟶ smytten me vpon the cheke despitefully, they gather them selues together agaynst me.
God hath put me in prease with the vngodly, Ꟶ delyuered me into the handes of the wycked.
I was in wealth, but he hath brought me to naught. He hath taken me by the neck, he hath rent me, and sett me as a marck for him selfe.
His archers compasse me rounde aboute: he wounded my loynes, and doth not spare. My bowels hath he poured vpon the ground.
He hath geuen me one wound vpon another, and is fallen vpon me lyke a giaunte.
I haue sowed a sack cloth vpon my skynne, Ꟶ lye with my heare in the dust.
My face is swollen with wepynge, and in myne eyes is the shadow of death.
Howbeit, there is no wyckednesse in my handes, but my prayer is cleane.
O earth couer not thou my bloude, and let my cryenge fynde no rowme.
For lo, my witnesse is in heauen: Ꟶ he that knoweth me, is aboue in the heygth:
My frendes geue me many wordes, to scorne, and myne eye poureth out teares vnto God.
O that a body might pleate with God, as one man doth with another,
yet the nombre of my yeares is come, and the waye that I must go is at hande, from whence I shall not turne agayne.
My breth stincketh, my dayes are shortened. I am harde at deathes dore.
Froward men are wt me, and myne eye must continue in the bitternesse of them.
O deliuer me, and loke out one to be my suertie in thy sight, what is he that knoweth who will promes for me?
For thou hast with holden their hertes from vnderstandynge, therfore shalt thou not sett (them) vp on hye.
He promiseth his frendes parte of his good, but his awne children spende it.
He hath made me as it were a byworde of the people: where as afore, I was theyr ioye.
Myne eye is dymme, for very heuynesse, Ꟶ all my strength is become like a shadow.
Uertuous men therfore shall well consydre this, and the innocent shall take parte agaynst the ypocrite.
The righteous also will kepe hys waye, and he that hath cleane handes, wyll euer be stronger and stronger.
As for you, turne you, and get you hence (I praye you) seynge I cannot fynde one wyse man amonge you:
My dayes are past, and my councels and thoughtes of my hart are vanysshed awaye
chaungynge the night into daye, and the light into darcknes.
Though I tary neuer so moch, yet the graue is my house, and I haue made my bed in the darcke.
I call corrupcyon my father, and the wormes call I my mother and my syster.
What helpeth then my longe taryenge? Or, who hath considred the thynge, that I loke for?
All that I haue, shall go downe into the pytt, and lye with me in the dust.
Then answered Baldad the Suhite, and sayde:
when wyll ye make an ende of youre wordes? Marcke well, and then we wyll speake.
Wherfore are we counted as beastes, Ꟶ reputed so vyle in youre sight?
He destroied him selfe with his anger? Shal the earth be forsaken, or any stone remoued out of his place because of the?
Yee, the light of the vngodly shall be put out? and the sparke of hys fyre shall not burne.
The lyght shalbe darcke in his dwelling, and his candle shalbe put out with him.
His presumpteous goinges are kepte in, and his awne councell shall cast him downe.
For his fete are taken as it were in the nett, and he is at his wittes ende.
His fote shalbe holden in the snare, and it shall catch them that be thyrsty of bloude.
The snare is layed for him in the grounde, and a pytfall in the waye.
Fearfulnesse shall make him afrayed on euery syde, that he shall not knowe, where to get out.
Honger shalbe his strength: mysfortune shall hange vpon him.
He shall eate the strength of his awne skynne, euen the fyrst borne of death shall eate his strength.
His hope shalbe roted out of his dwellynge, very ferfulnesse shall bringe him to the kyng.
Other men shal dwell in his house (but shalbe none of his) and brymstone shalbe scatered vpon his habitacyon.
His rotes shalbe dried vp beneth, and aboue shall his braunch be cutt downe.
His remembraunce shall perysshe from the earth, and he shall haue no name in the strete:
they shall dryue him from the light into darcknesse, and cast him cleane out of the worlde.
He shall nether haue chyldren nor kynsfolckes amonge his people, no, ner eny posterite in his dwellinges.
They that come after hym, shalbe astonied at his daye, and they that go before, shall be afrayed.
Soch are now the dwellynges of the wycked, and this is the place of hym that knoweth not God.
Iob answered, and sayde:
how longe will ye vexe my soule, and trouble me with wordes?
Lo ten tymes haue ye reproued me: and are not a shamed, for to laugh me so to scorne:
yf I go wronge, I go wronge to my selfe.
But yf ye will enhaunce your selues agaynst me, and accuse me to be a wycked personne because of the shame that is come vpon me:
knowe this then, that it is God, which hath handled me so violently and hath compased me aboute with his nette.
Yf I complayne of the violence that is done vnto me, I cannot be herde. And yf I crye, there is no sentence geuen with me.
He hath hedged vp my waye, that I cannot passe, and he hath set darcknesse in my pathes.
He hath spoyled me of myne honoure, and taken the crowne awaye fro my head.
He hath destroyed me on euery syde, and I am vndone: My hope hath he taken awaye fro me, as it were a tre pluckt vp by the rote.
His wrath is kyndled agaynst me: he taketh me, as though I were hys enemy.
Hys men of warre came together, which made their waye ouer me, and beseged my dwellynge rounde aboute.
He hath put my brethren farre awaye fro me, and soch as were of myne acquayntance, are become straungers vnto me.
Myne awne kynsfolkes haue forsaken me, and my frendes haue put me out of remembraunce.
The seruauntes and maydens of myne awne house toke me for a straunger: and I am be come as an aleaunt in theyr syght.
I called my seruaunt, and he gaue me no answere, no though I prayed him with my mouth.
Myne awne wyfe myght not abyde my breth, I was fayne to speake fayre for the chyldren of myne awne body.
Yee, the children despysed me: And when I was gone from them, they spake euell vpon me.
All soch as were my most familiers, abhorred me: and they whom I loued best, are turned agaynst me.
My bone hangeth to my skynne and my flesh is awaye, only there is left me the skynne aboute my teth.
Haue pyte vpon me, haue pyte vpon me (O ye my frendes) for the hand of God hath touched me.
Why do ye persecute me as God doth, and are not satisfyed of my flesshe?
O that my wordes were nowe written O that they were put in a boke:
wolde God they were grauen with an yron penne in leade or in stone to continue.
For I am sure, that my redemer lyueth, and that I hall ryse out of the earth in the latter daye:
that I shall be clothed agayne with this skynne, and se God in my flesh.
Yee, I my selfe shall beholde him, not with other, but with these same eyes. My reynes are consumed within me:
dyd not ye saye: why doth he soffer persecucion? Is theyr founde an occasion in me?
But be warre of the swearde, for the swearde wylbe auenged of wyckednesse, and be sure, that there is a iudgement.
Then answered Sophar the Naamathite, and sayde.
For the same cause do my thoughtes compell me to answere. And why? my mynde is ready within me.
I haue sufficiently herde thy checking and reprofe, therfore am I purposed to make answere after myne vnderstandynge.
Knowest thou not this, namely: that from the begynnyng (euer sence the creacion of man vpon earth)
the gladnes of the vngodly hath bene shorte, and that the ioye of ypocrites continued but the twyncklynge of an eye?
Though he be magnified vp to the heauen, so that his head reacheth vnto the cloudes:
yet at a turne he perisheth for euer. Insomoch that they which haue sene hym, shall saye. Where is he?
He shall vanysh as a dreame, so that he can no more be founde, and shall passe awaye as a vision in the nyght.
So that the eye which sawe hym before, shall haue nomore syght of hym, and hys place shall knowe hym nomore.
Hys chyldren shall be fayne to agree with the poore, and his handes shall restore them their goodes.
From his youth his bones are full of pleasures, but now shall it lye downe within him in the earth.
When wyckednesse, was swete in his mouth, he hid it vnder hys tonge.
That he fauoured, that wolde he not forsake, but kepte it close in his throte.
The breade that he dyd eate, is turned to the poyson of serpentes, within his body.
The ryches that he deuoured, shall he perbrake agayne, for God shall drawe them out of his bely,
he shal sucke the gall of serpentes, and the adders tonge shall slaye hym:
so that he shall nomore se the ryuers and brokes of hony and butter.
The thing that other men haue laboured for, shall he restore agayne, and shall not eate it vp. Greate trauayle shall he make for ryches, but he shall not enioye them.
And why? he hath oppressed the poore, Ꟶ not helped them: houses hath he spoyled, Ꟶ not buylded them.
His bely coulde neuer be fylled, therfore shall he perishe in hys coueteousnesse.
There shall none of hys meats be left behinde, therfore shall no man loke for hys prosperite.
Whan he had plenteousnesse of euery thynge, yet was he poore, though he was helped on euery syde.
For though the wycked haue neuer somoch to fyll his bely, yet God shall sende his wrath vpon him, and cause his indignacyon to raygne ouer him:
so that yf he fle the yron weapens, he shall be shott wt the stele bowe.
The arowe is taken forth, and gone out of the quyuer, Ꟶ a glystering sweard thorowe the gall of him, feare shall come vpon hym.
There shall no darcknes be able to hyde him An vnkyndled fyre shall consume him, and loke what remayneth in hys house, it shall be destroyed.
The heauen shall declare hys wyckednesse, and the earth shall take parte agaynst him.
The substaunce that he hath in hys house, shalbe taken awaye and peryshe in the daye of the Lordes wrath.
This is the porcyon that the wycked man shall haue of God, and the herytage that he maye loke for of God. because of his wordes.
Iob answered, and sayde:
O heare my wordes, and that shalbe my comfort of you.
Suffre me a lytle, that I maye speake also, and then laugh my wordes to scorne.
Is it for mans sake that I make thys disputacyon? Which yf it were so, shulde not my sprete be then in sore trouble?
Marcke me well, and be abasshed, and laye youre hand vpon youre mouth.
For when I consyder my selfe, I am afrayed, and my fleshe is smytten with feare.
Wherfore do wycked men lyue in health and prosperite, come to theyr olde age, and increase in ryches?
Their chyldren lyue in theyr syght, and theyr generacyon before theyr eyes.
Their houses are safe from all feare, and the rodd of God doth not smyte them.
Their bullocke gendreth, and that not out of tyme: theyr cowe calueth, and is not vnfrutefull.
They sende forth their children by flockes, and their sonnes lede the daunce.
They beare with them tabrettes and harpes, and haue instrumentes of musycke at their pleasure.
They spende their dayes in welthynesse: but sodenly they go downe to hell.
They saye also vnto God: go from vs, we desyre not the knowledge of thy wayes.
Who is the Allmyghtie, that we shulde serue hym? And what profyt shuld we haue to submyt our selues vnto him?
Lo, there is vtterly no goodnesse in them, therfore will not I haue to do with the councell of the vngodly.
How oft shall the candle of the wycked be put out? how oft commeth their destruccion vpon them? O what sorowe shal God geue them for their parte in hys wrath?
Yee, they shall be euen as haye before the wynde, and as chaffe that the storme caryeth awaye.
And though God saue their children from soch sorowe, yet wyll he so rewarde them selues, that they shall knowe it.
Their awne destruccion and misery shall they se with their eyes, and drincke of the fearfull wrath of the Almyghty.
For what careth he what become of his housholde after hys death, whan the nombre of his monethes is cut short?
In as moch then as God hath the hyest power of all, who can teach him eny knowledge?
One dyeth now when he is mightye and at hys best, ryche, and in prosperite:
euen when his bowels are at the fattest, and hys bones full of mary.
Another dyeth in sorowe and heuinesse, and neuer had good dayes.
They shall slepe both a lyke in the earth, Ꟶ the wormes shall couer them.
Beholde, I knowe what ye thincke, yee, and the sotiltye that ye ymagyn agaynst me.
For ye saye: where is the princes palace? and where is the dwellynge of the vngodly:
haue ye not asked them that go by the waye? Doutlesse ye cannot denye their tokens,
that the wicked is kepte vnto the daye of destruccyon, and that the vngodly shalbe brought forth to the daye of wrath.
Who darre reproue him for his waye to hys face? Who wyll rewarde him for the vngraciousnesse that he doth?
Yet shall he be brought to his graue, and dwell among the heape of the deed.
Then shall he be fayne to be buried amonge the stones of the playne. All men also must folowe him, and there are innumerable gone before him.
How vayne then is the comforte that ye geue me? Doth not falshede remayne in all youre answers?
So Eliphas the Themanite gaue answere, and sayde:
Maye a man be profitable vnto God, as he that is wyse maye be profytable to hym selfe?
Is it any vauntage to the Allmyghtye that thou art ryghteous? Or shall it profyte hym, that thou makest thy wayes perfect?
Is he afrayed to reproue the, and to steppe forth with the into iudgment?
Is not thy wickednesse greate, and thyne vngracious dedes innumerable?
For thou hast taken the pledge from thy brother for naught, and robbed the naked of their clothinge:
To soche as were weery hast thou geuen no water to drincke, Ꟶ hast withdrawen bred from the hungrye:
Shulde soch one then as vseth violence, wrong Ꟶ oppression (doing all thinge of parcialite, and hauinge respecte of personnes) dwell in the lande?
Thou hast sent wyddowes awaye emptie and oppressed the poore fatherlesse.
Therfore art thou compassed aboute with snares on euery syde, and sodenly vexed with feare.
Shuldest thou then se no darckenesse? Shulde not the water floude runne ouer the?
Now because that God is hyer then the heauens, and because thou seyst that the starres are so hye,
wilt thou therfore saye: Tushe, how shulde God knowe? Doth his dominyon reache beyonde the cloudes?
Tush, the cloudes couer him that he maye not se, Ꟶ he dwelleth aboue heauen.
Dost not thou kepe the olde waye, that vayne men haue gone?
Which were cut downe out of tyme, and whose foundacyon was as a runnynge water,
which sayed vnto God: go from vs, and what dyd the Allmyghtye with them?
He fylled theyr houses with good thinges. But the councell of the vngodly is farre fro me.
The ryghteous sawe it and were glad, and the innocent laughed them to scorne.
Is oure increase hewen downe? As for the remnaunt of them, the fyre hath consumed it.
Therfore reconcile the vnto God, and be content, so shall all thinges prospere with the ryght well.
Receaue the lawe at his mouth, and laye vp his wordes in thyne herte.
For yf thou wilt turne to the Almightye, thou shall stande fast, and put all vnrighteousnesse from thy dwellynge:
Thou shall make golde as plentifull as the dust, and the golde of Ophir as the flyntes of the ryuers.
Yee, Almightye God hys awne selfe shalbe thy defence, and thou shalt haue plentye of syluer.
Then shalt thou haue thy delite in the Almightie, Ꟶ lyft vp thy face vnto God.
Then shalt thou make thy prayer vnto him, and he shall heare the, and thou shalt kepe thy promyses.
Then, loke what thou takest in hand, he shall make it to prospere with the, and the lyght shall shyne in the wayes.
For who so humbleth hym selfe, him shall be set vp: and who so loketh mekely, shalbe healed.
If thou be innocent thou shalt deliuer the countre because of the vngyltynesse of thyne handes.
Iob answered, and sayde:
My sayinge is yet this daye in bytternes, and my hande heuy because of my gronynge.
O that I myght se him, and fynde hym: O that I myght come before his seate,
to pleate my cause before him, and to fyll my mouth with argumentes.
That I myght knowe, what answere he wolde geue me: and that I myght vnderstande, what he wolde saye vnto me.
Wyll he pleate agaynst me with his great power and strength?
No, but he wyll make me the stronger. He that is iust, shall entre disputacion with hym, and my iudge shall delyuer me for euer.
Beholde, though I go before, I fynde him: If I come behynde, I can get no knowledge of him:
Yf I go on the left syde where he doth hys worcke, I cannot atteyne vnto hym. A gayne, yf I go on the ryght syd, he hydeth hym selfe, that I cannot se him.
But as for my waye, he knoweth it: and tryeth me as the golde in the fyre.
My fote doth kepe his path, his hye waye haue I holden, and will not go out of it.
I will not forsake the commaundement of his lippes, but loke what he charged me with his mouth, that haue I shutt vp in my herte.
He is styll at one poynt, and who wyll turne him back? He doth as him listeth, and bringeth to passe what he will.
He perfourmeth the thynge that is appoynted for me, Ꟶ many soch thynges doth he.
This is the cause that I shrincke at his presence, so that when I consydre hym, I am afrayed of him.
For in somoch as he is God, he maketh my herte soft: and seynge that he is Allmyghtie, he putteth me in feare.
Thus can not I gett out of darckenesse, nether hath he couered the cloude fro my face.
Consyderinge then that there is no tyme hid from the Almyghtie, how happeneth it, that they which knowe hym, do not regarde his dayes?
For some men there be, that remoue other mens landemarkes: that robbe them of their catell, and kepe the same for theyr awne:
that dryue awaye the asse of the fatherlesse: that take the wyddowes oxe for a pledge:
that thrust the poore out of the waye, and oppresse the simple of the worlde together.
Beholde, euen as the wylde asses in the deserte goo they forth to their worke, and ryse by tymes to spoyle: Yee the very wyldernesse ministreth foode for their chyldren.
They reape the corne felde that is not their awne: and let the vyneyarde of the vngodly alone.
They are the cause that so many men are naked and bare, hauinge no clothes to couer them and to kepe them from colde:
So that when the showers in the mountaynes haue rayned vpon them, Ꟶ they be all wett, they haue none other succoure, but to kepe them amonge the rockes.
They spoyle the suckinge fatherlesse childe, and take the pledge from the poore.
In somoch that they let him go naked without clothing, and haue taken awaye the sheafe of the hungrie.
The poore are fayne to laboure in their oyle milles, yee, and to treade in theyr wyne presses, and yet to suffre thyrst.
The men of the cytie crieth vnto the Lorde with sything, the soules of the slayue also make theyr complainte: But God destroyeth them not for all this,
where as they (not withstandinge) are conuersaunt amonge them that abhorre the lyght: they knowe not hys waye, ner contynue in his pathes.
Tymely in the mornynge do they aryse, to murthur the symple and poore, and in the nyght they go a stealynge.
The eye of the aduolterer wayteth for the darcknesse, and sayeth thus in him selfe: Tush, there shall no eye se me, and so he disgiseth his face.
In the night ceason they search the houses, and hyde them selues in the daye tyme, but will not knowe the light.
For as soone as the daye breaketh, the shadowe of death commeth vpon them, and they go in horrible darcknesse.
The vngodly is swyfter then the water: their porcion shalbe cursed in the earth, and he shall not beholde the waye of the vineyardes.
O that they (for the wickednesse which they haue done) were drawen to the hell, soner then snowe melteth at the drouth and heate.
O that all compassion vpon them were forgotten: that their daynties were wormes, that they were cleane put out of remembraunce, and vngodlynesse vtterly hewen downe lyke as a tre.
He hath oppressed the baren, that he cannot beare, and vnto the wyddowe hath he done no good.
He drue the mightie after hym with his power, and when he was gotten vp, no man was without feare, as longe as he lyueth.
And though they might be safe, yet they wyll not receaue it, for their eyes loke vpon their awne wayes.
They are exalted for a lytle, but shortly are they gone, brought to extreme pouerte, and taken out of the waye: ye and vtterly pluckte of, as the eares of corne.
Is it not so? Who wyll then reproue me as a lyar, and saye that my wordes are nothynge worth?
Then answered Baldad the Suhite, and sayde.
Is there power and feare with him aboue, that maketh peace, sytting in his hyghnesse,
whose men of warre are innumerable, and whose light aryseth ouer all.
But how maye a man compared vnto God, be iustifyed? Or how can he be cleane, that is borne of a woman?
Beholde, the Moone shyneth nothynge in comparison to him, and the starres are vncleane in his sight.
How moche more then man, that is but corrupcion: and the sonne of man, which is but a worme?
Iob answered, and sayde:
Whom hast thou helped? Him that is wtout strength? what comforte geuest thou vnto hym that hath no strength?
Where is the councell that thou shuldest geue him, which hath no wysdome? Hast thou shewed the waye of ryght lyuinge.
To whom hast thou spoken those wordes? Who made the breth to come out of thy mouth?
Are not deed thinges shapen vnder the waters: Ꟶ thinges by the waters syde?
Hell is naked before him, and the very destruccion it selfe cannot be hyd out of his syght.
He stretcheth out the north ouer the emptie, and hangeth the earth vpon nothing.
He byndeth the waters in his cloudes, and the cloude is not broken vnder them.
He holdeth back his stole, that it cannot be sene, and spredeth his cloude before it.
He hath compased the waters with certayne boundes vntill the daye Ꟶ nyght come to an ende.
The very pyllers of heauen tremble and quake at his reprofe.
He stilleth the se with his power, and thorow his wysdome smyteth he the strength therof.
Hys sprete hath garnisshed the heauens, and hys hande hath made the rebellious serpent.
Lo, this is nowe a shorte summe of his wayes. But who is able sufficiently to rehearse hys workes? Who can perceaue and vnderstande the thondre of hys power?
And Iob proceaded Ꟶ went forth in hys communicacyon, sayeng:
As truly as God lyueth (which hath taken awaye my iudgement) and the Almightie, that hath vexed my mynde:
My lyppes shal talke of no vanyte, and my tonge shall speake no dysceate,
whyle my breth is in me, and as longe as the wynde (that God hath geuen me) is in my nostrels.
God forbid, that I shulde graunte youre cause to be ryght. As for me, vntyil myne ende come wyll I neuer goo fro myne innocency.
My ryghtwes dealynge kepe I fast, which I wyll not forsake: my hert shall not reproue me of my dayes.
Therfore, myne enemy shalbe founde as the vngodly, and he that taketh parte agaynst me, as the vnryghteous.
For what hope hath the ypocryte though he haue greate good, and though God geue him riches after his hertes desyre?
Doth God heare him the soner, when he crieth vnto him in hys necessite?
Hath he soch pleasure and delyte in the Almightye, that he darre alwaye call vpon God?
I wyll teach you in the name of God, and the thinge that I haue of the Almyghtie, will I not kepe from you,
Beholde, ye stande in youre awne conceate, as though ye knewe all thynges. Wherfore then do ye go aboute with soch vayne wordes,
sayenge. This is the porcion that the wycked shall haue of God, and the heretage that Tyrauntes shall receaue of the Almyghtie.
If he get many children, they shall perish with the swerde, and his posterite shall haue scarcenesse of bred.
Loke whom he leaueth behinde him, they shall dye and be buried, and no man shall haue pitye of hys wyddowes.
Though he haue as moch money as the dust of the earth, and rayment as ready as the claye,
he maye well prepare it: but the godly shall put it vpon hym, and the innocent shall deale out the money.
His house shall endure as the moth, and as a boothe that the watch man maketh.
When the ryche man dyeth, he carieth nothynge with him: he is gone in the twyncklinge of an eye and hath nothynge.
Destruccion taketh holde vpon him as a water floude, Ꟶ the tempest stealeth him awaye in the nyght season.
A vehement east winde caryeth hym hence, and departeth, a storme plucketh hym oute of his place.
It russheth in vpon him, and spareth hym not, he maye not escape from the power therof.
Then clappe men their handes at him, yee, Ꟶ ieast of hym when they loke vpon his place.
There is a place where siluer is brought out of, and where golde is tried
where yron is dygged out of the ground, and stones resolued to metall.
The darckenes shall once come to an ende, he can seke out the grounde of all thinges: the stones, the darcke, and the shadow of death.
With the ryuer of water parteth he asunder the straunge people, that knowe no good neyghbour head: soch as are rude, vnmanerly and boyustours.
He bringeth foode out of the erth, and that which is vnder, consumeth he with fyre.
There is founde a place, whose stones are cleane Saphirs, and where the clottes of the earth are golde.
There is a waye also that the byrdes knowe not, that no vulturs eye hath sene:
wherin the lions whelpes walke not, and where no lion commeth.
There putteth he his hande vpon the stony rockes, and ouerthroweth the mountaines.
Riuers flowe out of the rockes, and loke what is pleasaunt, his eye seyth it.
Out of droppes bringeth he greate floudes together, and the thinge that is hyd bringeth he to light.
How commeth a man then by wysdome? Where is the place that men fynde vnderstanding?
Uerely no man can tell how worthy a thinge she is, nether she is founde in the lande of them that lyue.
The depe saieth: she is not with me. The see saieth: she is not with me
She can not be gottten for golde, nether maye the pryce of her be bought with eny syluer.
No wedges of golde of Ophir, no precions Onix stones, no Saphirs maye be compared vnto her.
No, nether golde ner Christall, nether swete odours ner golden plate.
There is nothinge so worthy, or so excellent, as once to be named vnto her: for perfecte wysdome goeth farre beyonde them all,
The Topas that commeth out of Inde, maye in no wyse be likened vnto her: yee, no maner of apparell howe pleasaunt and fayre soeuer it be.
From whence then commeth wisdome? and where is the place of vnderstandinge?
She is hid from the eyes of all men liuinge, yee, and from the foules of the ayre.
Destruccion and death saye: we haue herde tell of her with oure eares.
But God seeth her waye, and knoweth her place.
For he beholdeth the endes of the world, and loketh vpon all that is vnder heauen.
When he weyed the wyndes, and measured the waters:
when he set the rayne in ordre, and gaue the myghtye floudes a lawe:
Then dyd he se her, then declared he her, prepared her and knewe her.
And vnto man he sayde: Beholde, to feare the Lorde, is wysdome: and to for sake euell. is vnderstandinge.
So Iob proceaded and went forth in his communicacyon, sayenge.
O that I were as I was in the monethes by past, and in the dayes when God preserued me:
when his light shyned vpon my head: when I wente after the same lyght and shynynge, euen thorowe the darcknesse.
As it stode with me when I was yonge: when God prospered my house:
when the Almyghtie was yet with me: when my chyldren stode aboute me:
when my wayes ranne ouer with butter, and when the stony rockes gaue me ryuers of oyle:
when I wente thorowe the cytie vnto the gate, and when they set me a chayre in the strete:
when the yonge men (as soone as they sawe me) hid them selues, and when the aged arose, and stode vp vnto me,
when the Princes left of their talkinge, and layed their hande to their mouth:
when the myghty kepte still their voyce, and when their tonge cleued to the rofe of their mouthe.
When all they that herde me, called me happye: and when all they that sawe me, spake good of me.
For I deliuered the poore when he cried, and so did I the fatherlesse and him that had none to holde him.
He that shulde haue bene lost, gaue me a good worde, and the wyddowes herte praysed me.
And why? I put vpon me ryghteousnes, which couered me as a garment, and equyte was my crowne.
I was an eye vnto the blynde, and a fote to the lame,
I was a father vnto the poore: and when I knewe not the cause, I sought it out diligently.
I brake the chawes of the vnrighteous man, and pluckte the spoyle out of his teth.
Therfore, I thought verely that I shuld haue dyed in my nest: and that my dayes shulde haue bene as many as the sondes of the see.
For my roote was spred out by the watersyde, and the dewe laye vpon my corne.
Myne honour encreased more and more, and my bowe was euer the stronger in my hand.
Unto me men gaue eare, me they regarded, and with sylence they taryed for my councell.
If I had spoken, they wolde haue it none other wayes, my wordes were so well taken amonge them.
They wayted for me as for the rayne: and gaped vpon me, as the grounde doth to receaue the latter shower.
When I laughed, they knewe well it was not earnest: and the lyght of my countenaunce wolde they not put out.
When I agreed vnto theyr waye, I was the chefe, and sat as a kynge with hys armye aboute hym. And whan they were in heuynes, I was theyr comfortoure.
But now they that are younger then I, haue me in derysion: yee, euen they, whose fathers I wolde haue thought scorne to haue set with the dogges of my catell.
The power Ꟶ strength of their handes might do me no good: for the tyme is but lost among them.
For very misery and honger, they fled in to the wyldernesse horrible Ꟶ waist,
pluckynge vp nettels amonge the busshes, and the Iuniper rotes for their meate.
And when they were dryuen forth, men cryed after them, as it had bene after a thefe.
Their dwelling was besyde foule brokes, yee, in the caues and dennes of the earth.
Amonge the busshes wente they aboute crying, and vnder the thornes they gathered them selues together.
They were the chyldren of fooles and vylaines, which are vexed out of the worlde.
Now am I their songe, and am become their ieastinge stock:
they abhorre me, and flye farre fro me, and stayne my face with spetle.
For the Lord hath loosed the strength of my body, and brought me lowe. The brydle haue they cast out of my syght.
Upon my right hande ryse the yonge men agaynst me, they haue hurte my fete, treadinge vpon me, as vpon the wayes that they wolde destroye.
My pathes haue they clene marred. It was so easy for them to do me harme, that they neded no man to helpe them.
They fell vpon me, as it had bene the breakinge in of waters, and came in by heapes to destroye me.
Fearfulnesse is turned agaynst me. Myne honoure vanisshed awaye more swyftly then the wynde, and my prosperite departeth hence, lyke as it were a cloude.
Therfore is my mynde powred full of heuynesse, and the dayes of my trouble haue taken holde vpon me.
My bones are pearsed thorow, in the night season, and my synewes take no rest.
For the vehemencie of sorow is my garment chaunged: and according to the diuersite of heuynes am I gyrded with my coate.
He hath cast me into the mire, and I am become like asshes and dust.
When I crye vnto the, thou doest not heare me, Ꟶ though I stande before the, yet thou regardest me not.
Thou art become myne enemye, and with thy violent hande thou takest part agaynst me.
In tymes past thou didest set me vp on hie, as it were aboue the wynde, but now hast thou geuen me a very sore fall,
Sure I am, that thou wilt deliuer me vnto death euen to the lodginge that is due vnto all men liuinge.
Now vse not men to do violence vnto them, that are destroied allready: but where hurte is done, there vse they to helpe.
Did not I wepe with him that was in trouble? Had not my soule compassion vpon the poore?
Yet neuerthelesse, where as I loked for good, euell happened vnto me: and where as I wayted for light, there came darcknesse
My bowles sethe within me, Ꟶ take no rest, for the dayes of my trouble are come vpon me.
Mekely and lowly came I in, yee, and without any displeasure: I stode vp in the congregacion, and communed with them.
But now, I am a companion of dragons, and a felowe of Estriches.
My skynne vpon me is turned to black, and my bones are brent with heate:
my harpe is turned to sorowe, and my pype to wepynge.
I Made a couenaunt wt myne eyes that I wolde not loke vpon a damsell.
For how great a porcion shall I haue of God? Ꟶ what enheritaunce from the almightie on hie?
As for the vngodly and he that ioyneth him selfe to the company of wycked doers, shall not destruccion and misery come vpon him?
Doth not he se my wayes, and tell all my goinges?
If I haue walked in vanite, or yf my fete haue runne to disceaue:
let me be weyed in an euen balaunce, that God may se my innocency.
If so be that I haue withdrawne my fote out of the right waye, and yf my hert hath folowed mine eye sight? If I haue stained or defiled my handes?
then shal I sowe, and another eate, yee, my generacion and posterite shall be cleane roted out.
If my hert hath lusted after my neghboures wyffe, or yf I haue layde wayte at his dore?
O then let my wiffe grinde vnto another man and let other men lie with her.
For this is a wickednesse and synne, that is worthy to be punisshed,
yee, a fyre that vtterly shulde consume, and rote out all my substaunce.
Did I euer thinke scorne to do right vnto my seruauntes and maydens, when they had eny mater agaynst me?
But seinge that God will sytt in iudgment, what shall I do? And for so moch as he will nedes visett me, what answere shall I geue him?
He that fashioned me in my mothers wombe, made he not him also? were we not both shapena like in oure mothers bodies?
When the poore desired any thinge at me, haue I denied it them? Haue I caused the widdowe to stande waytinge for me in vayne?
Haue I eaten my porcion alone, that the fatherlesse hath had no parte with me?
for mercy grewe vp with me fro my youth, and compassion fro my mothers wombe.
Haue I sene any man perishe thorow nakednesse and want of clothinge? Or any poore man for lack of rayment,
whose sydes thancked me not, because he was warmed with the wolle of my shepe?
Dyd I euer lyfte vp my hande to hurte the fatherlesse? yee, in the gate where I sawe my selfe to be in auctorite:
then let myne arme fall fro my shulder, and myne arme holes be broken from the ioyntes.
For I haue euer feared the vengeaunce and punyshement of God, and knewe very well, that I was not able to beare hys burthen.
Haue I put my trust in golde? Or haue I sayde to the fynest golde of all: thou arte my confidence?
Haue I reioysed because my power was great, and because my hande gat so moche?
Dyd I euer greatly regarde the rysynge of the sonne? or had I the goinge downe of the moone in greate reputacyon?
Hath my hert medled priuely with any disceate? Or, dyd I euer kysse myne awne hande?
that were a wyckednesse worthy to be punished, for then shulde I haue denyed the God that is aboue.
Haue I euer reioysed at the hurte of myne enemy? Or was I euer glad, that any harme happened vnto him? Oh no.
I neuer suffred my mouth to do soch a synne, as to wish him euell.
Dyd not the men of myne awne houshold saye: who shall let vs to haue oure belly full of his fleshe?
I haue not suffred a straunger to lye without, but I opened my dores vnto him, that went by the waye.
Haue I kepte secrete my synne and hyd myne iniquite, as Adam dyd?
Haue I feared any great multitude of people: or yf I had bene dispysed of the symple, O then shulde I haue bene afrayed. Thus haue I quyetly spent my lyfe, and not gone out at the dore.
O that I had one which wolde heare me. Lo, this is my cause. In the which the almyghty shall answere for me: though he that is my contrary party, hath written a boke agaynst me.
Yet wyll I take him vpon my shulder, and as a garlande about my head.
I wyll tell him, the nomber of my goinges, and go vnto him as to a Prince.
But yf case be that my lande crye agaynst me, or that the forowes therof make any complaynte:
yf I haue eaten the frutes therof vnpayed for, yee yf I haue greued any of the plowmen:
then let thystles growe in steade of my wheate, Ꟶ cockle for my barleye. Here ende the wordes of Iob:
So these thre men wolde stryue no more with Iob, because he helde hym selfe a ryghteous man.
But Elihu the sonne of Barachell the Bussyte of the kynred of Ram, was very sore displeased at Iob, because he called hym selfe iust before God.
And with Iobs thre frendes he was angry also, because they had founde no reasonable answere to ouercome Iob.
Now taried Elihu, tyll they had ended theyr communicacion with Iob, for why, they were elder then he.
So when Elihu the sonne of Barachel the Bussyte sawe, that these thre men were not able to make Iob answere, he was myscontent:
Elihu the sonne of Barachel the Bussite answered hym selfe, and sayde: Considringe, that I am younge, and ye be men of age, I was afrayed, and durst not shew forth my mynde,
For I thought thus within my selfe. It becommeth olde men to speake, and the aged to teach wysdome.
Euery man (no doute) hath a mynde, but it is the inspiracion of the Almyghty that geueth vnderstandinge.
Great men are not all waye wyse, nether doth euery aged man vnderstande the thynge that is lawfull.
Therfore will I speake also (heare me) and I wyll shew you also myne vnderstandinge.
For when I had wayted tyll ye made an ende of youre talkynge, and hearde youre wysdome, what argumentes ye made in youre communicacyon:
yee, when I had diligently pondred what ye sayde, I founde not one of you that made any good argument agaynst Iob, that directly coulde make answere vnto his wordes:
lest ye shulde saye. We haue founde out wysdome: God shall cast hym downe, and no man.
He hath not spoken vnto me, and I wyll not answere hym as ye haue done
(for they were so abasshed, that they coulde not make answere, nor speake one worde)
but in so moche as ye wyll not speake, standynge styll lyke domme men, and makynge no answere:
I haue a good hope for my parte to shape hym an answere, and to shewe him my meanynge:
For I am full of wordes, and the sprete that is within me, compelleth me.
Beholde, my belly is as the wyne, which hath no vente, and bursteth the new vessels in sunder.
Therfore will I speake that I may haue a vente: I will open my lyppes, Ꟶ make answere.
I will regarde no maner of personne, no man will I spare.
For yf I wold go aboute to please men, I knowe not howe sone my maker wolde take me awaye:
Wherfore, heare my wordes (O Iob) and herken vnto me all that I will saye:
Beholde, I haue now opened my mouth, my tonge hath spoken in my throte.
My hert doth ordre my wordes a ryght, and my lyppes talke of pure wysdome.
The spryte of God hath made me, and the breth of the Almyghtye hath geuen me my lyfe.
If thou canst, then geue me answere: prepare thy selfe to stande before me face to face,
Beholde, before God am I euen as thou, for I am fashyoned and made euen of the same mould.
Therfore, thou nedest not to be afrayed of me, nether nedest thou to feare, that my auctoryte shalbe to heuy for the.
Now hast thou spoken in myne eares, and I haue herde the voyce of thy wordes:
I am cleane wythout any faute, I am innocent, and there is no wyckednes in me.
But lo, he hath picked a quarell agaynst me, and taketh me for hys enemy:
he hath put my fote in the stockes, and loketh narowly vnto all my pathes.
Beholde, in thys hast thou not done ryght. I wyll make answere vnto the, that God is more then man.
And why doest thou then stryue agaynst him: for he shall not geue the accomptes of all hys wordes.
For when God doth once commaunde a thynge, there shulde no man be curyous, to searche whether it be ryght.
In dreames and visyons of the nyght (when slombring commeth vpon men, that they fall a slepe in their beddes)
he roundeth them in the eares, he infourmeth them, and sheweth them playnely,
that it is he, whych withdraweth man from euyll, delyuereth hym from pryde,
kepeth hym from the graue, and hys lyfe from the swearde.
He chasteneth hym wyth sycknesse, and bryngeth hym to his bed: he layeth sore punyshement vpon hys bones,
so that hys lyfe maye awaye wyth no bred, and his soule abhorreth to eat any dayntie meat:
In so moch that hys body is cleane consumed awaye, and his bones appeare no more.
Hys lyfe draweth on to the graue, and hys lyfe to death.
Now, yf there be a messenger (one amonge a thousande) sent for to speake vnto man, and to shewe him the ryght waye:
then the Lorde is mercyfull vnto hym, and sayeth: He shalbe delyuered, that he fall not downe to the graue, for I am sufficiently reconcyled.
Than shall hys flesh be as well lykyng as it was afore, and shalbe as it was in hys youth.
For yf he submytte hym selfe vnto God, he shalbe gracious vnto him, and shewe him his countenaunce ioyfully, Ꟶ rewardeth man for his ryghteousnes.
Soch a respecte hath he vnto men. Therfore, let a man confesse (and saye) I haue offended: I dyd vnryghteously, and it hath done me no good.
Yee, he hath delyuered my soule from destruccyon, and my lyfe shall se the lyght.
Lo, thus worcketh God allwaye with man,
that he kepeth hys soule from perishing, and letteth hym enioye the lyght of the lyuynge.
Marcke well (O Iob) and heare me: holde the styll, and I will speake.
But yf thou hast any thynge to saye, then answere me, and speake, for thy answere pleaseth me.
If thou hast nothinge, then heare me, and holde thy tonge, so shall I teach the wisdome.
Elihu proceadynge forth in hys answere, sayd:
Heare my wordes (O ye wyse men) herken vnto me, ye that haue vnderstandynge.
For the eare proueth and discerneth the wordes, and the mouth tasteth the meates:
As for iudgement, let vs seke it out amonge oure selues, that we may knowe what is good.
And why? Iob hath sayde: I am ryghteous, but God doth me wronge.
I must neades be a lyer, though my cause me ryght, and violently I am plaged where as I made no faut:
where is there soch a one as Iob, that drincketh vp scornefulnes lyke water?
whych goeth in the company of wycked doers, and walketh wyth vngodly men?
For he hath sayed: Though a man be good, yet is he naught before God.
Therfore herken vnto me, ye that haue vnderstandynge. Farre be it from God, that he shuld medle wyth wickednesse: and farre be it from the Almyghtye, that he shulde medle wyth vnryghteous dealynge:
For he shall reward the worckes of man, and cause euery man to fynde accordynge to his wayes.
For sure it is, that God condemneth no man wrongefully, and the iudgement of the Almyghtye is not vnryghteous.
Who ruleth the earth in his steade? Or, whom hath he sett to gouerne the whole worlde?
To whom hath he geuen hys herte, for to drawe hys sprete and breth vnto hym?
All flesh shall come together vnto naught, and all men shall turne agayne vnto dust.
If thou now haue vnderstandyng, heare what I saye, and herken to the voyce of my wordes?
Maye he be a ruler, that loueth no ryght? Or maye he that is a very innocent man, do vngodly?
Is it reason, that thou shuldest saye to the kynge: Thou art wicked, or, thou art vngodly, and that before the prynces?
He hath no respecte vnto the personnes, of the lordly, and regardeth not the rych more then the poore. For they be all the worcke of hys handes.
In the twyncklinge of an eye shall they dye: and at mydnight, when the people and the tyrauntes rage, then shall they perish, and be taken awaye without handes.
And why? his eyes loke vpon the wayes of man, and he seyth all hys goynges.
There is no darcknes nor shadowe of death, that can hyde the wycked doers from hym.
For no man shalbe suffred to go into iudgement wt God.
Many one: yee innumerable doth he punyshe, Ꟶ setteth other in their steades.
Therfore shall he declare their worckes, he shall turne the nyght, and they shall be destroyed.
They that were in the steade of Sears, dealt lyke vngodly men:
and therfore he punyshed them, because they turned back from hym, and wolde not consyder all hys wayes.
In so moch that they haue caused the voyce of the poore to come vnto hym, and now he heareth the complaynte of soche as are in trouble.
If he graunte pardon, who wyll condemne? And yf he hyde awaye hys countenaunce, who shalbe able to se it? whether it be to the people or to any man, thus wyll he do.
For the vngodlynesse of the people, doth God make an ypocrite to reygne, ouer them.
For so moch then as I haue begonne to talke of God, I will not hyndre the.
If I haue gone a mysse, enfourme thou me: yf I haue done wronge, I will leaue of.
Can he do nothinge without the? For thou hast reproued hys iudgement. Thou also hast thyne awne mynde and not I.
But speake on what thou knowest. Let men of vnderstonding tell me, and let a wyse man herken vnto me.
As for Iob, he hath nether spoken to the purpose nor wisely.
O father, let Iob be well tryed, because he hath answered for wycked men:
yee, aboue his synne he doth wyckedly: triumpheth amonge vs, and multiplieth hys wordes agaynst God.
Elihu spake moreouer, Ꟶ sayde:
Thynkest thou it ryght, that thou sayest: I am ryghtuous before God?
For thou sayest: What aduauntage will it be vnto the, and what profyt shalt thou haue of my synne.
Therfore will I geue answere vnto the and to thy companyons wyth the
loke vnto the heauen, and beholde it: consydre the cloudes, whych are hyer then thou.
If thou hast synned, what hast thou done against him? If thine offences be many, what hast thou done vnto hym?
If thou be ryghtuous what geuest thou him? Or what will he receaue of thy hand?
Of soche an vngodly personne as thou, and of the sonne of man that is ryghtuous as thou pretendest to be:
there is a greate cry and complaynte made by them that are oppressed wyth vyolence, yee, euery man complayneth vpon the crueltye of tyrauntes.
For soche a one neuer sayeth: Where is God that made me? Ꟶ that geueth vs occasion to prayse him in the night?
Whych geueth vs more vnderstandyng then he doth the beastes of the earth, Ꟶ teacheth vs more then he doth the foules of heauen.
If any soch complayne, no man geueth answere, and that because of the wyckednesse of proude tyrauntes.
But yf a man call vpon God, doth not he heare him? Doth not the almyghtye accepte his crye?
Whan thou speakest then, shulde not he pardon the, yf thou open thy selfe before hym, and put thy trust in hym?
Then vseth he no vyolence in hys wrath, nether hath he pleasure in curyous Ꟶ depe inquysycions.
Therfore doth Iob open hys mouth but in vayne, and folyshly doth he make so many wordes.
Elihu proceaded forth in hys talkyng, and sayd:
Holde the styll a lytle, Ꟶ I shall shewe the, what I haue yet to speake on Goddes behalfe.
I wyll open vnto the yet more of myne vnderstandynge, Ꟶ proue my mater ryghteous.
And truly, my wordes shall not be vayne, seynge he is with the that is perfect in knowlege:
behold, the greate God casteth awaye no man, for he him selfe is myghty in power and wysdome.
As for the vngodly, he shall not preserue hym, but shall helpe the poore to their ryght.
He shall turne hys eyes awaye from the ryghteous, but as kynges shall they be in theyr trone, he shall stablysh them for euer, Ꟶ they shalbe exalted.
But yf they be layed in preson and cheynes, or bounde with the bondes of trouble,
then wyll he shewe them theyr worcke, and the synnes wher with they haue vsed cruell vyolence.
He wyth punysshynge and nurtringe of them, roundeth them in the eares, warneth them to leaue of from theyr wyckednesse, Ꟶ to amende.
If they now wyll take hede and serue him, they shall were out theyr dayes in prosperite, and theyr yeares in pleasure and ioye.
But yf they wyll not herken, they shall go thorow the swearde, and perysh or euer they be aware.
As for soch as be fayned ypocrites, they shall heape vp wrath for them selues: for they call not vpon hym, though they be hys presoners.
Thus shall theyr soule perysshe in folyshnesse, Ꟶ theyr lyfe shalbe condemned among the fornicatours.
The poore shall he delyuer out of his affliction, Ꟶ rounde them in the eare whan they be in trouble.
Euen so shall he kepe the (yf thou wylt be content) from the bottomlesse pytte that is beneth: Ꟶ yf thou wylt holde the quyete, he shall fyll thy table wyth plenteousnesse.
Neuerthelesse, thou hast condemned the iudgement of the vngodly, yee, euen soche a iudgement and sentence shalt thou suffre.
For then shall not thy cause be stylled wyth crueltye, nor pacyfyed wyth many gyftes.
Thynkest thou, that he wyll regarde thy riches? he shall not care for golde, ner for all them that excell in strength.
Prolonge not thou the tyme, tyll ther come a nyght for the, to set other people in thy steade.
But bewarre that thou turne not asyde to wyckednesse and synne, which hither to thou hast chosen more then mekenesse.
Behold, God is of a mighttye hye power: Where is there soche a gyde Ꟶ lawe geuer as he?
Who wyll reproue hym of hys waye? who wyll saye vnto him: thou hast done wrong?
O consydre how greate and excellent hys worckes be, whom all men loue and prayse:
yee, wondre at hym, and yet they se hym but afarre of.
Beholde, so greate is God, that he passeth oure knowledge, nether are we able to come to the experience of hys yeares.
He turneth the water to small droppes, he dryueth hys cloudes together for to rayne,
so that they poure downe and droppe vpon men.
He can sprede out the cloudes (a couerynge of hys tabernacle)
and cause hys lyght to shyne vpon them, and to couer the botome of the see.
By these thinges gouerneth he hys people, and geueth them aboundaunce of meate.
Wyth the cloudes he hydeth the lyght, and at hys commaundement it commeth agayne.
The rysyng vp therof sheweth he to hys frendes Ꟶ to the catell.
At this, my hert is astonnied, and moued out of hys place.
Heare then the sounde of hys voyce, and the noyse that goeth out of his mouth.
He gouerneth euery thyng vnder the heauen, and his lyght reacheth vnto the ende of the worlde.
A roaring voyce foloweth hym: for his glorious maiesty geueth soche a thondre clappe, that (though a man heare it) yet maye he not perceaue it afterwarde. It geueth an horryble sownde,
when God sendeth oute hys voyce: greate thynges doth he, whych we can not comprehende.
When he commaundeth the snowe, it falleth vpon the erth: As soone as he geueth the rayne a charge, immediatly the showers haue theyr strength, and fall downe.
He sendeth feare vpon euery man, that they myght knowe their awne worckes.
The beestes crepe into theyr dennes, and take theyr rest.
Out of the south commeth the tempest, and colde out of the north.
At the breth of God, the frost commeth, and the waters are shed abrode.
He maketh the cloudes to do theyr labour in geuynge moystnesse, Ꟶ agayne wyth his lyght he dryueth awaye the cloude.
He distrybuteth also on euery syde, accordynge as it pleaseth hym to deale out hys worckes, that they maye do whatsoeuer he commaundeth them thorow the whole worlde:
whether it be to punysh any lande, or to doo good vnto them, that seke hym.
Herken vnto thys (O Iob) stande styll, Ꟶ consydre the wondrous worckes of God.
Art thou of councell wyth God, when he doth these thinges? When he causeth the lyght to come forth of hys cloudes?
Art thou of hys councell when he spredeth out the cloudes? Hast thou the perfecte knowledge of hys wonders?
Ꟶ how thy clothes are warme, when the lande is styll thorow the South wynde?
Hast thou helped hym to spreade out the heauen, whych is to loke vpon, as it were cast of cleare metall?
Teache vs what we shall saye vnto hym, for we are vnmete because of darcknes.
Shall it be tolde hym what I saye? Shuld a man speake, or shulde he kepe it backe?
For euery man seyth not the light, that he kepeth cleare in the cloudes whych he clenseth whan he maketh the wynde to blowe.
Golde is brought out of the North, but the prayse and honoure of Gods feare commeth from God hym selfe.
It is not we that can fynde out the almightye: for in power, equite, and ryghteousnesse, he is hyer than can be expressed.
Let men therfore feare hym, for there shall no man se hym that is wise in his awne conceate.
Then answered the Lorde vnto Iob out of the storme, and sayd:
what is he that hydeth his mynde with folysh wordes?
Gyrde vp thy loynes lyke a man, for I wyll questyon wyth the, se thou geue me a directe answere.
Where wast thou, when I layde the foundacyons of the earth? Tell playnely, yf thou hast vnderstandyng.
Who hath measured it, knowest thou? Or, who hath spreade the lyne vpon it?
Where vpon stande the pyllers of it? Or, who layed the corner stone therof?
Where wast thou, when the mornyng starres praysed me together, and all the chyldren of God reioysed triumphantly?
Who shut the see wyth dores, when it brake forth as a chylde out of hys mothers wombe?
When I made the cloudes to be a coueryng for it, and swadled it with the darcke?
when I gaue it my commaundement, makyng dores and barres for it,
saying: Hyther to shalt thou come, but no farther, Ꟶ here shalt thou laye downe thy proud and hye waues.
Hast thou geuen the mornynge hys charge (as sone as thou wast borne) and shewed the daye spryng hys place,
that it myght take holde of the corners of the earth, and that the vngodly myght be shaken out?
Theyr tokens and weapens are turned lyke claye, and sett vp agayne as the chaungyng of a garment.
The vngodly shalbe disapoynted of their lyght, and the arme of the proude shalbe broken.
Camest thou euer into the grounde of the see: or walkedest in the lowe corners of the depe?
Haue the gates of deeth bene opened vnto the, or hast thou sene the dores of the shadowe of death?
Hast thou also perceaued how broade the earth is? Yf thou hast knowledge of all thys,
then shew me, where lyght dwelleth, and where darcknes is:
that thou mayest brynge vs vnto theyr quarters, yf thou canst tell the waye to theyr houses.
Knewest thou (afore thou wast borne) how olde thou shuldest be?
Wentest thou euer into the treasuryes of the snowe, or hast thou sene the secrete places of the hayle,
whych I haue prepared agaynst the tyme of trouble, agaynst the tyme of batell and warre?
By what waye is the lyght parted, and into what lande breaketh the east wynde:
Who deuydeth the aboundaunce of waters into ryuers, or who maketh a waye for the lyghtenyng and thonder,
that it watereth Ꟶ moystureth the drye and barengrounde:
to make the grasse growe in places where no body dwelleth, and in the wyldernes where no man remayneth?
Who is the father of rayne? Or who hath begotten the droppes of dewe?
Out of whose wombe came the yse? Who hath gendred the coldnes of the ayre?
that the waters are as harde as stones, and lye congeled aboue the depe.
Wylt thou hyndre the swete influences of the .vij. starres? Or art thou able to breke the circle of heauen?
Canst thou brynge forth the mornynge starre or the euenynge starre at conuenient tyme, Ꟶ conueye them home agayne?
Knowest thou the course of heauen, that thou mayest set vp the ordinaunce therof vpon the erth?
Moreouer, canst thou lyft vp thy voyce to the cloudes, that they maye poore downe a greate rayne vpon the?
Canst thou thondre also that they maye go theyr waye, and be obedient vnto the, sayeng: Lo here are we?
Who geueth sure wysdome or stedfast vnderstandynge?
who nombreth the cloudes in wysdome? who stylleth the vehement waters of the heauen?
who turneth the clottes to dust, Ꟶ then to be clottes agayne?
Wylt thou hunt the praye from the lyon, or fede hys whelpes
lying in theyr dennes, and lurkyng in theyr couches?
who prouideth meate for the rauen, when hys yonge ones crye vnto God, and fle aboute for lack of meate?
Knowest thou the tyme when the wylde goates brynge forth theyr yonge, amonge the stony rockes? Or layest thou wayte when the hyndes vse to fawne?
rekenest thou the monethes after they engendre, that thou knowest the tyme of theyr bearinge?
or when they lye downe, when they cast theyr younge ones, and when they are delyuered of theyr trauayle and payne?
How their younge ones growe vp, Ꟶ waxe greate thorow good fedyng? whan they go forth, and returne not agayne vnto them?
who letteth the wylde asse go fre, or who lowseth the bondes of the mule?
Euen I whych haue geuen the wyldernes to be theyr house, and the vntylled land to be theyr dwellyng place.
That they may geue no force for the multitude of people in the cyties, nether regarde the cryenge of the dryuer:
but seke theyr pasture about the mountaynes, and folowe the grene grasse.
Wyll the vnycorne be so tame as to do the seruice, or to abyde styll by thy crybbe?
Canst thou bynd the yock about the vnycorne in thy forowe, to make hym plowe after the in the valleys?
Mayest thou trust hym (because he is strong) or committe thy labour vnto hym?
Mayest thou beleue hym, that he wyll bringe home thy corne, or to cary any thyng vnto thy barne?
Gauest thou the fayre wynges vnto the pecockes, or wynges Ꟶ fethers vnto the storke?
For he leaueth hys egges in the earth and layeth them in the dust.
He remembreth not, that they myght be troden wyth fete, or broken wyth some wylde beast.
So harde is he vnto hys yonge ones, as though they were not hys, and laboureth in vayne wythout any feare.
And that because God hath taken wysdome from hym, Ꟶ hath not geuen hym vnderstandynge.
When hys tyme is that he flyeth vp on hye, he careth nether for horse ner man.
Hast thou geuen the horsse hys strength, or lerned him to bowe downe his neck wt feare:
that he letteth hym selfe be dryuen forth lyke a greshopper, where as the stoute neynge that he maketh, is fearfull?
he breaketh the grounde with the hoffes of his fete chearfully in his strength, and runneth to mete the harnest men.
He layeth asyde all feare, hys stomack is not abated, nether starteth he a back for any swerde.
Though the quyuers rattle vpon him, though the speare and shilde glystre:
yet russheth he in fearsely, and beateth vpon the grounde. He feareth not the noyse of the trompettes,
but as soone as he heareth the shawmes blowe, tush (sayeth he) for he smelleth the battel a farre of, the noyse, the captaynes and the shoutinge.
Commeth it thorow thy wysdome, that the Goshauke flyeth towarde the South?
Doth the Aegle mount vp, and make hys nest on hye at thy commaundement?
He abydeth in the stony rockes, and vpon the hye toppes of harde mountaynes, where no man can come.
From thence seketh he his praye, Ꟶ loketh farre about with hys eyes.
Hys younge ones are fed with bloud: Ꟶ where any deed body lyeth, there is he immediatly.
Moreouer, God spake vnto Iob and sayde:
Can he that stryueth wyth the Almyghtye, be at rest? Shulde not he which disputeth wyth God, geue hym an answere?
Iob answered the Lorde, saying:
Beholde. I am to vyle a personne, to answere the, therfore wyll I laye my hande vpon my mouth.
Once or twise haue I spoken, but I wyll saye nomore.
Then answered the Lorde vnto Iob out of the storme, and sayde:
Gyrde vp thy loynes now lyke a man, and tell me the thinges that I will aske the.
Wylt thou disanul my iudgement? Or wylt thou condemne me, that thou thy selfe mayest be made ryghteous?
Is thy power then lyke the power of God? Maketh thy voyce soch a sounde as hys doth?
Then arme thy selfe wyth thyne awne power, vp, decke the in thy ioly araye,
powre out the indignacion of thy wrath: se that thou cast downe all the proude,
loke well, that thou makest all soch as be stubburne, to obeye: treade downe all the vngodly in their place,
cast them downe into the dust, and couer their faces with darcknesse:
Then will I confesse vnto the also, that thyne awne right hande shall saue the.
Beholde, the beast Behemoth (whom I made wyth the) whych eateth haye as an oxe:
lo, how stronge he is in hys loynes, and what power he hath in the nauell of his body.
He spredeth out hys tayle lyke a Cedre tre, all hys vaynes are styf.
Hys shynnes are lyke pypes of brasse, hys rydge bones are lyke staues of yron.
Fyrst, when God made him, he ordened the wildernesse for him,
that the mountaynes shulde geue hym grasse, where all the beastes of the felde take their pastyme.
He lyeth amonge the redes in the Mosses,
the fennes hyde him with their shadowe, and the wylowes of the broke couer him rounde aboute.
Lo, without any labour myght he drincke out of the whoale floude, and suppe of Iordane without any trauayle.
Who darre laye hande vpon hym openly, and vndertake to catch him? Or, who darre put a hooke thorow his nose, and lay a snare for hym?
Darrest thou drawe out Leuiathan wyth an Angle, or bynde hys tonge wyth a snare?
Canst thou put a ryng in the nose of him, or bore hys chawe thorow with a naule?
Wyll he make many fayre wordes with the (thynkest thou) or flatter the?
Will he make a couenaunt with the? Or art thou able for to compell hym to do the continuall seruyce?
Wylt thou take thy pastyme wyth hym, as with a byrde, or geue him vnto thy maydens,
that thy companyons may make a refeccion of hym, or that he maye be parted amonge the marchaunt men?
Canst thou fyll the baskett with his skynne, or the fysh pannyer wt his heade?
Darrest thou laye hande vpon hym? It is better for the to consydre what harme myght happen the there thorow, and not to touch him.
For when thou thynkest to haue holde vpon him, he shall begyle the.
No man is so cruell, that is able to stere him vp. Who is able to stande before me?
Or who hath geuen me any thyng afore hande, that I maye rewarde him agayne? All thynges vnder heauen are myne:
I feare him not, whether he threaten or speake fayre.
Who lyfteth him vp, and stripeth hym out of his clothes, or who taketh him by the bytt of his brydle?
Who openeth the dore of his face? for he hath horrible tethe rounde about.
His body is couered wyth scales as it were with shyldes, lockte in, kepte, and well compacte together:
One is so ioyned to another, that no ayre can come in:
Yee, one hangeth so vpon another, and stycketh so together, that they cannot be sundered.
His nesyng is lyke a glystering fyre, and his eyes lyke the mornynge shyne.
Out of his mouth go torches,
and out of his nostrels ther goeth a smoke, lyke as out of an hote sething pot.
His breth maketh the coales burne, and the flamme goeth out of hys mouth.
In his necke remayneth strength, and nothing is to laborious for him.
The membres of his body are ioyned so strayte one to another, and cleaue so fast together, that he cannot be moued.
His hert is as herd as a stone, and as fast as the stythye that the smyth smyteth vpon.
When he goeth: the myghtye are afrayed, and feare troubleth them.
If any man draw out a swearde at him, it shall not hurt him: there may nether speare, iauelinge ner brest plate, abyde hym.
He setteth as moch by a strawe as by yron, and as moch by a rotten stocke as by brasse.
He starteth not awaye for hym that bendeth the bowe: and as for slynge stones, he careth as moch for stubble as for them.
He counteth the dartes no better then a strawe, he laugheth hym to scorne that shaketh the speare.
He treadeth the gold in the myre lyke the sharpe potsherdes.
He maketh the depe to boyle lyke a pot, and stereth the see together lyke an oyntment.
He maketh a path to be sene after hym, the depe is hys walkynge place.
Upon erth is there no power lyke vnto hys, for he is so made that he feareth not.
If a man wyll consydre all hye thynges, thys same is a kynge ouer all the chyldren of pryde.
Then Iob answered the Lorde, and sayde.
I knowe that thou hast power ouer all thynges, and that there is no thought hyd vnto the.
For who can kepe hys awne councell so secrete, but it shalbe knowne? Therfore haue I spoken that I vnderstode not, the thynges that are so hye, Ꟶ passe myne vnderstanding.
O herken thou vnto me also, and let me speake: answere vnto the thyng that I wyll aske the.
I haue geuen diligent care vnto the, and now I se the wyth myne eyes.
Wherfore, I geue myne awne selfe the blame, and take repentaunce in the dust and asshes.
Now when the Lorde had spoken these wordes vnto Iob, it fortuned, that the Lord sayde vnto Eliphas the Themanite: I am displeased with the, and thy two frendes, for ye haue not spoken of me the thynge that is ryght, lyke as my seruaunt Iob hath done.
Therfore, take you now seuen oxen and seuen rammes, and go to my seruaunt Iob, and offre vp for youre selues a brent offeringe: and my seruaunt Iob shall praye for you. Hym wyll I accepte, and not deale wyth you after youre folyshnesse: in that ye haue not spoken the thinge whych is ryght, lyke as my seruaunt Iob hath done.
So Eliphas the Themanite, and Bildad the Suhite Ꟶ Sophar the Naamathite went their waye, and dyd accordyng as the Lord commaunded them, The Lord also accepted the personne of Iob,
and the Lorde turned the captiuite of Iob, when he prayed for his frindes: Yee, the Lord gaue Iob twyse as moch as he had afore.
And then came there vnto hym all hys brethren, all hys systers, Ꟶ all they that had bene of hys acquayntaunce afore, Ꟶ dyd eat bread with him in his housse, wondrynge at hym, and comfortynge hym ouer all the trouble, that the Lorde had brought vpon hym. Euery man also gaue hym a certayne some of money and a Iewell of golde.
And the Lorde made Iob rycher then he was before: for he had fourtene .M. shepe .vj.M. camels, a .M. youck of oxen, and a .M. asses.
He had seuen sonnes also Ꟶ thre daughters.
The fyrst daughter called he Iemima: the second Kezia, and the thirde Kerenhapuch.
In all the land were no wemen found so fayre, as the daughters of Iob, and their father gaue them enheritaunce amonge their brethren.
After thys lyued Iob an hundred and fourty yeares, so that he sawe hys chyldren, Ꟶ hys chyldrens chyldren into the fourth generacion.
And so Iob dyed, beynge olde Ꟶ of a perfect age.
Blessed is the man that hath not walked in the councel of the vngodly, ner stonde in the waye of sinners, Ꟶ hath not sytt in the seate of the scornefull.
But hys delyte is in the lawe of the Lorde: and in his lawe will he exercise him selfe daye Ꟶ night.
And he shalbe lyke a tre planted by the watersyde, that wyll brynge forth hys frute in due season. His leafe also shall not wither: Ꟶ loke whatsoeuer he doth, it shall prospere.
As for the vngodly, is it not so wt them: but they are lyke the chafe which the wynde scatered awaye.
Therfore, the vngodly shall nott be able to stande in the iudgment, nether the synners in the congregacion of the ryghtewes.
But the Lorde knoweth the waye of the ryghtewes, and the waye of the vngodly shall peryshe.
Why do the Heythen so furiouslye rage together? and why do the people ymagyne a vayne thynge?
The kynges of the erth stande vp, and the rulers take councell together agaynst the Lorde, and agaynst hys anoynted.
Let vs breake theyr bondes asunder, and cast awaye theyr coardes from vs.
He that dwelleth in heauen shall laugh them to scorne: the Lorde shall haue them in derisyon.
Then shall he speake vnto them in hys wrath, and vexe them in hys sore displeasure.
Yet haue I set my kynge vpon my holy hyll of Syon.
I wyll preach the lawe, wherof the Lorde hath sayd vnto me: thou arte my sonne, thys daye haue I begotten the.
Desyre of me, and I shall geue the, the Heythen for thyne enheritaunce, Ꟶ the vtmost partes of the erthe for thy possessyon.
Thou shalt bruse them with a rodd of yron, and breake them in peces lyke a potters vessell.
Be wyse nowe therfore, O ye kinges, be warned, ye that are iudges of the earth.
Serue the Lorde in feare, and reioyse. with reuerence.
Kysse the sonne, lest he be angrye, Ꟶ so ye perysshe from the waye, yf his wrath be kyndled (yee but a lytle) blessed are all they that put theyr trust in hym.
A psalme of Dauid when he fledd from the face of Absalon hys sonne. Lord, howe are they increased, that trouble me? many are they, that ryse against me.
Many one there be, that saye of my soule: there is no helpe for hym in God. Sela.
But thou O Lorde, arte my defender: thou arte my worshyppe, and the lyfter vp of my heed.
I did call vpon the Lorde with my voyce, and he hearde me out of hys holy hyll. Sela.
I layed me downe and slepte, and rose vp agayne, for the Lorde susteyned me.
I will not be afrayde for ten thousandes of the people, that haue set them selues agaynst me rounde about.
Up Lorde, Ꟶ helpe me, O my God, for thou smyttest all myne enemyes vpon the cheke bone: thou hast broken the teeth of the vngodly.
Saluacyon belongeth vnto the Lorde, and thy blessynge is vpon thy people. Selah.
To hym that excelleth in musick, a psalme of Dauid. Heare me, when I call, O God, of my ryghtewesnes: thou hast set me at lybertye, when I was in trouble: haue mercy vpon me, and herken vnto my prayer.
O ye sonnes of men, howe longe wyll ye blaspheme myne honoure, Ꟶ haue soch pleasure in vanyte, and seke after lesyng? Sela.
Knowe thys also, that the Lorde hathe chosen to hym selfe the man that is godlye: when I call vpon the Lorde, he wyll heare me.
Stonde in awe, and synne not: comen with youre awne herte, and in youre chamber, and be styll. Sela.
Offer the sacryfyce of ryghtewesnesse, and put youre trust in the Lorde.
There be many that saye: who wyll shewe vs any good? Lorde lyfte thou vp the lyght of thy countenaunce vpon vs.
Thou hast putt gladnesse in myne herte, sence the tyme that theyr corne Ꟶ wyne increased.
I wyll laye me downe in peace, and take my rest: for it is thou Lorde onely, that makest me dwell in safetye.
To hym that excelleth in songes of Musick: a psalme of Dauid. Pondre my wordes, O Lord, consydre my meditacyon.
O herken thou vnto the voyce of my callynge, my kinge and my God for vnto the wyll I make my prayer.
My voyce shalt thou heare by tymes, O Lorde, early in the mornyng will I directe my praier vnto the, and wyll loke vp.
For thou arte the God that hath no pleasure in wyckednes, nether shall any euell dwell with the.
Soch as be foolysh, shall not stande in thy syght, thou hatest all them that worke vanyte. Thou shalte destroye them that speake leasynge: the Lorde wyll abhorre both the bloud thyrstye, and disceatfull man.
But as for me, I will come into thy house, euen vpon the multitude of thy mercy, and in thy feare wyll I worshyp towarde thy holy temple.
Leade me, O Lorde, in thy ryghtewesnesse because of myne enemyes: make thy waye playne before my face.
For there is no faythfulnesse in hys mouth: theyr inwarde partes are very wickednes.
Theyr throte is an open sepulchre: they flatter wt their tonge.
Destroye thou them, O God, let them perysshe thorowe theyr awne ymaginacyons, cast them out in the multitude of theyr vngodlynes: for they haue rebelled agaynst the.
And let all them that put theyr trust in the reioyce: they shall euer be geuinge of thankes, because thou defendest them: they that loue thy name shalbe ioyfull in the.
For thou Lorde wylt geue thy blessynge vnto the ryghteous: and with thy fauorable kyndnesse wylt thou defende hym, as with a shylde.
To hym that excelleth in musick, vpon the instrument of eyght strynges. A psalme of Dauid. O Lorde, rebuke me not in thyne indignacion: nether chasten me in thy displeasure.
Haue mercy vpon me, O Lorde: for I am weake: O Lorde heale me: for my bones are vexed.
My soule also is sore troubled: but Lorde howe longe wylt thou punyshe me?
Turne the, O Lorde, and delyuer my soule: Oh saue me for thy mercyes sake.
For in death no man remembreth the: Ꟶ who will geue the thankes in the pytte?
I am weery of my gronynge: euery nyght washe I my bedd, Ꟶ water my couche with my teares.
My bewtye is gone for very trouble, and worne awaye because of all myne enemyes.
Awaye frome all ye that worke vanyte: for the Lorde hath hearde the voyce of my wepynge.
The Lorde hathe hearde my peticyon, the Lorde wyll receaue my prayer.
All myne enemyes, shalbe confounded Ꟶ soore vexed, they shalbe turned backe Ꟶ put to shame sodenly.
Sigaion of Dauid, which he sang vnto the Lord in the busynes of Thus the sonne of Iemini. O Lorde my God, in the haue I put my trust: saue me from all them that persecute me, Ꟶ delyuer me.
Lest he deuoure my soule lyke a lyon, and teare it in peces, whyle there is none to helpe.
O Lorde my God, yf I haue done any soche thynge, or yf there be any wyckednes in my handes.
Yf I haue rewarded euyll vnto him that dealt frendly with me, yee, I haue delyuered hym, that without any cause is myne enemye.
Then lett myne enemye persecute my soule, and take me: ye let hym treade my lyfe downe vpon the earth, Ꟶ laye myne honoure in the dust. Sela.
Stande vp, O Lorde, in thy wrath: and lyfte vp thy selfe, because of the indygnacyons of myne enemyes: aryse vp for me, in the iudgement that thou hast commaunded.
And so shall the congregacyon of the people come aboute the, for theyr sakes therfore lyft vp thy selfe agayne.
The Lorde shall iudge the people geue sentence with me, O Lorde, accordyng to my ryghtewesnes, and accordynge to the innocencye that is in me.
Oh let the wyckednes of the vngodly come to an ende: but guyd thou the iust.
For the righteous God trieth the very hertes and the reynes.
My helpe commeth of God, which preserueth them that are true of herte.
God is a ryghtewes iudge, and God is prouoked euery daye. Yf a man will not turne, he wyll whet his swerde: he hath bent his bowe and made it ready.
He hath prepared hym the instrumentes of deeth: he ordeyneth hys arowes agaynst the persecutours.
Beholde he trauayleth with myschefe, he hath conceaued sorow, and brought forth vngodlynesse.
He hath grauen and dygged vp a pytte, Ꟶ is fallen hym selfe into the destruccyon that he made (for other.)
For his trauayll shall come vpon his awne head Ꟶ his wickednes shall fall vpon hys awne pate.
I wyll geue thankes vnto the Lorde accordynge to his ryghteousnes, Ꟶ will prayse the name of the Lorde the most hyest.
To hym that excelleth in Githith, a Psalme of Dauid. O Lorde our gouernoure, howe excellent is thy name in all the world, thou that hast sett thy glory aboue the heauens?
Out of the mouth of very babes and sucklynges hast thou ordeyned strength because of thyne enemyes, that thou myghtest styll the enemye and the auenger.
For I wyll consydre thy heauens, euen the worcke of thy fyngers: the moone Ꟶ the starres whych thou hast ordeyned.
What is man, that thou art myndfull of hym? and the sonne of man, that thou visytest hym?
Thou madest hym lower then the aungels, to crowne hym with glory Ꟶ worshyppe.
Thou makest him to haue domynion in the workes of thy handes: and thou hast put all thynges in subieccion vnder his fete.
All shepe and oxen, ye and the beastes of the felde.
The foules of the ayre, and the fysshe of the see, Ꟶ whatsoeuer walcketh thorow the pathes of the sees.
O Lorde oure gouernoure, howe excellent is thy name in all the worlde.
To hym that excelleth vpon Almuth Labben, a Psalme of Dauid. I Wyll geue thankes vnto the, O Lorde wyth my whole herte, I wyll speake of all thy maruelous worckes.
I wyll be glad, and reioyse in the, yee my songes will I make of thy name, O thou moost hyest.
Whyle myne enemyes are dryuen backe, they shall fall, Ꟶ perysh at thy presence.
For thou hast mayntened my ryght Ꟶ my cause: thou art sett in the throne that iudgest ryght.
Thou hast rebuked the Heythen, Ꟶ destroyed the vngodly, thou hast put out their name for euer Ꟶ euer.
O thou enemye: destruccyons are come to a perpetuall ende: euen as the cities which thou hast destroyed: their memoriall is perished with them.
But the Lorde shall endure for euer, he hath also prepared his seate for iudgement:
For he shall iudge the world in ryghteousnes, and minister true iudgement vnto the people.
The Lorde also wylbe a defence for the oppressed euen a refuge in due tyme of trouble.
And they that knowe thy name, wyll put their trust in the: for thou (Lorde) hast neuer fayled them, that seke the.
O prayse the Lord, which dwelleth in Syon, shewe the people of hys doinges.
For when he maketh inquisycion for bloude, he remembreth them: Ꟶ forgetteth not the complaynte of the poore.
Haue mercy vpon me (O Lorde) consydre the trouble whych I suffre of them that hate me, thou that lyftest me vp from the gates of death.
That I maye shewe all thy prayses wyth in the portes of the daughter of Syon, I wyll reioyse in thy saluacyon.
The Heithen are suncken downe in the pytte that they made: in the same nett which they hydd pryuely, is their awne foote taken.
The Lorde is knowen to execute iudgement: the vngodly is trapped in the worcke of his awne handes: A consyderacyon Sela.
The wycked shall be turned vnto hell, Ꟶ all people that forget God:
For the poore shall not be all waye forgotten, the pacient abydynge of the meke shall not peryshe for euer.
Up Lorde, and let not man haue the vpper hande, let the Heythen be iudged in thy syght.
Put them in feare (O Lorde) that the Heythen maye knowe them selues to be but men. Sela.
Why stondest thou so farre of (O Lord) Ꟶ hydest thy face in that neadefull tyme of trouble?
The vngodly for his owne lust, doth persecute the poore: let them be taken in the craftye wilynesse that they haue ymagined.
For the vngodly hath made boast of hys awne hertes desyre, Ꟶ speaketh good of the couetous, whom God abhorreth.
The vngodly is so proude that he careth not for God, nether is God in all his thoughtes.
His wayes are allway greuous, thy iudgementes are farre aboue out of his syght, Ꟶ therfore defyeth he all his enemyes.
For he hath sayed in his hert: Tush I shall neuer be cast downe, ther shall no harme happen vnto me. His mouth is full of cursynge, and disceate and fraude vnder his tonge is vngodlynesse Ꟶ vanite.
He sytteth lurkinge in the theuish corners of the stretes, Ꟶ priuely in his lurkynge dennes doth he murthur the innocent: his eyes are set agaynst the poore.
For he lyeth waytinge secretly (euen as a lyon, lurketh he in his denne) that he maye rauish the poore.
He doth rauish the poore, when he getteth him in to his nett.
He falleth downe Ꟶ humbleth him selfe, that the congregacyon of the poore maye fall in to the hande of his captaynes.
He hath sayed in his herte: Tush, God hath forgotten, he hydeth awaye his face, and he wyll neuer se it.
Aryse (O Lorde God) and lyfte vp thyne hande, forget not the poore.
Wherfore shulde the wycked blaspheme God, whyle he doth saye in his herte: tush, thou God carest not for it?
Surely thou hast sene it. For thou beholdest vngodlynesse and wronge. That thou mayest take the matter in to thy hande: the poore committeth hym selfe vnto the, for thou art the helper of the frendlesse.
Breake thou the power of the vngodly and malycyous, take awaye hys vngodlynesse, and thou shalt fynde none.
The Lorde is kynge for euer, and euer, and the Hethen are peryshed out of the lande.
Lorde, thou hast hearde the desyre of the poore: thou preparest theyr hert and thyne eare herkeneth therto.
To helpe the fatherlesse and poore vnto theyr right: that the man of the erthe be no more exalted agaynst them.
To the chaunter, A Psalme of Dauid. In the Lorde put I my trust: howe saye ye then to my soule: that she shulde fle as a byrde vpon your hyll?
For lo, the vngodly bende theyr bowe, and make ready theyr arowes wyth in the bowe: that they maye pryuely shote at them, which are true of hert.
For the foundacyons wilbe cast downe, and what hath the ryghteous done?
The Lorde is in hys holy temple the Lordes seat is in heauen? Hys eyes consydre Ꟶ hys eye lyddes tryeth the chyldren of men.
The Lorde aloweth the ryghteous: but the vngodly, and hym that delyteth in wickednes, doth his soule abhorre.
Upon the vngodly he shall rayne snares, fyre, and brymstone, storme Ꟶ tempest: thys shalbe theyr porcyon to dryncke.
For the ryghteous Lorde loueth ryghteousnes: hys countenaunce wyll beholde the thynge that is iust.
To him that excelleth vpon an instrument of eyght strynges a Psalme of Dauid. Helpe Lord, for there is not one godly man left. For the faythful are mynisshed from amonge the chyldren of men.
They talke of vanyte, euery one wyth hys neyghboure, they do but flatter wyth theyr lyppes Ꟶ dyssemble in theyr double herte.
The Lorde shall rote out all disceatfull lyppes, and the tonge that speaketh proude thynges.
Whych haue sayde: wyth oure tonge wyll we preuayle: we are they that ought to speake, who is Lord ouer vs.
Nowe for the comforles troubles sake of the neadye, Ꟶ because of the deape fyghthing of the poore, I will vp (sayeth the Lorde) and wyll helpe euery one, from hym that swelleth agaynst hym, and wyll set them at rest.
The wordes of the Lorde are pure wordes euen as the syluer, whych from earth is tryed and purifyed seuen tymes in the fyre.
Thou shalt kepe them (O Lorde) thou shalt preserue hym from thys generacyon for euer
The vngodly walke on euery syde: whan they are exalted, the chyldren of men are put to rebuke.
To the chaunter, a Psalme of Dauid. Howe longe wylt thou forget me (O Lorde) for euer? howe longe wylt thou hyde thy face fro me?
Howe longe shall I seke councell in my soule? Ꟶ be so vexed in myne hert? howe longe shall myne enemye triumphe ouer me?
Consydre, and heare me (O Lorde my God) lyghten myne eyes, that I sleape not in death.
Lest myne enemye saye: I haue preuayled agaynst hym: for yf I be cast downe, they that trouble me wyll reioyse at it.
But my trust is in thy mercy, and my hert is ioyfull in thy saluacyon.
I wyll synge of the Lord because he hath dealt so louyngly wyth me.
To the chaunter a Psalme of Dauid. The fole hath sayed in hys hert, there is no God. They are corrupt, and become abhomynable in theyr doynges there is not one that doth good.
The Lorde loked downe from heauen vpon the chyldren of men, to se yf there were any that wolde vnderstande, and seke after God.
But they are all gone out of the waye, they are all together become abhominable: there is none that doeth good, no not one.
Haue they no knowledge, that all are soche worckers of myscheffe, eatynge vp my people, as it were bread and call not vpon the Lorde?
There were they brought in great feare for God is in the generacyon of the ryghteous.
As for you, ye haue made a mocke at the councell of the poore, because he putteth hys trust in the Lorde.
Oh that the saluacyon were geuen vnto Israel out of Sion. Whan the Lorde turneth the captyuite of hys people, then shal Iacob reioyse, and Israel shall be glad.
Lorde, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? who shall rest vpon thy holy hyll?
Euen he that ledeth an vncorrupt lyfe, Ꟶ doth the thynge which is ryght, and that speaketh the trueth from hys hert.
He that hath vsed no disceat in his tonge, ner done euell to hys neyghboure, Ꟶ hath not sclaundred his neyghbours.
He that setteth not by hym selfe: but is lowly in hys awne eyes, Ꟶ maketh moch of them that feare the Lorde: he that sweareth vnto his neyghbour, Ꟶ disapoynteth hym nott, though it were hys awne hinderaunce.
He that hath not geuen hys money vpon vsury, ner taken rewarde agaynst the innocent. Who so doth these thynges, shall neuer fall.
The badge or armes of Dauid. Preserue me; O God, for in the haue I put my trust.
O my soule thou hast sayd vnto the Lorde: thou arte my God, my goodes are nothing vnto the.
All my delyte is vpon the saynctes that are in the erth, Ꟶ vpon soch as excell in vertue.
But they that runne after another God, shall haue greate trouble.
Their drinckoffrynges of bloude will not I offre, nether make mencion of their names within my lyppes.
The Lorde hym selfe is the porcion of myne enheritaunce: and of my cup: thou shalt maynteyne my lot.
The lot is fallen vnto me in fayre ground, yee, I haue a goodly heritage.
I wyll thanke the Lorde for geuynge me warnynge: my reynes also chasten me in the nyght season.
I haue set God alwayes before me, for he is on my right hande, therfore I shall not fall.
Wherfore my hert was glad, Ꟶ my glory reioysed, my flesh also shall rest in hope.
For why? thou shalt not leaue my soule in hell, nether shalt thou suffre thy holy one to se corrupcion. Thou shalt shewe me the path of lyfe: in thy presence is the fulnesse of ioye, and at thy ryght hande ther is pleasure for euermore.
A prayer of Dauid. Heare the right, O Lorde, consydre my complaynte, Ꟶ herken vnto my prayer, that goeth not out of fayned lyppes.
Let my sentence come forth from thy presence: and let thyne eyes loke vpon the thing that is equall.
Thou hast proued Ꟶ visyted myne herte in the nyght season: thou haste tryed me and shalt fynde no wyckednesse in me: for I am vtterly purposed, that my mouth shall not offende.
Because of mens worckes that are done agaynst the wordes of thy lyppes I haue kepte me from the wayes of the destroyer.
O holde thou vp my goynges in thy pathes, that my fote steppes slyppe not.
I haue called vpon the, O God, for thou shalt heare me: enclyne thyne eare to me, and herken vnto my wordes.
Shewe thy maruelous louynge kyndnesse, thou that art the sauyour of them which put theyr trust in the, from soch as resyst thy ryght hande.
Kepe me as the apple of an eye, hyde me vnder the shadowe of thy wynges.
From the vngodly that trouble me: mine enemies compasse me round about, to take awaye my soule.
They are enclosed in their awne fatt: Ꟶ their mouth speaketh proude thinges.
They lye waytynge in oure waye on euery syde, turnynge their eyes downe to the grounde.
Lyke as a lyon that is gredy of hys praye, and as it were a lyons whelpe lurcking in secrete places.
Up Lorde, disapoynte hym, and cast hym downe: delyuer my soule from the vngodly which is as a swearde of thyne.
From the men of thy hande, O Lorde from the men, I saye, and from the euyll worlde, which haue their porcion in thys lyfe, whose belyes thou fyllest wt thy hyd treasure.
They haue children at their desyre: Ꟶ leaue the reste of theyr substaunce for theyr babes. But as for me, I wyll beholde thy presence in righteousnes: Ꟶ when I awake vp after thy lykenes, I shalbe satisfyed with it.
To the chaunter of Dauid the seruaunt of the Lorde, which spake vnto the Lord the wordes of thys song, (in the daye that the Lorde delyuered hym from the hande of all hys enemyes, and from the hande of Saul) and he sayde: I Will loue the, O Lorde, my strength. The Lorde is my stony rock, Ꟶ my defence, my sauyour, my God, Ꟶ my might, in whom I wyll trust: my buckler, the horne also of my saluacyon, and my refuge.
I will call vpon the Lord, which is worthy to be praysed, so shall I be safe fro myne enemyes.
The sorowes of deeth compassed me, Ꟶ the ouerflowinges of vngodlynesse made me afrayed.
The paynes of hell came about me, the snares of deeth ouertoke me.
In my trouble wyll I call vpon the Lorde: Ꟶ complayne vnto my God.
So shall he heare my voyce out of his temple, Ꟶ my complaynte shall come before him, it shall entre euen into hys cares.
The erth trembled Ꟶ quaked, the very foundacions also of the hylles shoke Ꟶ were remoued, because he was wroth.
There went a smoke out in his presence: Ꟶ a consumynge fyre out of hys mouth, so that coales were kyndled at it.
He bowed the heauens also, Ꟶ came downe, and it was darcke vnder his fete.
He rode vpon the cherubins, Ꟶ dyd flye: he came flying vpon the wynges of the wynde.
He made darcknes hys secrete place: hys pauylion rounde aboute hym, with darcke water and thycke cloudes to couer hym.
At the bryghtnesse of hys presence hys cloudes remoued, hayle stones and coales of fyer.
The Lorde also thondred out of the heauen, Ꟶ the hyest gaue his thondre, hayle stones, and coales of fyer.
He sent out his arowes and scattered them, he cast forth lyghtnynges, Ꟶ destroyed them.
The sprynges of waters were sene, Ꟶ the foundacions of the round worlde were discouered at thy chydinge, O Lorde, at the blastynge of the breth of thy displeasure.
He shall send downe from the heygth to fetch me, Ꟶ shall take me out of many waters.
He shall delyuer me from my strongest enemye, Ꟶ from them which hate me: for they are to myghty for me.
They preuented me in the daye of my trouble: but the Lorde was my vpholder.
He brought me forth also into a place of liberty: he brought me forth, euen because he had a fauoure vnto me.
The Lorde shall rewarde me after my righteous dealing: accordinge to the clennes of my handes shall he recompense me.
Because I haue kepte the wayes of the Lorde: and haue not forsaken wyckedlye my God.
For I haue an eye vnto all hys lawes: Ꟶ wyll nott cast out hys commaundementes fro me.
I was also vncorrupte before him: and eschued myne awne wickednes.
Therfore shall the Lord rewarde me after my righteous dealing: and according vnto the clennes of my handes in hys eye syght.
With the holy thou shalt be holy, and wt a perfecte man thou shalt be perfect.
With the cleane thou shalt be cleane: and with the frowarde thou shalt lerne frowardnes.
For thou shalt saue the people that are in aduersite, and shalt brynge downe the hye lookes of the proude.
Thou also shalt lighte my candelle: the Lorde my God shall make my darcknes to be light.
For in the I shall disconfyte an hoost of men: and wt the helpe of my God I shall leape ouer the wall.
The waye of God is an vndefyled waye the worde of the Lorde also is tryed in the fyre: he is the defender of all them that putt their trust in him.
For who is God but the Lorde? or who hath any strength except or God?
It is God that gyrdeth me wt strength of warre, and maketh my waye parfecte.
He maketh my fete lyke hertes fete: and setteth me vp on hye.
He teacheth myne handes to fyght, Ꟶ myne armes shall breake euen a bow of steele.
Thou hast geuen me the defence of thy saluacion: thy right hande also shall holde me vp, and thy louynge correccion shall make me greate.
Thou shalt make rowme ynough vnder me for to go, that my fote steppes shall not slyde.
I wyll folowe vpon myne enemies, Ꟶ ouertake them: neyther wyll I turne agayne, tyll I haue destroyed them.
I will smyte them, that they shall not be able to stande: but fall vnder my fete.
Thou hast gyrded me with strength vnto the battayll, thou shalt throwe downe myne enemyes vnder me.
Thou hast made myne enemyes also to turne theyr backes vpon me, Ꟶ I shall destroye them that hate me.
They shall crye: but there shalbe none to helpe them: yee, euen vnto the Lord, shall they crye: but he shall nott heare them.
I wyll beate them as small as the dust before the wynde: I will cast them out, as the claye in the stretes.
Thou shalt delyuer me from the stryuinges of the people: and thou shalte make me the head of the Heythen.
A people whom I haue not knowen shall serue me.
Assone as they heare of me, they shall obey me: but the straunge chyldren shall dissemble with me.
The straunge chyldren shall fayle, and be afrayed out of theyr presons.
The Lorde lyueth: Ꟶ blessed be my strong helper, and praysed be the God of my saluacyon.
Euen the God which seeth that I be auenged, and subdueth the people vnto me.
It is he that delyuereth me from my enemyes, and setteth me vp aboue myne aduersaryes: thou shalt rydd me from the wycked man.
For this cause I will geue thankes vnto the, O Lorde, amonge the Gentyles, and synge prayses vnto thy name. Greate prosperite geueth he vnto his kinge: and sheweth louyng kyndnesse vnto Dauid hys anoynted, Ꟶ vnto hys seede for euermore.
To the chaunter, a psalme of Dauid. The heauens declare the glory of God, and the firmament sheweth his handy worcke.
One daye telleth another: Ꟶ one nyght certifieth another.
There is nether speach ner language, but their voices ar heard among them.
Their sounde is gone out into all landes: Ꟶ their wordes into the endes of the worlde.
In them hath he set a tabernacle for the sunne, which commeth forth as a brydgrome out of hys chambre, and reioyseth as a giaunt to runne his course.
It goeth forth from the vttmost parte of the heauen, and runneth about vnto the ende of it agayne, Ꟶ there is nothynge hyd from the heate therof.
The lawe of the Lord is an vndefylled lawe conuerting the soule. The testimony of the Lorde is sure, and geueth wisdome vnto the symple.
The statutes of the Lorde are right and reioyse the hert, the commaundement of the Lorde is pure, and geueth light vnto the eyes.
The feare of the Lorde is cleane, and endureth for euer: the iudgementes of the Lorde are true and ryghteous all together.
More to be desyred are they then golde, yee then moche fyne golde: sweter also then hony, and the hony combe.
Moreouer, by them is thy seruaunt taught, Ꟶ in kepynge of them there is greate rewarde.
Who can tell, howe oft he offendeth? Oh clense thou me fro secrete fautes.
Kepe thy seruaunt also from presumptuous synnes, lest they get the dominion ouer me: so shall I be vndefyled, Ꟶ innocent from the greate offence.
Let the wordes of my mouth, and the meditacion of my herte be acceptable in thy syght O Lorde, my strength annd my redemer.
To the chaunter, a Psalme of Dauid. The Lorde heare the in the daye of trouble, the name of the God of Iacob defende the.
Sende the helpe from the Sanctuary, and strength the out of Sion.
Remembre all thy offerynges, and accepte thy brent sacrifyce Sela.
Graunte the thy hertes desyre, Ꟶ fulfyll all thy mynde.
We wyll reioyse in thy saluacyon, and triumphe in the name of the Lorde oure God the Lorde perfourme all thy peticions.
Nowe knowe I, that the Lorde helpeth hys anoynted, and wyll heare hym from hys holy heauen: euen with the wholsome strength of hys ryght hande.
Some put theyr trust in charettes, and some in horses: but we wyll remembre the name of the Lorde oure God.
They are brought downe and fallen, but we are rysen, and stande vp ryght.
Saue Lorde, and heare vs, O kynge of heuen, when we call.
To the chaunter, a Psalme of Dauid. The kynge shall reioyce in thy strength, O Lorde, exceadynge glad shall he be of thy saluacion.
Thou hast geuen hym his hertes desyre, and hast not denyed him the request of hys lyppes. Sela.
For thou shalt preuente him with the blessynges of goodnes, and shalt set a crowne of pure golde vpon his head.
He asked lyfe of the, and thou gauest him a longe lyfe, euen for euer and euer.
Hys honoure is greate in thy saluacion: glory and greate worshyppe shalt thou laye vpon hym.
For thou shalt geue hym euerlastynge felycite, Ꟶ make hym glad with the ioye of thy countenaunce.
And why? because the kynge putteth hys trust in the Lorde, and in the mercy of the most hyest he shall not my searye.
All thyne enemies shall fele thy hand: thy ryght hand shall fynde out them that hate the.
Thou shalt make them lyke a fyrye ouen in tyme of thy wrath: the Lorde shall destroye them in hys displeasure, and the fyre shall consume them.
Their frute shalt thou roote out of the earth, and theyr sede from amonge the chyldren of men.
For they intended myschefe agaynst the, and ymagined soch a deuyce, as they are not able to perfourme.
Therfore shalt thou put them to flyght, and the strynges of thy bowe shalt thou make ready agaynst the faces of them:
Be thou exalted, Lorde, in thyne awne strength: so wyll we synge and prayse thy power.
To the Chaunter vpon the hynde of the dawnynge a Psalme of Dauid. My God, my God: why hast thou forsaken me: and art so farre fro my health, and from the wordes of my complaynte?
O my God, I crye in the daye tyme, but thou hearest not: and in the nyght season also I take no rest.
And thou continuest holy, O thou worshyppe of Israel.
Oure fathers hoped in the: they trusted in the, and thou dyddest delyuer them.
They called vpon the, and were helped: they put theyr trust in the, and were not confounded.
But as for me, I am a worme Ꟶ no man: a very scorne of men Ꟶ the outcast of the people.
All they that se me, laugh me to scorne: they shote out theyr lyppes, Ꟶ shake the heade sayinge.
He trusted in God that he wolde delyuer him: let him delyuer him, yf he wyll haue him.
But thou art he that toke me out of my mothers wombe: thou wast my hope, when I hanged yet vpon my mothers brestes.
I haue bene left vnto the euer sence I was borne: thou art my God, euen fro my mothers wombe.
O go not fro me, for trouble is harde at hande, and ther is none to helpe me.
Greate oxen are come aboute me, fatt bulles of Basan close me in on euery syde.
They gape vpon me with theyr mouthes as it were a rampynge and roarynge lyon.
I am powred out lyke water, Ꟶ all my bones are out of ioynt: my hert also in the myddest of my bodye is euen lyke meltynge waxe.
My strength is dryed vp lyke a potsherde, Ꟶ my tonge cleueth to my gummes: and thou shalt brynge me into the dust of death.
For dogges are come aboute me, Ꟶ the councell of the wycked laye seage agaynst me.
They pearsed my handes and my fete, I maye tell all my bones, they stonde starynge and lokynge vpon me.
They parte my garmentes amonge them and cast lottes vpon my vesture.
But be not thou farre fro me, O Lord: thou art my succoure, haste the to helpe me.
Delyuer my soule from the swearde, my dearlynge from the power of the dogge.
Saue me from the lyons mouth: thou hast hearde me also from amonge the hornes of the vnicornes.
I wyll declare thy name vnto my brethren: in the myddest of the congregacion wyll I prayse the.
O prayse the Lorde ye that feare him: Magnifye hym all ye of the sede of Iacob, Ꟶ feare him all ye sede of Israel.
For he hath not despysed ner abhorred the lowe estate of the poore he hath not hyd hys face from hym, but when he called vnto him, he harde him.
My prayse is of the in the great congregacion, my vowes wyll I perfourme in the syght of them that feare hym.
The poore shall eate, Ꟶ be satisfyed: they that seke after the Lorde, shall prayse hym. youre herte shall lyue for euer.
All the endes of the worlde shall remembre them selues, Ꟶ be turned vnto the Lorde, Ꟶ all the kynreds of the nacions, shall worshyppe before him.
For the kyngdom is the Lordes, and he is the gouernoure amonge the people.
All soche as be fat vpon earth haue eaten Ꟶ worshypped.
All they that go downe into the dust, shall knele before him Ꟶ no man hath quyckened hys awne soule.
Sede shall serue him: they shalbe counted vnto the Lorde for a generacyon. They shall come, and shall declare hys ryghteousnes: vnto a people that shall be borne, whom the Lorde hath made.
A psalme of Dauid. The Lord is my shepherde, therfore can I lack nothing.
He shall fede me in a grene pasture, Ꟶ leade me forth besyde the waters of comforte.
He shall conuerte my soule, Ꟶ brynge me forth in the pathes of ryghteousnes for hys names sake.
Yee though I walke thorowe the valleye of the shadow of death, I wyll feare no euell, for thou art wt me thy rodde Ꟶ thy staffe comforte me.
Thou shalt prepare a table before me agaynst them that trouble me: thou hast anoynted my head wt oyle, Ꟶ my cuppe shalbe full.
But louynge kyndnes Ꟶ mercy shall folowe me all the dayes of my lyfe. Ꟶ I wyll dwell in the house of the Lord for euer.
A Psalme of Dauid. The earth is the Lordes, and all that therin is: the compasse of the worlde, and they that dwell therin.
For he hath founded it vpon the sees, Ꟶ prepared it vpon the floudes.
Who shall ascende into the hyll of the Lorde? Or, who shall ryse vp in his holy place?
Euen he that hath cleane handes Ꟶ a pure hert: Ꟶ that hath not lyfte vp his mynde vnto vanite, ner sworne to disceaue.
He shall receaue the blessynge from the Lorde, and ryghteousnesse from the God of hys saluacyon.
Thys is the generacion of them that seke him, euen of them that seke thy face, O Iacob. Sela.
Lyfte vp youre heades O ye gates, Ꟶ be ye lyfte vp, ye euerlastynge dores, Ꟶ the kynge of glory shall come in.
Who is this kynge of glory? It is the Lorde stronge Ꟶ myghtie, euen the Lord myghtye in battell.
Lyfte vp youre heades (O ye gates) Ꟶ be ye lyfte vp ye euerlastyng dores, Ꟶ the kyng of glory shall come in.
Who is thys kynge of glory? Euen the Lorde of Hoostes, he is the kynge of glory. Sela.
Of Dauid. Unto the (O Lorde) wyll I lyft vp my soule.
My God, I haue put my trust in the: Oh lett me not be confounded, nether let myne enemyes triumphe ouer me.
For all they that hope in the, shall not be a shamed: but soch as transgresse without a cause, shall be put to confusion
Shewe me thy wayes, O Lord, Ꟶ teache me thy pathes.
Leade me forth in thy trueth, Ꟶ lerne me, for thou art the God of my saluacion: in the hath bene my hope all the daye longe.
Call to remembraunce (O Lorde) thy tender mercyes, and thy louynge kyndnesses, which haue bene euer of olde.
Oh remembre not the synnes Ꟶ offences of my youth, but accordynge vnto thy mercy thynke thou vpon me (O Lord) for thy goodnesse.
Gracious Ꟶ ryghteous is the Lorde, therfore wyll he teache synners in the waye.
Them that be meke, shall he guyde in iudgement: Ꟶ soch as be gentle, them shall he lerne his waye.
All the pathes of the Lorde are mercye Ꟶ truthe, vnto soch as kepe his couenaunt Ꟶ his testimonies.
For thy names sake, O Lord, be mercyfull vnto my synne, for it is great.
What man is he that feareth the Lord? him shall he teache in the waye that he shall chose.
His soule shall dwell at ease, and hys sede shall inheret the lande.
The secrete of the Lorde is amonge them that feare him Ꟶ he wyll shewe them hys couenaunt.
Myne eyes are euer lokynge vnto the Lord, for he shall plucke my fete out of the net.
Turne the vnto me, Ꟶ haue mercy vpon me: for I am desolate, and in misery.
The sorowes of my herte are enlarged: O bryng thou me out of my troubles.
Loke vpon myne aduersyte Ꟶ misery, and forgeue me all my synne.
Considre myne enemies how many they ar, Ꟶ they beare a tyrannous hate agaynst me.
O kepe my soule, and delyuer me. let me not be counfounded, for I haue put my trust in the.
Let perfectnesse and ryghteous dealynge wayte vpon me, for my hope hath bene in the.
Delyuer Israel O God, out of all hys troubles.
Of Dauid. Be thou my iudge, O Lorde, for I haue walked innocently: my trust hath bene also in the Lorde therfore shall I not fall.
Examen me, O Lord, Ꟶ proue me: trye out my reynes and my hert.
For thy louynge kindenesse is before mine eyes, Ꟶ I will walke in thy trueth.
I haue not dwelt with vayne personnes, nether wyll I haue fellishipe with the disceatfull.
I haue hated the congregacyon of the wicked, and will not syt amonge the vngodly.
I will washe my handes in innocencye, O Lorde, and so will I go to thyne aulter.
That I maye shewe the voyce of thankesgeuynge, and tell of all thy wonderous worckes.
Lorde, I haue loued the habitacion of thy house, Ꟶ the place where thyne honoure dwelleth.
O shutt not vp my soule with the synners, ner my lyfe with the bloudthurstye.
In whose handes is wyckednesse, Ꟶ their ryghthande is full of gyftes.
But as for me I will walcke innocently: O delyuer me, and be mercyfull vnto me.
My fote standeth ryght: I will prayse the Lorde in the congregacyons.
Of Dauid. The Lorde is my lyght and my saluacyon: whom then shall I feare? the Lorde is the strength of my lyfe: of whom then shall I be afrayed?
When the wycked (euen myne enemyes and my foes) came vpon me, to eate vp my fleshe, they stombled Ꟶ fell.
Though an hoost of men were layed agaynst me, yet shall not my hert be astrayed: and though there rose vp warre agaynst me, yet will I put my trust in this.
One thynge haue I desyred of the Lorde, which I will requyre: euen that I maye dwell in the house of the Lorde all the dayes of my lyfe: to beholde the fayre bewtie of the Lorde, and to vyset this temple.
For in the tyme of trouble he shall hyde me in his tabernacle, yee in the secrete place of his dwellynge shall he hyde me, and set me vp vpon a rocke of stone.
And nowe shall he lyft vp my head aboue myne enemyes rounde aboute me.
Therfore will I offre in hys dwellynge, an oblacyon with great gladnesse: I will synge and speake prayses vnto the Lorde.
Herken vnto my voyce, O Lorde, when I crye vnto the: haue mercye vpon me, and heare me.
My hert hath talked of the: Seke ye my face: thy face Lorde will I seke. O hyde not thou thy face fro me, ner cast thy seruaunt awaye in displeasure.
Thou hast bene my succoure, leaue me not, nether forsake me, O God of my saluacyon.
Whan my father and my mother forsake me, the Lorde taketh me vp. Trache me thy waye O Lorde, Ꟶ leade me the ryght waye, because of myne enemyes.
Delyuer me not ouer into the will of myne aduersaryes, for there are false wytnesses rysen vp agaynst me, and soch as speake wronge.
I shulde vtterlye haue faynted: but that I beleue verely to se the goodnesse of the Lorde in the lande of the lyuinge.
O tary thou the Lordes leysure be stronge, and he shall conforte thyne hert, and put thou thy trust in the Lorde.
A Psalme of Dauid. Unto the wyll I crye, O Lorde, my strength: thyncke no scorne of me, lest, yf thou make the as though thou heardest not. I become lyke them, that go downe into the pytte.
Heare the voyce of my humble peticyons, when I crye vnto the, whan I holde vp my, handes towarde the mercyseate of thy holy temple.
O plucke me not awaye with the vngodly and wicked doers which speake frendly to their neyghbours, but ymagine myschefe in their hertes.
Rewarde them accordinge to their dedes, and accordynge to the wyckednesse of their awne inuencions.
Recompense them after the worcke of their handes: paye them that they haue deserued.
For they regarde not in ther mynde the worckes of the Lorde, ner the operacion of his handes: therfore shall he breake them downe, Ꟶ not buylde them vp.
Praysed be the Lorde, for he hath hearde the voyce of myne humble peticions.
The Lorde is my strength Ꟶ my shylde: my hert hath trusted in him, Ꟶ I am helped: therfore my herte daunseth for ioye, and in my songe will I prayse him.
The Lorde is their strength: and he is the wholsome defence of his anoynted. O Saue thy people, Ꟶ geue thy blessinge vnto thyne enheritaunce: fede them, Ꟶ sett them vp for euer.
A Psalme of Dauid Brynge vnto the Lorde (O ye myghtie) ascribe vnto the Lorde worshyppe Ꟶ strengthe.
Geue the Lorde the honoure due vnto his name: worshyppe the Lorde with holy worshippe.
It is the Lorde that commaundeth the waters: It is the glorious God that maketh the thonder:
it is the Lorde that ruleth the see.
The voyce of the Lorde is myghtie in operacion, the voyce of the Lorde is a glorious voyce.
The voyce of the Lorde breaketh the. Cedre trees: yee, the Lorde breaketh the Ceders of Libanus.
He made them also so skyppe lyke a Calfe: Libanus also, and Syrion lyke a younge vnycorne.
The voyce of the Lorde deuydeth the flames of fyre: the voyce of the Lorde, shaketh the wyldernesse, ye the Lorde shaketh the wildernesse of Cades.
The voyce of the Lorde maketh the hyndes to brynge forth younge Ꟶ discouereth the thicke bushes: in his temple doth euery man speake of his honoure.
The Lorde sytteth aboue the water floude, Ꟶ the Lorde remayneth a kynge for euer.
The Lorde shall geue strength vnto his people, the Lorde shall geue his people the blessynge of peace.
A Psalme and songe of the dedicacyon of the house of Dauid. I Wyll magnifye the, O lorde, for thou hast set me vp, Ꟶ not made my fooes to triumphe ouer me.
O Lorde my God, I cryed vnto the, and thou hast healed me.
Thou Lorde hast brought my soule out of hell: thou hast kepte my lyfe, from them that go downe to the pytte.
Synge prayses vnto the Lorde (O ye saintes of his) and geue thankes vnto him for a remembraunce of his holynesse.
For hys wrath endureth but the twinclinge of an eye, and in hys pleasure is lyfe: heuynesse maye endure for a nyght, but ioye commeth in the mornynge.
And in my prosperyte, I sayde: I shall neuer be remoued: thou Lorde of thy goodnesse hadest made my hill so stronge.
Thou dyddest turne thy face and I was troubled.
Then cryed I vnto the, O Lorde, Ꟶ gat me to my Lorde ryght humbly.
What profyt is there in my bloude, whan I go downe to the pytte?
Shall the dust geue thanckes vnto the? Or shall it declare thy trueth?
Heare, O Lorde, and haue mercy vpon me: Lorde be thou my helper.
Thou hast turned my heuynesse in to ioye: thou hast put of my sacke cloth, and gyrded me with gladnesse. Therfore shall (euery good man) synge of thy prayse without ceassinge: O my God, I wyll geue thanckes vnto the for euer.
To the chaunter a Psalme of Dauid. In the, O Lord, haue I put my trust: let me neuer be put to confusyon: delyuer me in thy ryghteousnesse.
Bowe downe thine eare to me, make haste to delyuer me.
And be thou my stronge rocke, and a house of defence, that thou mayest saue me.
For thou art my stronge rocke, Ꟶ my castell: Be thou also my guyde, Ꟶ leade me for thy names sake.
Drawe me out of the nett that they haue layed priuely for me, for thou art my strength.
Into thy handes I commende my sprete: For thou hast redemed me, O Lorde thou God of treuth.
I haue hated them that holde of supersticious vanityes, Ꟶ my trust hath bene in the Lorde.
I wyll be glad and reioyse in thy mercy: for thou hast consydred my trouble, Ꟶ hast knowne my soule in aduersytees.
Thou hast not shut me vp in to the hande of the enemye, but hast set my fete in a large rowme.
Haue mercy vpon me, O Lorde, for I am in trouble, Ꟶ myne eye is consumed for very heuynesse, yee my soule Ꟶ my body.
For my lyfe is waxen olde with heuynesse, Ꟶ my yeares with mournynge.
My strength fayleth me because of myne iniquite, and my bones are corrupte.
I became a reprofe amonge all myne enemyes, but specially amonge my neyghbours, and they of myne acquayntaunce were afrayed of me: Ꟶ they that dyd se me without, conueyed them selues fro me.
I am cleane forgotten, as a deed man oute of mynde: I am be come lyke a broken vessell.
For I haue herde the blasphemy of the multitude: and feare is on euerye syde whyle they conspire together agaynst me, Ꟶ take ther counsell to take awaye my lyfe.
But my hope hath bene in the, O Lorde, I haue sayde: thou art my God.
My tyme is in thy hande: delyuer me from the hande of myne enemyes, and from them that persecute me.
Shewe thy seruaunt the light of thy countenaunce, and saue me for thy mercyes sake.
Let me not be confounded, O Lorde, for I haue called vpon the: let the vngodly be put to confusion, and be put to sylence in the graue.
Let the lyenge lyppes be put to sylence, which cruelly, disdainfully, Ꟶ despitefully, speake against the ryghteous.
O howe plentyfull is thy goodnesse, which thou hast layed vp, for them that feare the? and that thou hast prepared for them, the put their trust in the, euen before the sonnes of men?
Thou shalt hyde them priuely by thine awne presence from the prouokinges of all men: thou shalt kepe them secretly in thy tabernacle, from the stryfe of tonges.
Thankes be to the Lorde, for he hath shewed me maruelous greate kyndnesse in a stronge citie. And when I made hast, I sayde: I am cast out of thy syght.
Neuertheles, thou herdest the voyce of my prayer, when I cryed vnto the. O loue the Lorde, all ye his saintes, for the Lorde preserueth them that are faythfull, and plenteously rewardeth he the proude doer. Be stronge, Ꟶ he shall stablyshe youre hart, all ye that put your trust in the Lorde.
An instruccyon of Dauid. Blessed is he, whose vnryghteousnesse is forgeuen, and whose synne is couered.
Blessed is the man, vnto whom the Lorde imputeth no synne, and in whose sprete there is no gyle.
For whyle I helde my tonge, my bones consumed awaye thorowe my daylye complayninge.
For thy hande is heuy vpon me daye and nyght, and my moysture is lyke the drouth in Sommer. Sela.
I wyll knowledge my synne vnto the, and myne vnryghteousnesse haue I not hyd.
I sayde: I wyll confesse my synnes vnto the Lorde, Ꟶ so thou forgauest the wyckednesse of my synne. Sela.
For this shall euery one that is godly, make his prayer vnto the in a tyme when thou mayeste be founde, but in the great water floudes they shall not come nye hym.
Thou art a place to hyde me in, thou shalt preserue me from trouble: thou shalt compasse me about with songes of delyueraunce. Sela.
I wyll enfourme the, Ꟶ teache the in the waye wherin thou shalt go: and I wyll guyde the with myne eye.
Be not ye lyke horse and mule, which haue no vnderstandynge. Whose mouthes must be holden with byt Ꟶ brydle, lest they fall vpon the.
Greate plages remayne for the vngodly, but who so putteth hys trust in the Lorde, mercy embraceth him on euery syde. Be glad, O ye ryghteous and reioyse in the Lorde: and be ioyfull all ye that are true of herte.
Reioyse in the Lord, O ye ryghteous, for it becommeth well the iust to be thankfull.
Prayse the Lord with harpe: synge psalmes vnto hym with the lute and instrument of ten strynges.
Synge vnto the Lorde a newe songe, synge prayses lustely with a good corage.
For the worde of the Lorde is true, and all hys worckes are faythfull.
He loueth ryghteousnes and iugement: the earth is full of the goodnesse of the Lorde.
By the worde of the Lorde were the heauens made, and all the Hoostes of them by the breth of his mouth.
He gathereth the waters of the see together as it were vpon a heape, Ꟶ layeth vp the depe as in a tresure house.
Let all the earth feare the Lorde: stande in awe of hym, all ye that dwell in the worlde.
For he spake, and it was done: he commaunded, and it stode fast.
The Lorde bryngeth the councell of the Heithen to naught, and maketh the deuyces of the people, to be of none effecte.
The councell of the Lorde shall endure for euer, and the thoughtes of hys herte from generacyon to generacyon.
Blessed are the people whose God is the Lorde Iehouah, Ꟶ blessed are the folcke that haue chosen hym to be theyr inheritaunce.
The Lorde loked downe from heauen, and behelde all the chyldren of men:
from the habitacyon of his dwellynge, he consydreth all them that dwell in the erth.
He fashyoneth all the hertes of them, and vnderstandeth all theyr worckes.
There is no kynge that can be saued by the multytude of an hoost, nether is any myghtie man delyuered by moche strength.
A horse is counted but a vayne thynge to saue a man, neyther shall he delyuer any man by hys greate strength.
Behold the eye of the Lorde is vpon them that feare hym, and vpon them that put theyr trust in his mercy.
To delyuer theyr soules from death, and to fede them in the tyme of dearth.
Oure soule hath paciently taryed for the Lorde for he is oure helpe and oure shylde.
For oure herte shall reioyse in hym, because we haue hoped in hys holy name.
Let thy mercyfull kyndnesse, O Lorde be vpon vs, lyke as we haue put oure trust in the.
Of Dauid, when he chaunged his speche before Abimelech. which droue hym awaye and he departed. I Wyll allwaye geue thanckes vnto the Lorde, hys prayse shall euer be in my mouth.
My soule shall make her boast in the Lord the humble shall heare therof, and be glad.
O prayse the Lorde with me, and let vs magnifye hys name together.
I sought the Lorde Ꟶ he hearde me, yee he deliuered me out of all my feare.
They had an eye vnto him, and were lyghtened, Ꟶ their faces were not ashamed.
Lo, the poore cryeth, Ꟶ the Lorde heareth hym, yee and saueth hym out of all hys troubles.
The Angell of the Lorde taryethe rounde about them that feare hym, and delyuereth them.
O taste and se, howe gracious the Lord is, blessed is the man that trusteth in hym.
O feare the Lorde, ye that be hys sayntes for they that feare hym, lacke nothynge.
The lyons do lacke, Ꟶ suffre hunger but they which seke the Lorde: shall want no maner of thynge that is good.
Come ye chyldren Ꟶ herken vnto me, I wyll teach you the feare of the Lorde.
What man is he that lysteth to lyue, Ꟶ wold fayne se good dayes?
Kepe thy tonge from euell, Ꟶ thy lyppes, that they speake no gile.
Eschue euell, Ꟶ do good. seke peace and ensue it.
The eyes of the Lorde are ouer the ryghteous, Ꟶ his eares are open vnto their prayers.
The countenaunce of the Lorde is agaynst them that do euell, to rote out the remembraunce of them from of the earth.
The ryghteous crye, Ꟶ the Lorde heareth them, Ꟶ delyuereth them out of all theyr troubles.
The Lorde is nye vnto them that are of a contryte hert, Ꟶ wyll saue soche as be of an humble sprete.
Greate are the troubles of the ryghteous but the Lorde delyuereth hym out of all.
He kepeth all hys bones, so that not one of them is broken.
But mysfortune shall slaye the vngodly, and they that hate the ryghteous, shalbe desolate.
The Lorde delyuereth the soules of hys seruauntes: and all they that put theyr trust in hym shall not be destitute.
Of Dauid. Pleate thou my cause, O Lorde, with them that stryue with me: and fyght thou agaynst them that fyght agaynst me.
Laye hande vpon the shilde Ꟶ buckler, and stande vp to helpe me.
Brynge forth the speare, Ꟶ stoppe the waye agaynst them that persecute me: saye vnto my soule: I am thy saluacyon.
Let them be confounded and put to shame, that seke after my soule: let them be turned backe, and brought to confusyon, that ymagyne myschefe for me.
Let them be as the dust before the wynde, and the angell of the Lorde scatterynge them.
Let theyr waye be darcke and slyppery, and let the angell of the Lorde persecute them.
For they haue pryuely layed theyr net to destroye me without a cause, yee euen without a cause haue they made a pytte for my soule.
Let a soden destruction come vpon him vnawares: Ꟶ hys net that he hath layed priuely, catch hym selfe, that he maye fall into hys awne myschefe.
And my soule be ioyfull in the Lorde: it shall reioyse in his saluacyon.
All my bones shall saye: Lorde, who is lyke vnto the? which delyuerest the poore from hym that is to stronge for hym, yee the poore and hym that is in misery, from hym that spoyleth hym.
False witnesse dyd ryse vp: they layed to my charge, thynges that I knowe not.
They rewarded me euell for good, to the greate dyscomforte of my soule.
Neuerthelesse, when they were sycke, I put on a sacke clothe: and humbled my soule with fastynge, and my prayer shall turne into myne awne bosome.
I behaued my selfe as though it had bene my frende or my brother, I wente heuely, as one that mourneth for hys mother.
But in myne aduersyte they reioysed, and gathered them together: Yee the very abiectes came together agaynst me vnawares, makynge mowes at me, and ceassed not.
With the flatrers were busy mockers, which gnasshed vpon me with theyr teeth.
Lorde, howe longe wylt thou loke vpon thys? O delyuer my soule from the calamityes which they brynge on me, and my dearlynge from the lyons?
So wyll I geue the thankes in the greate congregacyon I wyll prayse the amonge moche people.
O let not them that are myne enemyes triumphe ouer me vngodlye nether: let them wyncke with theyr eyes, that hate me without a cause.
And why? theyr comonyng is not for peace, but they ymagyne disceatfull wordes agaynst them that are quyet in the lande.
They gaped vpon me with theyr mouthes, and sayde: fye on the, fye on the: we dyd se it with oure eyes.
This thou hast sene, O Lorde: holde not thy tonge then, go not farre fro me, O Lord.
A wake and stande vp to iudge my quarell auenge thou my cause, my God, and my Lorde.
Iudge me, O Lorde my God, accordynge to thy ryghteousnesse, and let them not triumphe ouer me.
Let them not saye in their hertes: there, there, so wolde we haue it: nether lett them saye: we haue deuoured hym.
Let them be put to confusyon and shame together that reioyse at my trouble: let them be clothed with rebuke and dishonoure that boast them selues agaynst me.
Let them be glad and reioyse, that fauoure my ryghteous dealynge: yee let them saye allwaye blessed be the Lorde, which hath pleasure in the prosperitye of hys seruaunt.
And as for my tonge, it shalbe talkynge of thy ryghteousnes and of thy prayse, all the daye longe.
To the Chaunter, of Dauid the seruaunt of the Lorde. My hert sheweth me the wyckednesse of the vngodly, that there is no feare of God before hys eyes.
For he flatreth hym selfe in hys owne syght, tyll hys abhominable synne be founde out.
The wordes of hys mouth are vnryghteous, and full of disceate: he hath left of to behaue hym selfe wysely and to do good.
He ymagyneth myschefe vpon hys bedd, and hath set hym selfe in no good waye, nether doth he abhore any thyng that is euell.
Thy mercy, O Lorde reacheth vnto the heauen, and thy faythfulnesse vnto the cloudes.
Thy ryghteousnesse standeth lyke the stronge mountaynes: thy iudgementes are lyke the greate depe.
Thou Lorde shalt saue both man and beest. Howe excellent is thy mercy, O God? and the chyldren of men shall put theyr trust vnder the shadowe of thy wynges.
They shalbe satisfyed with the plenteousnesse of thy house, and thou shalt geue them dryncke of thy pleasures, as out of the ryuer.
For with the is the well of lyfe, and in thy lyght, shall we se lyght.
O contynue forth thy louynge kyndnesse vnto them that knowe the, and thy ryghteousnesse vnto them that are true of hert.
O let not the fote of pryde come agaynst me: and let not the hande of the vngodly cast me downe.
There are they fallen that worke wyckednesse: they are cast downe, and shall: not be able to stande.
A Psalme of Dauid. Fret not thy self because of the vngodly: nether be thou enuyous agaynst the euell doers.
For they shall soone be cut downe lyke the grasse, Ꟶ be wythered euen as the grene herbe.
Put thou thy trust in the Lorde, Ꟶ be doinge good: dwell in the lande, and verely thou shalt be fedd.
Delyte thou in the Lorde, Ꟶ he shall geue the thy hertes desyre.
Commytte thy waye vnto the Lorde, Ꟶ put thy trust in hym, Ꟶ he shall brynge it to passe.
He shall make thy rightuousnesse as cleare as the light, Ꟶ thy iust dealing as the noone daye.
Holde the styll in the Lorde, Ꟶ abyde pacyently vpon him: but greue not thy selfe at hym, whose waye doth prospere agenst the man that doth after euell councels.
Leaue of from wrath, Ꟶ let go displeasure, frett not thy self, els shalt thou be moued to do euell.
Wycked doers shalbe roted out: Ꟶ they that paciently abyde the Lorde, those shall enheret the lande.
Yet a lytle whyle, Ꟶ the vngodly shalbe clene gone: thou shalt loke after hys place, Ꟶ he shalbe awaye.
But the meke spreted shall possesse the earth, Ꟶ shalbe refresshed in the multitude of peace.
The vngodly seketh councell agaynst the iust, Ꟶ gnassheth vpon hym with his tethe.
The Lord shall laughe hym to scorne, for he hath sene, that his daye is commynge.
The vngodly haue drawen out the swerde, and haue bended their bowe, to cast downe the poore and nedye, and to slaye soch as be of a ryght conuersacion.
Their swerde shall go thorow their awne herte, Ꟶ their bowe shalbe broken.
Asinall thinge that the ryghtuous hath, is better then greate ryches of the vngodly.
For the armes of the vngodly shalbe broken, and the Lorde vpholdeth the ryghtuous.
The Lord knoweth the dayes of the godly, Ꟶ their inheritaunce shall endure for euer.
They shall not be confounded in the perelous tyme, and in the dayes of derth they shall haue ynough.
As for the vngodly, they shall peryshe: Ꟶ the enemyes of the Lorde shall consume, as the fatt of lambes: yee, euen as the smoke shall they consume awaye.
The vngodly boroweth and payeth not agayne, but the rightuous is mercyfull Ꟶ lyberall.
Soch as be blessed of God, shall possesse the lande, Ꟶ they that be curssed of hym, shalbe roted out.
The Lord ordreth a good mans goinge, Ꟶ maketh his waye acceptable to him self.
Though he fall, he shal not be cast awaye, for the Lord vpholdeth him with his hande.
I haue bene yonge, and nowe am olde: Ꟶ yet sawe I neuer the rightuous forsaken, ner his sede begginge theyr bread.
The ryghtuous is euer mercyfull, and lendeth, and his sede is blessed.
Fle from euell, and do the thynge that is good, and dwel for euer.
For the Lorde loueth the thynge that is ryght, he forsaketh not hys that be godly, but they are preserued for euermore:
as for the sede of the vngodly, it shalbe roted out.
The ryghtuous shall inherett the lande, and dwell therin for euer.
The mouth of the ryghtuous is exercised in wysdome and his tonge wilbe talkyng of iudgement,
The lawe of his God is in his hert, and his goynges shall not slyde.
The vngodly seeth the ryghtuous, Ꟶ seketh occasyon to slaye hym.
The Lorde wyll not leaue hym in hys hande, ner condempne him when he is iudged.
Hope thou in the Lord, and kepe his waye, Ꟶ he shal promote the, that thou shalt possesse the lande: when the vngodly shal perishe, thou shalt se it.
I my selfe haue sene the vngodly in great power, Ꟶ florishinge lyke a grene baye tree:
Ꟶ he vanished awaye, Ꟶ lo, he was gone: I sought him, but coulde no where be found.
Kepe innocency, and take hede vnto the thynge that is ryght, for that shall brynge a man peace at the last.
As for the transgressours, they shall peryshe together, and the ende of the vngodly is, they shall be roted out at the last. But the saluacion of the ryghtuous commeth of the Lorde, which is also their strength in the tyme of trouble.
And the Lorde shall stande by them, and saue them: he shall delyuer them from the vngodly, and shall saue them, because they put theyr trust in hym.
A Psalme of Dauid for remembraunce. Put me not to rebuke (O Lord) in thine anger: nether chasten me in thy heuy displeasure.
For thyne arowes styck fast in me, and thy hande presseth me fore.
There is no health in my flessh, because of thy displeasure: nether is there anye rest in my bones, by reason of my synne.
For my wyckednesses are gone ouer my heade, and are lyke a sore burthen, to heuy for me to beare.
My woundes styncke and are corrupt, thorowe my folyshnesse.
I ambrought in to so greate trouble Ꟶ misery, that I go mournynge all the daye longe.
For my loynes are fylled with a sore disease, Ꟶ there is no whole parte in my body.
I am feble Ꟶ sore smytten, I haue roared for the very disquyetnes of my hert.
Lorde, thou knowest all my desyre, and my gronynge is not hyd from the.
My hert panteth, my strength hath fayled me, Ꟶ the lyght of myne eyes is gone fro me.
My louers Ꟶ my neyghbours dyd stande lokynge vpon my trouble, Ꟶ my kynsmen stode a farre of.
They also that sought after my life, layed snares for me: Ꟶ they that went aboute to do me euell, talked of wickednesse, Ꟶ ymagined disceate all the daye longe.
As for me, I was lyke a deafe man Ꟶ herde not: Ꟶ as one that is domme, which doth not open his mouth.
I became euen as a man that heareth not: and in whose mouth are no reprofes.
For in the, O Lorde, haue I put my trust, thou shalt answere for me, O Lord my God.
I haue required, that they shuld not triumphe ouer me: for whan my fote slypte, they reioysed greatly against me.
And I truly am set in the plage, Ꟶ my heuinesse is euer in my syght.
For I wyll confesse my wickednesse, and be sory for my synne.
But myne enemyes lyue, Ꟶ are myghtie: Ꟶ they that hate me wrongfully, are many in nombre.
They also that rewarde euell for good are agaynst me, because I folowe the thynge that good is.
Forsake me not (O Lorde my God.) Be not thou farre fro me.
Haste the to helpe me, O Lord my saluacyon.
To the chaunter Ieduthun, a Psalme of Dauid. I sayde: I will take hede to my wayes that I offend not in my tonge.
I will kepe my mouth (as it were wt a brile) while the vngodly is in my sight.
I helde my tonge, Ꟶ spake nothinge, I kepte sylence yee, euen from good wordes, but it was payne Ꟶ grefe to me.
My hert was hote within me, Ꟶ whyle I was thus musyng, the fyre kyndled: and (at the last) I spake wyth my tonge:
Lorde, let me knowe myne ende, and the nombre of my dayes: that I maye be certyfied howe longe I haue to lyue.
Beholde, thou hast made my dayes as it were a spanne longe, and myne age is euen as nothing in respecte of the: Ꟶ verely euery man lyuing is all together vanite. Selah.
For man walketh in a vayne shadowe, and disquieteth him self in vayne: he heapeth vp riches Ꟶ cannot tell who shall gather them.
And now Lord, what is my hope? trulye my hope is euen in the.
Delyuer me from all myne offences, Ꟶ make me not a rebuke vnto the foolish.
I became domme, Ꟶ opened not my mouth, for it was thy doynge. Take thy plage awaye fro me: I am euen consumed by the meanes of thy heuye hand.
When thou wyth rebukes dost chasten man for sinne, thou makest his bewtye to consume awaye, like as it were a mothe fretinge a garment. Euery man therfore is but vanite. Selah.
Heare my prayer, O Lord, Ꟶ wt thyne eares consydre my callynge: holde not thy peace at my teares. For I am a straunger wt the, Ꟶ a sogeourner, as all my fathers were.
Oh spare me a lytle, that I maye recouer my strength, before I goo hence, and be nomore sene.
To the chaunter, a Psalme of Dauid. I Wayted paciently for the Lord, Ꟶ he enclyned vnto me: and hearde my calling.
He brought me also out of the horrible pitte, out of the myer and claye, and sett my fete vpon the rocke, and ordred my goynges.
And he hath put a new songe in my mouth, euen a thanckesgeuynge vnto oure God. Many shall se it, and feare, and shall put their trust in the Lorde.
Blessed is the man, that hath sette hys hope in the Lorde, and turned not vnto the proude, and to soch as go aboute with lyes.
O Lord my God, greate are thy wonderous worckes, which thou hast done: like as be also thy thoughtes which are to vs ward: and yet there is no man that ordreth them vnto the.
Yf I wolde declare them, and speake of them, they shulde be moo then I am able to expresse.
Sacrifice and meat offerynge thou woldest not haue, but myne eares hast thou opened: burntofferynges and sacrifice for synne hast thou not required. Then sayd I: Lo, I come.
In the volume of the boke it is written of me, that I shulde fulfyll thy will, O my God: I am content to do it: yee, thy lawe is wythin my hert.
I haue declared thy ryghtuousnesse in the great congregacion: Lo, I will not refrayne my lippes, O Lord, Ꟶ that thou knowest.
I haue not hyd thy ryghtuousnes within my hert my talkynge hath bene of thy truth and of thy saluacion. I haue not kept backe thy louing mercy, Ꟶ truth from the greate congregacion.
Withdrawe not thou thy mercy fro me O Lord, let thy louinge kyndnesse and thy truth alwaye preserue me.
For innumerable troubles are come aboute me: my synnes haue taken soche holde vpon me, that I am not able to loke vp: yee, they are mo in nombre then the heeres of my head, and my hert hath fayled me.
O Lorde, let it be thy pleasure to deliuer me, make haste (O Lorde) to helpe me. Let them be ashamed Ꟶ confounded together, that seke after my soule to destroye it: let them be dryuen backward Ꟶ be put to rebuke, that wish me euell.
Let them be desolate Ꟶ rewarded wt shame, that saye vnto me: fye vpon the, fye vpon the.
Let all those that seke the, be ioyfull and glad in the: Ꟶ let soch as loue thy saluacion, saye allwaye the Lorde be praysed.
As for me, I am poore Ꟶ neadye, but the Lorde careth for me.
Thou art my helper and redemer: make no longe taryinge (O my God.)
To the chaunter, a Psalme of Dauid. Blessed is he that consydreth the poore the Lorde shall delyuer hym in the tyme of trouble.
The Lorde preserue hym, Ꟶ kepe him aliue: that he maye be blessed vpon earth, Ꟶ delyuer not thou hym in to the wyll of hys enemyes.
The Lord comforte hym, when he lyeth syck vpon hys bedd: make thou all his bedd in his sicknesse.
I sayde: Lord be mercyfull vnto me, heale my soule, for I haue synned agaynst the.
Myne enemyes speake euell of me: when shall he dye, Ꟶ hys name perish?
And yf he come to se me, he speaketh vanite, Ꟶ his hart conceaueth falshode within him selfe: Ꟶ whan he commeth forth, he telleth it.
All myne enemyes whisper together agaynst me: euen agaynst me do they ymagin this euell.
Let the sentence of giltynesse proceade agaynst him: Ꟶ now that he lyeth, let him ryse vp nomore.
Yee, euen mine awne familier frend whom I trusted (whych dyd also eate of my bred) hath layed greate wayte for me.
But be thou mercyfull vnto me (O Lord) rayse thou me vp agayne, and I shall rewarde them.
By this I know thou fauourest me, that my enemye doth not triumphe agaynst me.
And whan I am in my health, thou vpholdest me, and shalt set me before thy face for euer.
Blessed be the Lorde God of Israel, worlde wythout ende, Amen, and Amen.
To the chaunter, a monicyon of the sonnes of Corath. Like as the hert desyreth the water brookes, so longeth my soule after the (O God.) My soule is a thurste for God, yee, euen for the lyuyng God: when shall I come, to appeare before the presence of God?
My teares haue bene my meate daye Ꟶ night, whyle they daylie saye vnto me: where is now thy God?
Now when I thincke there vpon I powre out my hert by my self: for I went with the multitude, Ꟶ brought them forth vnto the house of God, in the voyce of prayse and thanckesgeuyng, among soch as kepe holy daye.
Why art thou so full of heuynes (O my soule) and why art thou so vnquiete within me?
Put thy trust in God, for I wyll yet geue hym thankes, for the help of hys countenaunce.
My God, my soule is vexed wythin me: therfore will I remembre the concernyng the land of Iordane, and the lytle hyll of Hermonim. One depe calleth another because of the noyse of thy water pipes all thy waues Ꟶ stormes are gone ouer me.
The Lord hath graunted his louing kindnesse on the daye tyme, Ꟶ in the night season dyd I syng of him, Ꟶ made my prayer vnto the God of my lyfe.
I wyll saye vnto the God of my strength why hast thou forgotten me: why go I thus heuely, whyle the enemye oppresseth me?
My bones are smytten a sunder, whyle mine enemyes cast me in the tethe,
Namely, whyle they saye daylie vnto me: where is now thy God?
Why art thou so vexed (O my soule) and why art thou so disquieted wythin me? O put thy trust in God, for I wyll yet thanke hym whych is the helpe of my countenaunce, and my God.
Geue sentence wt me (O God) Ꟶ defende my cause agaynst the vngodly people: Oh delyuer me from the disceatfull Ꟶ wycked man.
For thou art the God of my strength: why hast thou put me from the? And why go I so heuely, whyle the enemye oppresseth me?
Oh send out thy lyght Ꟶ thy trueth that they maye leade me Ꟶ bryng me vnto thy holy hyll, Ꟶ to thy dwellyng.
And that I maye go vnto the aulter of God, euen vnto the God of my ioye Ꟶ gladnesse, Ꟶ vpon the harpe wyll I geue thankes vnto the (O God) my God.
Why art thou so heuy (O my soule) Ꟶ why art thou so disquyeted wythin me? O put thy trust in God, for I will yet geue hym thankes whych is the helpe of my countenaunce, and my God.
To the chaunter an instruccyon of the sonnes of Corah. We haue herd wt oure eares (O God) oure fathers haue tolde vs, what thou hast done in theyr tyme of old.
How thou hast dryuen out the Heithen wt thy hande, Ꟶ planted them in: how thou hast destroyed the nacions, Ꟶ cast them out.
For thy gat not the lande in possessyon thorowe theyr awne swearde, nether was it theyr awne arme that helped them.
But thy ryght hand, and thyne arme, and the lyght of thy countenaunce, because thou haddest a fauoure vnto them.
Thou art my kyng (O God) sende helpe vnto Iacob.
Thorow the, wyll we ouerthrowe our enemyes, Ꟶ in thy name wyll we tread them vnder that ryse vp agaynst vs.
For I wyll not trust in my bowe, it is not my swerde that shall help me.
But it is thou that sauest vs from oure enemye, and puttest them to confusyon that hate vs.
We make oure boast of God all the daye longe, and wyll prayse thy name for euer. Sela.
But now thou art farre of, and puttest vs to confusyon, and goest not forth wyth oure armyes.
Thou makest vs to turne oure backes vpon oure enemy, so that they whych hate vs, spoyle oure goodes.
Thou lettest vs be eaten vp lyke shepe, Ꟶ hast scatred vs among the Heithen.
Thou sellest thy people for naught, Ꟶ takest no moneye for them.
Thou makest vs to be rebuked of oure neyghbours, to be laughed to scorne Ꟶ had in derisyon, of them that are round about vs.
Thou makest vs to be a by worde among the Heithen, Ꟶ that the people shake their heades at vs.
My confusion is daylye before me, Ꟶ the shame of my face hath couered me.
For the voyce of the sclaunderer Ꟶ blasphemer, for the enemye Ꟶ auenger.
And though all this be come vpon vs, yet do we not forgette the, ner behaue oure selues frowardly in thy couenaunt.
Oure hert is not turned backe, nether oure steppes gone out of thy waye.
No not whan thou hast smytten vs in to the place of dragons, and couered vs wyth the shadow of deeth.
If we haue forgotten the name of oure God, Ꟶ holden vp our handes to eny straung God. Shall not God search it out? for he knoweth the very secretes of the hert.
For thy sake also are we kylled all the daye longe, and are counted as shepe apoynted to be slayne.
Up Lorde why slepest thou? A wake, Ꟶ be not absent from vs for euer.
Wherfore hydest thou thy face, Ꟶ forgettest oure mysery Ꟶ trouble?
For our soule is brought lowe euen vnto the dust: oure bely cleueth vnto the ground.
Aryse Ꟶ helpe vs, Ꟶ delyuer vs for thy mercy sake.
To hym that excelleth amonge the lylies, an instruccion of the chyldren of Corah, a songe of loue. Mi hert is endytyng of a good matter I speake of the thynges, whych I haue made vnto the kyng:
My tong is the penne of a ready wryter.
Thou art fayrer then the chyldren of men, full of grace are thy lyppes, because God hath blessed the for euer.
Gyrde the wt thy swerde vpon thy thygh (O thou most myghtye) accordyng to thy worshipe Ꟶ renowne.
Good lucke haue thou wt thine honour, ryde on because of the word of treuth, of mekenesse Ꟶ righteousnes: and thy ryght hande shall teach the terrible thynges.
Thy arowes are very sharpe, Ꟶ the people shalbe subdued vnto the, euen in the myddest amonge the kynges enemyes.
Thy seate (O God) endureth for euer: the scepter of thy kyngdome is a ryght scepter:
Thou hast loued ryghteousnesse, and hated iniquite: wherfore God (euen thy God) hath anoynted the wyth the oyle of gladnes aboue thy felowes.
All thy garmentes smell of myrre, Aloes and Cassia, out of the yuerye palaces, wher by they haue made the glad.
Kynges daughters were among thy honorable wemen: vpon thy ryght hande dyd stande the quene in a vesture of gold.
Herken (O daughter) and consydre: enclyne thyne eare: forget also thine awne people, Ꟶ thy fathers house.
So shall the kyng haue pleasure in thy bewtye, for he is thy Lorde Ꟶ worshype thou hym.
And the daughter of Tire shall be there wt a gyfte, lyke as the ryche also amonge the people shall make theyr supplicacyon before the.
The kynges daughter is all gloryous wythin, her clothyng is of wrought golde.
She shalbe brought vnto the king in rayment of nedle worke: the virgins that be hyr felowes, shall beare hir company, and shalbe brought vnto the.
Wyth ioye Ꟶ gladnesse shall they be brought, Ꟶ shall entre into the kynges palace.
In steade of thy fathers thou shalt haue chyldren, whom thou mayest make prynces in all lande. I wyll remembre thy name from one generacyon to another: therfore shall the people geue thankes vnto the, worlde wythout ende.
To the chaunter, a songe for the chyldren of Corah vpon Alamoth. God is our hope Ꟶ strength: a very present helpe in trouble.
Therfore wyll we feare, though the erth be moued, Ꟶ though the hylles be caryed in the myddest of the see.
Though the waters therof rage Ꟶ swell, Ꟶ though the mountaynes shake at the tempest of the same. Sela.
The ryuers of the floude therof shall make glad the cytie of God, the holy place of the tabernacles of the most hyest.
God is in the myddest of her, therfore shall she not be remoued: God shall help her, Ꟶ that ryght early.
The Heathen make moch a doo, Ꟶ the kyngdomes are moued: but God hath shewed hys voyce, Ꟶ the earth shall melt awaye.
The Lord of Hostes is wt vs, the God of Iacob is oure refuge. Sela.
O come hyther, Ꟶ beholde the worckes of the Lorde, what destruccyons he hath brought vpon the earth.
He maketh warres to ceasse in all the worlde: he breaketh the bowe Ꟶ knappeth the speare in sonder, Ꟶ burneth the charettes in the fyre.
Be styll then Ꟶ knowe that I am God: I wil be exalted among the Heithen, and I wyll be exalted in the earth.
The Lorde of Hostes is wyth vs, the God of Iacob is oure defence. Sela.
To the chaunter, a Psalme for the chyldren of Corah. O clappe youre handes together (all ye people) O syng vnto God wyth the voyce of melodye.
For the Lord is hye and to be feared, he is the great kynge vpon all the earth.
He shall subdue the people vnder vs, and the nacions vnder oure fete.
He shall chose out an heritage for vs: euen the worshyppe of Iacob whom he loued. Sela.
God is gone vp wyth a mery noyse, Ꟶ the Lord wyth the sownde of the trompe.
O syng prayses, syng prayses vnto God: O synge prayses, synge prayses vnto oure kyng.
For God is kyng of all the earth synge ye prayses wt vnderstandyng.
God raygneth ouer the Heithen, God sytteth vpon hys holy seate.
The princes of the people are ioyned vnto the people of the God of Abraham: for God (which is very hye exalted) doth defende the earth, as it were wyth a shylde.
A songe of a Psalme of the children of Corah Greate is the Lorde, Ꟶ hyelye to be praysed, in the cytie of oure God, euen vpon his holy hyll.
The hyll of Sion is a fayre place, Ꟶ the ioye of the whole earth: vpon the north syde lyeth the cytie of the great kyng.
God is well knowne in her palaces, as a sure refuge.
For lo, the kynges are gathered, Ꟶ gone by together.
They marueled, to se soch thinges: they were astonied, and sodenly cast downe.
Feare came there vpon them, Ꟶ sorowe, as vpon a woman in her trauayle.
Thou shalt breake the shyppes of the see, thorow the east wynde.
Lyke as we haue herd, so haue we sene in the cytie of the Lord of Hostes, in the cytie of oure God. God vpholdeth the same for euer. Sela.
We wayte for thy louyng kyndnesse (O God) in the myddest of thy temple.
(O God) accordyng vnto thy name, so is thy prayse vnto the worldes ende: thy ryght hand is full of ryghteousnes.
Let the mount Sion reioyse, and the daughters of Iuda be glad because of thy iudgementes.
Walke about Sion, and go round about her, and tell the towres therof.
Marcke well her bulworkes, set vp her houses, that ye maye tell them that come after.
For thys God is oure God for euer Ꟶ euer, he shall be ouer gyde vnto death.
To the chaunter, a Psalme for the chyldren of Corah. O heare this, all ye people: pondre it with your eares, all ye that dwell in the worlde.
Hye and lowe, ryche and poore, one wyth another:
My mouth shall speake of wysdome, and my hert shall muse of vnderstandyng.
I wyll enclyne myne eare to the parable, and shew my darcke speach vpon the harpe.
Wherfore shulde I feare in the dayes of wyckednesse, and when the wyckednesse of my heles compaseth me round about?
There be some that put theyr in trust their goodes, Ꟶ boast them selues in the multitude of theyr ryches.
But no man maye delyuer hys brother, ner make agrement vnto God for hym.
For it costeth more to redeme theyr soules, so that he must let that alone for euer.
Yee, though he lyue longe, and se nat the graue.
For he seeth, that wyse men also dye, and peryshe together, as well as the ignoraunt Ꟶ folysh, and leaue theyr ryches for other:
And yet they thynke, that theyr houses shall continue for euer, and that theyr dwelling places shall endure from one generacyon to another, Ꟶ call the landes after theyr awne names.
Neuerthelesse, man wyll not abyde in honour, seyng he maye be compared vnto the beastes that peryshe: this is the waye of them.
Thys is their folyshnesse, and their posterite prayse their sayeng. Sela.
They lye in the hell lyke shepe, death gnaweth vpon them, and the ryghteous shall haue dominacyon of them in the mornynge: theyr bewtye shall consume in the sepulchre out of theyr dwellynge.
But God shall delyuer my soule from the place of hell, for he shall receaue me. Sela.
Be not thou afrayed though one be made ryche, or yf the glory of hys house be increased.
For he shall cary nothyng awaye with hym when he dyeth, nether shall hys pompe folowe hym:
For whyle he lyued, he counted hymselfe an happye man: and so longe as thou doest well vnto thy selfe, men wyll speake good of the.
He shall folowe the generacyons of hys fathers, and shall neuer se lyght.
Man beynge in honoure hath no vnderstandyng, but is compared vnto the beastes, that peryshe.
A Psalme of Asaph. The Lorde euen the most myghtye God hath spoken, and called the world from the rysyng vp of the sonne vnto the goyng downe therof.
Out of Syon hath God apeared in perfecte bewtye.
Oure God shall come, and shall not kepe sylence: there shall go before hym a consumynge fyre, and a myghtye tempest shalbe stered vp rounde aboute hym.
He shall call the heauen from aboue, and the earth, that he maye iudge hys people.
Gather my saynctes together vnto me, those that haue made a couenaunt with me, wyth sacrifyce.
And the heauens shall declare hys ryghteousnesse, for God is iudge hym selfe. Sela.
Heare, O my people: and I wyll speake, I my selfe will testifye agaynst the, O Israel, For I am God, euen thy God.
I wyll not reproue the because of thy sacryfyces, or for thy burntoffrynges, because they were not allwaye before me.
I wyll take no bullock out of thy house, ner he goates out of thy foldes.
For all the beastes of the forest are myne, Ꟶ so are the catell vpon a thousande hylles.
I knowe all the foules vpon the mountaynes, Ꟶ the wylde beastes of the feld are in my syght.
If I be hongrye I wyll not tell the: for the whole worlde is myne, and all that therin is.
Thinkest thou, that I wyll eat bulles flesh and drincke the bloud of goates?
Offre vnto God thanckesgeuynge, and paye thy vowes vnto the most hyest.
And call vpon me in the tyme of trouble, so wyll I heare the, and thou shalt prayse me.
But vnto the vngodly sayed God. Why doest thou preach my lawes, Ꟶ takest my couenaunt in thy mouth?
Where as thou hatest to be refourmed, Ꟶ hast cast my wordes behynd the?
Whan thou sawest a thefe, thou consentedest vnto hym, and hast bene partaker wyth the aduouterers.
Thou hast let thy mouth speake wickednesse, and with thy tong thou hast set forth disceat.
Thou sattest and spakest agaynst thy brother, yee, Ꟶ hast sclaundred thine awne mothers sonne.
These thynges hast thou done, Ꟶ I helde my tonge: Ꟶ thou thoughtest that I am euen soch a one as thy selfe: but I wyll reproue the, and set before the, the thinges that thou hast done.
O consydre this, ye that forget God: lest I plucke you awaye, and there be none to delyuer you.
Who so offreth me thanckes and prayse, he honoureth me: and to hym that ordreth hys conuersacyon ryght wyll I shewe the saluacyon of God.
To the chaunter, a Psalme of Dauid, when the prophet Nathan came vnto him, after he was gone in to Bethsabe. Haue mercy vpon me (O God) after thy goodnes: accordyng vnto the multitude of thy mercyes, do awaye myne offences.
Wash me thorowly fro my wickednesse, Ꟶ clense me from my synne.
For I knowledg my fautes, Ꟶ my synne is euer before me.
Agaynst the onely haue I synned, and done this euell in thy syght: that thou myghtest be iustifyed in thy sayinge, Ꟶ cleare when thou art iudged.
Beholde, I was shapen in wyckednesse, Ꟶ in synne hath my mother conceaued me.
But lo, thou requirest treuth in the inward partes, and shalt make me to vnderstonde wysdome secretly.
Thou shalt pourge me with Isope, and I shall be cleane: thou shalt wash me, Ꟶ I shalbe whyter then snowe:
Thou shalt make me heare of ioye and gladnesse, that the bones whych thou hast broken, maye reioyse.
Turne thy face from my synnes, Ꟶ put out all my mysdedes.
Make me a cleane hert (O God) and renue a ryght sprete wythin me.
Cast me not awaye from thy presence, Ꟶ take not thy holy sprete from me.
O geue me the comforte of thy helpe agayne, Ꟶ stablysh me wyth thy fre sprete.
Then shall I teach thy wayes vnto the wicked, and synners shall be conuerted vnto the.
Delyuer me from bloud gyltynesse (O God) thou that art the God of my health, and my tonge shall syng of thy ryghteousnesse.
Thou shalt open my lyppes (O Lord) my mouth shal shewe thy prayse.
For thou desyrest no sacrifyce, els wolde I geue it the: but thou delytest not in burntofferynge.
The sacrifyce of God is a troubled sprete, a broken and a contrite hert (O God) shalt thou not despyse.
O be fauorable Ꟶ gracyous vnto Syon, buylde thou the walles of Ierusalem.
Then shalt thou be pleased with the sacrifyce of ryghteousnesse, wyth the burntofferynges Ꟶ oblacions: then shall they offre yonge bullockes vpon thyne aulter.
To the chaunter, an exortacyon of Dauid, when Doeg the Edomyte came to Saul, and shewed him, sayinge: Dauid is come to the house Ahymelech. Why boastest thou thy self, thou Tyraunt, that thou canst do myschefe?
Where as the goodnesse of God endureth yet daylie.
Thy tonge ymagineth wyckednesse, Ꟶ wyth lyes thou cuttest lyke a sharpe rasoure.
Thou hast loued vngracyousnesse more then goodnes, Ꟶ to talke of lyes more then ryghteousnesse. Sela.
Thou hast loued to speake all wordes that maye do hurt, O thou false tonge.
Therfore shall God destroye the for euer: he shall take the Ꟶ plucke the out of thy dwelling, Ꟶ rote the out of the land of the lyuing. Sela.
The ryghteous also shall se this, Ꟶ feare, Ꟶ shall laugh him to scorne.
Lo, this is the man, that toke not God for hys strength, but trusted vnto the multitude of his ryches, Ꟶ strengthed hym selfe in his wickednesse.
As for me, I am lyke a grene olyue tre in the house of God: my trust is in the tender mercy of God for euer Ꟶ euer. I wyll alwaye geue thankes vnto the, for that thou hast done: Ꟶ I wyll hope in thy name, for thy saynctes lyke it well.
To the chaunter vpon Mahalath, an instruccyon of Dauid. The foolysh bodye hath sayed in hys hert: there is no God. Corrupte are they, Ꟶ become abhomynable in theyr wickednesse: there is none that doth good.
God loked downe from heauen vpon the children of men, to se yf there were eny that wolde vnderstande, and seke after God.
But they are all gone oute of the waye, they are all together become abhomynable: there is also none that doth good, no not one.
Are not they without vnderstandynge that worcke wickednes, eating vp my people as yf they wolde eate bread? they haue not called vpon God.
They were afraied, where no feare was: for God hath broken the bones of hym that beseged the: thou hast put them to confusion, because God hath despysed them.
Oh that the saluacyon were geuen vnto Israel out of Sion: Oh that the Lorde wold delyuer hys people out of captiuyte. Then shulde Iacob reioyse, and Israell shulde be ryght glad.
To the chaunter in melodyes, an instruccyon of Dauid, when the zephites came and sayde vnto Saull: Hath not Dauid hyd hym selfe amongest vs? Saue me, O God, for thy names sake, and auenge me in thy strength
Heare my prayer, O God, Ꟶ herken vnto the wordes of my mouth.
For straungers are rysen vp against me, and tyrauntes (whych haue not God before their eyes) seke after my soule. Sela.
Beholde, God is my helper, the Lorde is with them that vpholde my soule.
He shall rewarde euell vnto myne enemyes: destroye thou them in thy treuth.
An offeryng of a fre hert will I geue the, and prayse thy name (O Lord) because it is so comfortable.
For he hath delyuered me out of all my trouble, and myne eye hat sene his desyre vpon myne enemyes.
To the chaunter in melodyes, an instruccyon of Dauid. Heare my prayer (O God) and hide not thy selfe fro my peticion. Take hede vnto me, and heare me, how I mourne in my prayer, Ꟶ am vexed.
The enemy cryeth so, and the vngodly cometh on so fast: for they are mynded to do me some mischefe, so maliciously are they sett agaynst me.
My herte is dysquyeted within me, and the feare of death is fallen vpon me.
Fearfulnes and trembling are come vpon me, and an horryble drede hath ouerwhelmed me.
And I sayd: O that I had winges like a doue, for then wold I flie awaye, and be at reste.
Lo, then wolde I gett me awaye farre of, and remayne in the wildernes. Sela.
I wolde make hast to escape, because of the stormy wynd and tempeste.
Destroye theyr tonges (O Lorde) and deuide them, for I haue spyed vnrighteousnes and stryfe in the cyte.
Daye and night go they about within the walles therof: myschefe also, and sorow are in the myddest of it.
Wyckednes is therin, dysceate, and gyle go not out of her stretes.
For it is not an open enemye that hath done me thys dishonoure: for then I coulde haue borne it: nether was it myne aduersary, that did magnifye hym selfe agaynst me: for then I wolde haue hyd my selfe from hym.
But it was euen thou my companion: my gyde, and myne awne familyer frende.
We toke swete councell together, Ꟶ walked in the house of God as frendes.
Lett death come hastely vpon them, and let them go downe quyck into hell, for wyckednes is in theyr dwellynges, and amonge them.
As for me, I will call vnto God, and the Lorde shall saue me.
In the euening, and mornynge and at noone daye wyll I praye, (and that instantly) and he shall heare my voyce.
It is he that hath delyuered my soule in peace, from the batayll that was agaynst me: for there were many with me.
Yee, euen God that endureth for euer, shall heare me, and bryng them downe. Sela. For they wyll not turne, ner feare God.
He layed hys handes vpon soch as be at peace wt hym, and he brake hys couenaunt.
The wordes of hys mouth were softer then butter, hauynge warre in his hert: hys wordes were smother then oyle, and yet be they very sweardes.
O cast thy burthen, vpon the Lorde and he shall norysh the, and not suffre the ryghteous to fall for euer.
And as for them, thou (O God) shalt brynge them into the pyt of destruccyon.
The bloude thrusty and disceatful men shall not lyue out halfe theyr dayes. Neuerthelesse, my trust shalbe in the.
To the chaunter vpon the doue of him that was domme in a farre countreye: the badg (or armes) of Dauid, when the Philistines toke hym in Geth. Be mercyfull vnto me (O God) for man goeth about to deuoure me: he is dayly fyghtynge and troublyng me.
Myne enemyes are dayly in hande to swalowe me vp: for they be many that fyght agaynst me, o thou moost hyest.
Neuerthelesse, though I am some tyme afrayed yet put I my trust in the.
I wyll prayse God, because of hys worde, I haue put my trust in God, Ꟶ wyll not feare, what flesh can do vnto me.
They dayly mistake my wordes: all that they ymagyne is to do me euell.
They holde all together, Ꟶ kepe them selues close: Ꟶ marcke my steppes, whan they laye wayte for my soule.
Shall they escape for theyr wyckednes? thou (O God) in thy dyspleasure shalt cast them downe.
Thou tellest my flyttynges, put my teares in thy botell: are not these thinges noted in thy booke?
When soeuer I call vpon the, then shal myne enemies be put to flyght: thys I knowe, for God is on my syde.
In Gods wordes wyll I reioyse, in the Lordes worde wyll I comforte me.
Yee, in God haue I put my trust, I wyll not be afrayed what man can do vnto me.
Unto the (O God) wyl I paye my vowes, vnto the wyll I geue thankes.
For thou hast delyuered my soule from death, and my fete from falling, that I maye walke before God in the lyght of the lyuynge.
To the chaunter destroye not: The badges or armes of Dauid, when he fled from Saul into the caue. Be mercyfull vnto me (O God) be mercyfull vnto me, for my soule trusteth in the: and vnder the shadowe of thy winges shalbe my refuge vntyll this tyrannye be ouer past.
I wil cal vnto the most hye God, euen to the God that shall perfourme the cause which I haue in hande.
He shall sende from heauen, and saue me from the reprofe of hym that wold eate me vp. Sela. God shall sende forth hys mercy Ꟶ treuth.
My soule is among lyons and I lye euen amonge the chyldren of men (that are sett on fyre) whose tethe are speares and arowes, and their tonge a sherp swearde.
Set vp thy self (O God) aboue the heauens, and thy glorye aboue all the earth.
They haue layed a nett for my fete, and pressed downe my soule: they haue dygged a pytt before me, and are fallen into the myddes of it them selues. Sela.
My herte is fyxed (O God) my herte is fyxed: I wyll synge and geue prayse.
Awake, O my glory, awake lute and harpe, I my selfe wyll a wake ryght early.
I wyll geue thankes vnto the (O Lorde) among the people, and I wyll synge vnto the amonge the nacyons.
For the greatnes of thy mercy reacheth vnto the heauens, and thy treuth vnto the cloudes.
Sett vp thy selfe (O God) aboue the heauens, Ꟶ thy glory aboue all the earth.
To the chaunter Destroye not. The badge or armes of Dauid. Are your myndes sett vpon ryghteousnes, O ye congregacyon? and do ye iudge the thyng that is right O ye sonnes of men?
Yee, ye ymagyn mischef in your hert vpon the earth, and youre handes deale with wyckednesse.
The vngodly are frowarde, euen from their mothers wombe: as soone as they be borne, they go a straye and speake lyes.
They are as venymous as the poyson of a serpent, euen lyke the deaf Ader that stoppeth her eares.
Which refuseth to heare the voyce of the charmer, charme he neuer so wisely.
Breake theyr teth (O God) in their mouthes, smyte the chawe bones of the lyons (O Lorde:)
Let them fall awaye lyke water that runneth a pace: Ꟶ when they shote theyr arowes, lett them be roted out.
Let them consume awaye lyke a snayle, and be lyke the vntimely frute of a woman, and let them not se the sonne.
Or euer your pottes be made whot with thornes: so let indygnacyon vexe hym, euen as a thynge that is rawe.
The ryghteous shall reioyse when he seyth the vengeaunce: he shal wash hys fote stepes in the bloude of the vngodly.
So that a man shall saye: verely there is a rewarde for the ryghteous: doutles, there is a God that iudgeth in the earth.
To the chaunter: destroye not. The badge or arme of Dauid, when Saul sent and they dyd watch the house to kyll hym. Delyuer me from my enemyes (O God) defende me from them that ryse vp agaynst me.
O delyuer me from the wycked doers, and saue me from the bloudthursty men.
For lo, they lye waytynge for my soule: the myghty men are gathered together against me without any offence or faute of me (O Lord.)
They runne and prepare them selues without my faute: Aryse, thou therfore to helpe me, and beholde.
Stande vp (O Lorde God of Hoostes) thou God of Israel to vyset all heathen: and be not mercyful vnto them that offende of malycyous wyckednesse. Sela.
They go to and fro in the euenynge, they grenne lyke a dogg, and runne aboute, thorow the cytie.
Behold, they speake with theyr mouth, and sweardes are in theyr lyppes, for who doth heare?
But thou (O Lorde) shalt haue them in derysion, and thou shalt laugh all heathen to scorne.
My strength wyll I ascrybe vnto the, for thou art the God of my refuge.
God sheweth me his goodnesse plenteously, and God shall lett me se my desyre vpon myne enemyes.
Slaye them not, lest my people forgett it: but scatre them abroade among thy people, and put them downe (O Lorde) our defence.
For the synne of their mouth, and for the wordes of theyr lyppes they shalbe taken in theyr pryde, and why? theyr preachynge is of curlynge and lyes.
Consume them in thy wrath, consume them that they maye perish, and knowe that it is God, which ruleth in Iacob and vnto the endes of the world. Sela.
And in the euenynge they will returne: grenne lyke a dogg and wyll go aboute the cytie.
They wyll runne here and there for meate, and grudge yf they be not satisfyed.
As for me, I wil singe of thy power, and will prayse thy mercy by tymes in the morninge: for thou hast bene my defence and refuge in the daye of my trouble.
Unto the, O my strength, will I synge, for thou, O God, art my refyge and my mercyfull God.
To the chaunter, vpon the rose of witnes, the badge or armes of Dauid, for to teache: when he fought agaynst Mesopotamia, and Siria of zoba: and when Ioab turned backe, and slue twelue thousande Edomytes, in the salt valley. O God, thou that hast cast vs out and scatered vs abroade: thou hast also bene dyspleased, O turne the vnto vs agayne.
Thou hast moued the land and deuyded it, heale the sores therof, for it shaketh.
Thou hast shewed thy people heuy thynges, thou hast geuen vs a dryncke of deedlye wyne.
Thou hast geuen a token for soch as feare the, that they maye triumphe because of the treuth. Sel
Therfore were thy beloued deliuered, helpe me with thy ryght hande, and heare me.
God hath spoken in hys holynesse. I will reioyce and deuyde Sychem, and mete oute the valley of Suchoth.
Gilead is myne, and Manasses is myne: Ephraim also is the strength of my head, Iuda is my lawe geuer.
Moab is my washpotte, ouer Edom wyll I cast out my shoo. Philystea be thou glad of me.
Who wyll leade me into the stronge cytie? Who wyll brynge me into Edom?
Hast thou not cast vs out (O God) wylt not thou (o God) go oute with oure hoostes?
O be thou oure helpe in trouble, for vayne is the helpe of man.
Thorow God we shall do great actes, for it is he that shal treade downe our enemyes.
To the chaunter in the melodies of Dauid. Heare my cryeng (O God) geue eare vnto my prayer.
From the endes of the earth will I call vnto the, when my hert is in heuynes:
Oh sett me vp vpon the rocke that is hyer then I. For thou hast bene my hope, and a strong tower for me against the enemye.
I wyll dwell in thy tabernacle for euer, and my trust shalbe vnder the couering of thy wynges Sela.
For thou, O Lord, hast herde my desyres, and hast geuen an heritage vnto those that feare thy name.
Thou shalt graunt the kyng a longe lyfe, that hys yeares may endure thorow out all generacions.
He shall dwell before God for euer: O prepare thy louynge mercy Ꟶ faythfulnes that they may preserue him.
So will I allwaye synge prayse vnto thy name, that I maye dayly perfourme my vowes.
To the chaunter, For Ieduthun: a psalme of Dauid. My soule truly wayteth styll vpon God, for of him cometh my saluacion.
He verely is my strength, and my saluacion: He is my defence, so that I shall not greatly fall.
How longe will ye ymagin mischefe against euery man? ye shalbe slayne all the sorte of you: yee, as a tottring wall shall ye be, and lyke a broken hedge.
Their deuyce is onely how to put him out whom God wyll exalte. their delyte is in lyes: they geue good wordes wt their mouth, but curse wt their hert. Sela.
Neuertheles, my soule wayte thou styll vpon God, for my hope is in hym.
He truly is my strength, and my saluacion: he is my defence: so that I shall not fall.
In God is my health Ꟶ my glory, the rocke of my might, Ꟶ in God is my trust.
O put your trust in him allwaye (ye people) powre out youre hertes before him, for God is our hope. Sel
As for the children of men, they are but vayne, the children of men are disceatful: vpon the weyghtes they are all together lighter than vanite it self.
O trust not in wrong and robbery, geue not your selues vnto vanyte: yf riches encrease, set not your hert vpon them.
God spake once and twyse: I haue also herde the same: that power belongeth vnto God.
And that thou Lorde art mercyfull: for thou rewardest euery man accordynge to hys worcke.
A psalme of Dauid, when he was in the wildernes of Iuda. O God, thou art my God, early wil I seke the.
My soule thrusteth for the: my flesh also longeth after the in a baren and drye lande, where no water is.
Thus haue I loked for the in holynesse that I myght beholde thy power and glory.
For thy louing kindnes is better then thy lyfe it selfe: my lippes shal prayse the.
As longe as I lyue will I magnyfye the on this maner, and lyft vp my handes in thy name.
My soule shalbe satisfyed euen as it were with mary and fatnesse, when my mouth prayseth the with ioyfull lyppes.
Haue I not remembred the in my bedd, Ꟶ thought vpon the, whan I was wakynge?
Because thou hast bene my helper, therfore vnder the shadowe of thy wynges will I reioyse.
My soule hangeth vpon the, thy ryght hand hath vpholden me.
These also that seke the hurt of my soule, they shal go vnder the earth.
Lett them fall vpon the edge of the sweard, that they maye be a porcyon for foxes. But the kyng shall reioyse in God: all they also that sweare by him shalbe commended, for the mouth of them that speake lyes, shalbe stopped.
To the chaunter, a psalme of Dauid. Heare my voyce (O God) in my prayer preserue my lyfe from feare of the enemye.
Hyde me from the gathering together of the froward, Ꟶ from the insurrection of wicked doers.
Which haue whett their tonge lyke a swearde, Ꟶ shote out theyr arowes, euen bytter wordes.
That they maye preuely shote at him which is perfecte: sodenly do they hit him Ꟶ feare not.
They courage them selues in myschefe, and commune amonge them selues, how they maye laye snares: and saye, that no man shall se them.
They ymagin wickednes, Ꟶ practyse it that they kepe secrete amonge them selues, euery man in the depe of his hert.
But God shal sodenly shote at them with a swift arowe, that they shalbe wounded.
Yee, their awne tonges shall make them fall, in so moch that who so seeth them, shall laugh them to scorne.
And all men that se it, shall saye: this hath God done, for they shall perceaue that it is hys woreke.
The righteous shall reioyse in the Lord, and put his trust in hym: and all they that are true of herte, shalbe glad.
To the chaunter, a Psalme Ꟶ songe of Dauid. Thou (O God) art praysed in Sion, Ꟶ vnto the shal the vowe be perfourmed.
Thou that hearest the prayer: vnto the shall all flesh come.
My mysdedes preuayle agaynst me: Oh be thou mercyfull vnto our sinnes.
Blessed is the man whom thou chosest and receauest vnto the: he shal dwell in thy court: and shalbe satisfyed with the pleasures of thy house, euen of thy holy temple.
Thou shalt shewe vs wonderfull thynges in ryghteousnesse (O God) of our saluacion: thou that art the hope of al the endes of the earth, and of them that remayne in the broade see?
Which in hys strength setteth fast the mountaynes, and is gyrded about with power.
Which stilleth the ragyng of the see, Ꟶ the noyse of hys waues, and the madnes of the people.
They also that dwel in the vttermoost partes (of the earth) shalbe afrayed at thy tokens, thou that makest the out goinges of the mornynge and euenyng to prayse the.
Thou visitest the earth, and blessest it: thou makest it very plenteous.
The ryuer of God is full of water, thou preparest their corne: for so thou prouydest for the earthe.
Thou waterest her forowes, thou sendest rayne into the litle valleys therof: thou makest it soft with the droppes of rayne, and blessed the increase of it.
Thou crownest the yeare wt thy goodnesse: Ꟶ thy cloudes droppe fatnesse.
They shall droppe vpon the dwellynges of the wildernesse: and the lytle hylles shall reioyse on euery syde. The foldes shalbe full of shepe, the valleys also shall stande so thycke wt corne, that they shall laugh and synge.
To the chaunter, The songe of a Psalme. O be ioyfull in God, all ye landes, synge prayses vnto the honoure of hys name, make hys prayse to be glorious.
Saye vnto God: O how wonderfull art thou in thy worckes? thorow the greatnes of thy power shal thyne enemies be founde lyers vnto the.
For all the worlde shall worship the, singe of the, Ꟶ prayse thy name. Sela.
O come hither Ꟶ behold the worckes of God, how wonderfull he is in his doynge towarde the chyldren of men.
He turned the see into drye land, so that they wente thorow the water on fote: there did we reioyse therof.
He ruleth with hys power for euer, his eyes beholde the people: and soch as will not beleue, shall not be able to exalte them selues. Sela.
O prayse our God (ye people) and make the voyce of hys prayse to be heard.
Which holdeth our soule in lyfe, Ꟶ suffreth not our fete to slyp.
For thou (O God) hast proued vs: thou also hast tryed vs like as siluer is tryed.
Thou broughtest vs into the snare, and layed trouble vpon oure loynes.
Thou suffredest men to ryde ouer our heades,
we went thorow fyre Ꟶ water and thou broughtest vs out into a welthye place.
I wyll go into thy house with brentoffrynges, and wyll paye the my vowes,
which I promysed with my lyppes, Ꟶ spake with my mouth, when I was in trouble.
I will offre vnto the, fat brent sacrifyces with the incense of rammes, I wil offre bullockes and goates. Sela.
O come hyther and herken, all ye that feare God: Ꟶ I wyll tell you, what he hath done for my soule.
I called vnto him wt my mouth, and gaue him prayses wt my tonge.
If I enclyne vnto wickednes with my hert, the Lorde wyll not heare me.
But God hath hearde me, and consydred the voyce of my prayer.
Praysed be God which hath not cast out my prayer, ner turned his mercy fro me.
To the chaunter, in melodyes: a Psalme and songe. God be mercyfull vnto vs, Ꟶ blesse vs, and shewe vs the lyght of hys countenaunce. Sela.
That thy waye maye be knowne vpon earth, thy sauynge health amonge all nacions.
Let the people prayse the, O God, yee, let all people prayse the.
O let the nacions reioyse and be glad, For thou shalt iudge the folke ryghteously, and gouerne the nacions vpon earth. Sela.
Let the people prayse the, O God, let all people prayse the.
Then shal the erth bring forth hyr increase, and God, euen oure awne God shall geue vs hys blessynge.
God shall blesse vs, and all the endes of the worlde shal feare hym.
To the chaunter, a Psalme and songe of Dauid. Let God aryse, and let his enemies be scattered: let them also that hate him, flye before him.
Like as the smoke vanysheth, so shalt thou dryue them awaye: and lyke as waxe melteth at the fyre: so let the vngodly perysh at the presence of God.
But let the ryghteous be glad Ꟶ reioyse before God: let them also be mery and ioyfull.
Oh synge vnto God, and synge prayses vnto his name: magnyfie him that rydeth vpon the heauens as it were vpon a horse: prayse ye him in his name Ia Ꟶ reioyse before him.
He is a father of the fatherlesse, and defendeth the cause of wyddowes: euen God in his holy habitacion.
He is the God that maketh men to be of one mynde in a house, and bryngeth the presoners out of captiuyte, but letteth the rennagates contynue in scarcenesse.
O God, when thou wentest forth before the people, when thou wentest thorow the wyldernesse. Sela.
The earth shoke, and the heauens dropped at the presence of God, euen as Sinai also was moued at the presence of God, which is the God of Israel.
Thou O God sendedst a gracyous rayne vpon thyne enheritaunce, and refresshedst it, when it was weerye
Thy congregacyon shall dwell therin: For thou (O God) hast of thy goodnesse prepared for the poore.
The Lorde gaue the worde: greate was the company of the preachers.
Kynges with theyr armyes dyd flye, and were discomfited, and they of the houshold deuyded the spoyle.
Though ye haue lyen amonge the pottes, yet shall ye be as the wynges of a doue that is couered with syluer wynges, and hir fethers lyke golde.
When the Almyghty scatred kynges for their sake, then were they as white as snowe in zalmon.
As the hyll of Basan so is Gods hyll: euen a hye hill as the hyll of Basan.
Why hoppe ye so ye hye hylles? Thys is Gods hill, in the which it pleaseth him to dwell: yee, the Lorde will abyde in it for euer.
The charettes of God are twentie thousande, euen thousandes of angels, and the Lord is amonge them as in the holy place of Sinai.
Thou art gone vp an hye, thou hast led captiuitye captiue, and receaued gyftes for men. Yee, euen for thyne enemies, that the Lorde God myght dwell amonge them.
Praysed be the Lorde dayly, euen the God which helpeth vs, and poureth his benefytes vpon vs. Sela.
He is oure God, euen the God of whom commeth saluacion: God is the Lorde by whom we escape death.
God shall wounde the heade of his enemies, and the hearie scalpe of soch one as goeth on still in his wickednes.
The Lord hath sayde: I will bringe my people agayne as I dyd from Basan: myne owne wyll I brynge agayne as I dyd somtyme from the depe of the see.
That thy fote may be dipped in the bloude of thyne enemyes, and that the tong of thy dogges maye be redd thorow the same.
It is well sene, O God, how thou goest, how thou my God and kynge goest in the Sanctuary.
The syngers go before, the mynstrels folow after: in the myddes are the damosels playeng with the tymbrels.
Geue thankes O Israell, vnto God the Lorde in the congregacions from the grounde of the hart.
There is lytle BenIamin their ruler: and the Princes of Iuda, their councell: the Princes of zabulon, and the Prynces of Nephthali.
Thy God hath sent forth strength for the, stablysh the thing, O God, that thou hast wrought in vs.
For thy temples sake at Ierusalem: so shall kynges brynge presentes vnto the.
Whan the company of the speare men and multytude of the mightye are scatred abroade amonge the beastes of the people (so that they humbly bring peces of syluer) and whan he hath scatred the people that delyte in warre.
Then shall the Prynces come out of Egypte, the Morians land shall soone stretch out her handes vnto God.
Synge vnto God, O ye kyngdomes of the earth: O syng prayses vnto the Lord. Sela.
Which sytteth in the heauens ouer all from the begynnynge: Lo, he doth sende out hys voyce, yee, and that a myghtie voyce.
Ascrybe ye the power vnto God, ouer Israel: his worshypp Ꟶ strength is in the cloudes.
O God, wonderfull art thou in thy holy places: euen the God of Israell, he will geue strength and power vnto his people. Blessed be God.
To the chaunter vpon Sosanim of Dauid. Saue me, O God, for the waters are come in euen vnto my soule.
I sticke fast in the depe myre, where no ground is: I am come into depe waters, so that the floudes renne ouer me.
I am wery of crying, my throte is drie, my sight faileth me, for waytinge so long vpon my God.
They that hate me without a cause, are mo then the heeres of my head: they that are myne enemies Ꟶ wolde destroie me giltlesse are mightie:
I payed them the thinges that I neuer toke. God, thou knowest my simplenesse, and my fautes are not hid from the.
Let not them that trust in the, O Lord God of Hoostes be ashamed for my cause: let not those that seke the, be confounded thorowe me, O God of Israeli.
And why? for thy sake haue I suffred reprofe, shame hath couered my face.
I am become a straunger vnto my brethren: euen an aleaunt vnto my mothers children.
For the zele of thyne house hath euen eaten me, and the rebukes of them that rebuked the are fallen vpon me.
I wepte and chastened my selfe with fastynge, and that was turned to my reprofe.
I put on a sacke cloth also, Ꟶ they iested vpon me.
They that sitte in the gate, speake agaynst me, and the dronckardes make songes vpon me.
But Lorde I make my prayer vnto the in an acceptable tyme.
Heare me, O God, in the multitude of thy mercy, euen in the trueth of thy saluacion.
Take me out of the myre, that I sincke not. Oh let me be deliuered from them that hate me, and out of the depe waters.
Let not the water floud drowne me: nether let the depe swalowe me vp, and let not the pytte shut her mouth vpon me.
Heare me, O Lorde, for thy louyng kyndnesse is comfortable: turne the vnto me accordynge vnto the multitude of thy mercies.
And hyde not thy face from thy seruaunt, for I am in trouble: O haste the, and here me.
Drawe nye vnto my soule, and saue it: Oh delyuer me because of myne enemies.
Thou hast knowen my reprose, my shame and my dyshonour: myne aduersaries are all in thy syght.
The rebuke hath broken my herte, I am full of heuynes: I loked for some to haue pitye vpon me, but there was no man: nether founde I anye to comforte me.
They gaue me gall to eate, Ꟶ when I was thyrsty, they gaue me vineger to drinke.
Let their table be made a snare to take them selues withall, and let the thinges (that shuld haue bene for their welth) be vnto them an occasion of fallinge.
Let their eyes be blinded, that they se not: and euer bowe thou downe their backes.
Powre out thyne indignacion vpon them, and let thy wrathfull displeasure take holde of them.
Let their habitacion be voyde and no man to dwell in their tentes.
For they persecute hym whom thou hast smyte, Ꟶ they talke how they maye vexe them whom thou hast wounded.
Let them fall from one wyckednesse to another, and not come into thy ryghteousnesse.
Let them be wyped out of the boke of the lyuyng, Ꟶ not be wrytten among the ryghteous.
As for me, whan I am poore and in heuynesse, thy helpe (O God) shall lyfte me vp.
I wyll prayse the name of God with a songe, and magnifye it wt thankesgeuing.
This also shall please the Lorde better then a bullocke, that hath hornes and hooffes.
The humble shal consydre this, and be glad: seke ye after God, and youre soule shall lyue.
For the Lord heareth the poore, and despyseth not his presoners.
Let heauen and earth prayse hym, the see Ꟶ all that moueth therin.
For God will saue Syon, and buylde the cyties of Iuda, that men may dwell there, and haue it in possession. The posterite also of his seruauntes shall inheret it: Ꟶ they that loue hys name, shall dwell therin.
To the chaunter of Dauid to brynge to remembraunce. Haste the, O God, to delyuer me: make haste to helpe me, O Lorde.
Let them be shamed and confounded that seke after my soule: let them be turned backwarde, Ꟶ put to confusion, that wyshe me euyll.
Let them (for theyr rewarde) be soone brought to shame, that crye ouer me: there, there.
But let all those that seke the, be ioyfull and glad in the: and let all soch as delyte in thy saluacyon, saye alwaye: the Lorde be praysed.
As for me, I am poore and in misery, haste the vnto me (O God.) Thou art my helpe, and my redemer: O Lorde, make no longe taryenge.
In the O Lord, haue I put my trust let me neuer be put to confusyon, but rydde me, and delyuer me in thy righteousnesse: enclyne thyne eare vnto me, and saue me.
Be thou my strong holde (where vnto I maye all waye resorte) thou hast promysed to helpe me: for thou art my house of defence and my castell.
Delyuer me, O my God, out of the hand of the vngodly, out of the hande of the vnrighteous and cruell man.
For thou, O Lorde God, art the thynge that I longe for, thou art my hope euen fro my youth.
Thorow the haue I bene holden vp euer sence I was borne thou art he that toke me out of my mothers wombe, my prayse shalbe all waye of the.
I am become as it were a monster vnto many: but my sure trust is in the.
Oh let my mouth be fylled with thy prayse and honour all the daye longe.
Cast me not awaye in the tyme of age, forsake me not when my strength fayleth me.
For myne enemies speake agaynst me: Ꟶ they that laye wayte for my soule, take their councell together, sayenge: God hath forsaken hym, persecute hym, and take hym, for there is none to deliuer him.
Go not farre fro me, O God: my God, haste the to helpe me.
Let them be confounded and peryshe, that are agaynst my soule: let them be couered with shame and dyshonoure, that seke to do me euell.
As for me, I wyll paciently abyde all waye, and will prayse the more and more.
My mouth shall daylie speake of thy righteousnesse Ꟶ saluacion, for I knowe no ende therof.
I will go forth in the strength of the Lord God, Ꟶ will make mencion of thy righteousnesse onely.
Thou, O God, hast taught me fro my youth vp vntill now, therfore will I tell of thy wonderous worckes.
Forsake me not, O God, in myne olde age, when I am gray headed: vntyll I haue shewed thy strength vnto this generacion, and thy power to all them that are yet for to come.
Thy righteousnes (O God) is very hie, and great thynges are they that thou hast done: O God, who is lyke vnto the?
O what greate troubles and aduersyties hast thou shewed me? and yet didest thou turne and refreshe me: yee, and broughtest me from the depe of the earth
Thou hast brought me to great honour and comforted me on euery syde.
Therfore will I prayse the and thy faythfulnesse, O God, playinge vpon an instrument of musick, vnto the wyll I synge vpon the harpe, O thou holy one of Israell.
My lyppes wylbe fayne, whan I synge vnto the:
and so will my soule whom thou hast deliuered.
My tonge also shall talke of thy ryghteousnesse all the daye longe,
for they are confounded and brought vnto shame, that seke to do me euell.
For Salomon. Geue the kynge thy iudgementes (O God) and thy righteousnesse vnto the kynges sonne.
Then shall he iudge thy people accordinge vnto right, and defende the poore.
The mountaynes also shall brynge peace, and the lytle hilles righteousnesse vnto the people.
He shall kepe the symple folke by their ryght, defende the chyldren of the poore, and punish the wronge doer.
They shall feare the as long as the sonne and mone endureth, from one generacion to another.
He shall come downe like the rayne into a flese of wolle, euen as the droppes that water the earth.
In his tyme shall the ryghteous florish, yee, and aboundaunce of peace, so longe as the mone endureth,
His dominion shalbe also from the one see to the other, and from the floud vnto the worldes ende.
They that dwell in the wildernes shall knele before him, his enemies shall licke the dust.
The kynges of Tharsis and of the Iles shall geue presentes, the kynges of Araby and Saba shall bring gyftes.
All kinges shal fall downe before him: all nacions shall do him seruice.
For he shall delyuer the poore when he cryeth: the neady also and him that hath no helper.
He shalbe fauorable to the simple and neady: and shall preserue the soules of the poore.
He shall delyuer their soules from falshede and wronge, and deare shall theyr bloud be in his syght.
He shall lyue, Ꟶ vnto him shalbe geuen of the golde of Arabia: Prayer shalbe made euer vnto him, and daylie shall he be praysed.
There shalbe an heape of corne in the earth hye vpon the hylles, his frute shall shake lyke Libanus, and shalbe grene in the cite, like grasse vpon the earth.
His name shall endure for euer, his name shall remayne vnder the sunne amonge the posterites, which shalbe blessed thorow him, and all the Heathen shall prayse him
Blessed be the Lorde God, euen the God of Israell which onely doth wonderous thinges.
And blessed be the name of hys maiesty for euer, and all the erth shalbe filled with his maiestye. Amen, Amen.
Here ende the prayers of Dauid the sonne of Isai.
A Psalme of Asaph. Truly God is louing vnto Israel: euen vnto soch as are of a cleane hert?
Neuerthelesse, my fete were almost gone, my treadinges had well nye slypte.
And why I was greued at the wicked, I do se also the vngodly in soch prosperite.
For they are in no parell of death, but are lusty and strong.
They come in no misfortune like other folke, nether are they plaged like other men.
And this is the cause the they be so holden with pride, and ouerwhelmed with cruelte.
Their eyes swell for fatnesse, and they do euen what they lyst.
They corrupte other, Ꟶ speake of wicked blasphemye: theyr talkynge is agaynst the most hiest.
For they stretch forth theyr mouth vnto the heauen, Ꟶ theyr tonge goeth thorow the world.
Therfore fall the people vnto them, and there out sucke they no small aduauntage.
Tush (saye they) how shuld God perceaue it? is there knowlege in the moost hyest?
Lo, these are the vngodly, these prospere in the worlde, and these haue ryches in possessyon
Then haue I clensed my herte in vayne and washed my handes in innocency?
All the daye long haue I bene punished, and chastened euery mornynge.
Yee, and I had almost sayde euen as they: but lo, then shuld I haue condemned the generacyon of thy chyldren.
Then thought I to vnderstand this, but it was to harde for me.
Untill I wente into the Sanctuary of God, then vnderderstode I the ende of these men.
Namely, how thou dost sett them in slyppery places, and castest them downe and destroyest them.
O how sodenly do they consume, perysh, and come to a fearfull ende?
Yee, euen like as a dreame when one a waketh, so shalt thou make theyr ymage to vanysh out of the cyte.
Thus my hert was greued, and it wente euen thorow my reynes.
So folysh was I and ignoraunt, euen as it were a beast before the.
Neuerthelesse, I am all waye by the, for thou hast holden me by my right hande.
Thou shalt gyde me with thy councell, and afterwarde receaue me with glory.
Whom haue I in heauen but the? And there is none vpon earth, that I desyre in comparyson of the.
My fleashe and my hert fayleth, but God is the strength of my hert, and my porcyon for euer.
For lo, they that forsake the shall perysh: thou hast destroyed all them that commytte fornicacyon agaynst the.
But it is good for me, to holde me fast by God, to put my trust in the Lorde God, and to speake of all thy workes.
An instruccyon of Asaph. O God, werfore art thou absent from vs so long? why is thy wrath so hote agaynst the shepe of thy pasture?
O thynke vpon thy congregacyon, whom thou hast purchased and redemed of olde:
Thinke vpon the trybe of thine enheritaunce and mout Sion wherin thou hast dwelt.
Lyft vp thy fete, that thou mayest vtterly destroye euery enemye which hath done euell in the Sanctuary.
Thyne aduersaryes roare in the myddes of thy congregacions, and set vp their banners for tokens.
He that hewed tymbre afore out of the thick trees, was knowne to brynge it to an excellent worke.
But now they breake downe all the earned worcke therof wt axes Ꟶ hammers.
They haue set fyre vpon thy holy places, and haue defyled the dwellynge place of thy name, euen vnto the grounde.
Yee, they sayed in their hertes: let vs make hauoke of them alltogether: thus haue they brent vp all the houses of God in the lande.
We se not oure tokens, ther is not one Prophet more, no not one is ther among vs that vnderstandeth eny more.
O God, how long shall the aduersary do this dishonoure? how longe shal the enemy blaspheme thy name? For euer?
Why withdrawest thou thine hand? why pluckest thou not thy right hande out of thy bosome, to consume the enemye?
For God is my kynge of olde: the helpe that is done vpon earth, he doth it him selfe.
Thou dyddest deuyde the see thorowe thy power, thou brakest the heades of the dragons in the waters.
Thou smotest the heades of Leuiathan in peces, and geuest him to be meate for the people in the wyldernesse.
Thou broughtest out fountaynes and waters out of the harde rockes: thou dryedst vp myghtye waters.
The daye is thine, Ꟶ the nyght is thyne: thou hast prepared the lyght and the sonne.
Thou hast sett all the borders of the earth, thou hast made sommer and wynter.
Remembre this, O Lord, how the enemie hath rebuked, and how the folysh people hath blasphemed thy name.
O delyuer not the soule of thy turtle doue vnto the multitude of the enemies: and forget not the congregacyon of the poore for euer.
Loke vpon the couenaunt, for all the earth is full of darknes, and cruell habitacions.
O let not the symple go awaye ashamed, but let the poore and nedy geue prayse vnto thy name.
Aryse, O God, maynteyne thine awne cause: remembre how the folyshe man blasphemeth the dayly. Forget not the voyce of thine enemyes: the presumpcyon of them that hate the increaseth euermore and more.
To the chaunter, Destroye not. A Psalme and songe of Asaph. Unto the (O God) do we geue thankes yee, vnto the do we geue thankes:
thy name also is so nye, Ꟶ that do thy wonderous worckes declare.
When I receaue the congregacion, I shall iudge accordynge vnto ryght.
The earth is weake and all the in habiters therof, I beare vp the pyllers of it.
I sayde vnto the foles: deale not so madly, and to the vngodly: set not vp your horne.
Set not vp youre horne on hye, Ꟶ speake not with a styfnecke.
For promocion commeth nether from the East, ner from the west, ner yet from the south.
And why? God is the Iudge: he putteth downe one, and setteth vp another.
For in the hande of the Lord there is a cuppe, Ꟶ the wyne is redd, It is full mixte, Ꟶ he poureth out of the same. As for the dregges therof, all the vngodly of the earth shall drincke them, and sucke them out.
But I wyll talke of the God of Iacob, and prayse hym for euer. All the hornes of the vngodly also wyll I breake, and the hornes of the ryghteous shalbe exalted.
To the chaunter, in melodyes, a Psalme, Ꟶ songe of Asaph. In Iewrye is God knowne, his name is greate in Israel.
At Schalem is his tabernacle, and his dwellyng in Sion.
There brake he the arowes of the bowe, the shylde, the swerde, and the battayle. Sela.
Thou art of more honour and myght then the hylles of robbers.
The proude are robbed: they haue slepte their slepe: and all the men (whose handes were myghtie) haue found nothinge.
At thy rebuke (O God of Iacob) both the charet and horse is fallen.
Thou, euen thou art to be feared: and who may stande in thy syght, when thou art angrye.
Thou dyddest cause thy iudgement to be herde from heauen, the erth trembled and was styll.
When God arose to iudgement, Ꟶ to helpe all the meke vpon earth. Sela.
The fearcenesse of man shall turne to thy prayse: and the fearcenesse of other shalt thou refrayne.
Promyse vnto the Lorde youre God, Ꟶ kepe it, all ye that be rounde about hym: bryng presentes vnto hym that ought to be feared.
He shall refrayne the sprete of Prynces, and is wonderfull amonge the kynges of the earth.
To the Chaunter, for Ieduthun a Psalme of Asaph. I Wyll crye vnto God wt my voyce, euen vnto God wyll I crye wyth my voyce, and he shall herken vnto me.
In the tyme of my trouble I sought the Lorde: my sore ranne and ceassed not in the nyght ceason: my soule refused comforte.
When I am in heuynesse, I wyll thynke vpon God: when my hert is vexed, I wyll complayne. Sela.
Thou holdest myne eyes wakynge, I am so feble, that I cannot speake.
I haue consydred the dayes of olde, and the yeares that are past.
I call to remembraunce my songe: and in the nyght I commune with myne awne hert, and search out my spretes.
Wyll the Lord absent him selfe for euer? And will he be no more intreated?
Is hys mercy clene gone for euer? And is hys promyse come vtterly to an ende for euermore?
Hath God forgotten to be gracyous? And wyll he shutt vp hys louynge kyndnesse in dyspleasure? Sela.
And I sayde: It is myne awne infirmyte: But I wyll remembre the yeares of the ryght hande of the moost hyest.
I wyll remembre the worckes of the Lorde, and call to mynde thy wonders of olde tyme.
I will thynke also of all thy worckes, and my talkynge shalbe of thy doynges.
Thy waye, O God, is holy: who is so greate a God as God?
Thou art the God that doth wonders, and hast declared thy power among people.
Thou hast myghtely delyuered thy people, euen the sonnes of Iacob and Ioseph. Sela.
The waters sawe the, O God, the waters sawe the, Ꟶ were afrayed: the deapthes also were troubled.
The cloudes poured out water, the ayer thondered, Ꟶ thyne arowes went abroade.
The voyce of thy thonder was hearde rounde aboute, the lyghtenynges shone vpon the grounde, the earth was moued and shoke wythall
Thy waye is in the see, and thy pathes in the greate waters, and thy fotesteppes are not knowne.
Thou leddest thy people lyke shepe, by the hande of Moses and Aaron.
An instruccyon of Asaph. Heare my lawe, O my people, enclyne youre eares vnto the wordes of my mouth.
I wyll open my mouth in a parable, I wyll declare hard sentences of olde.
Whych we haue herde and knowne, and soche as oure fathers haue tolde vs.
That we shulde not hyde them from the chyldren of the generacyons to come: but to shewe the honour of the Lorde, hys might, and wonderfull workes that he hath done.
He made a couenaunt with Iacob, and gaue Israel a lawe which he commaunded oure forefathers to teache their children.
That their posterite myght knowe it, and the children which were yet vnborne.
To thintent that when they came vp, they myght shewe their chyldren the same.
That they myght put their trust in God, and not to forget the workes of God, but to kepe his commaundementes.
And not to be as their forefathers a faythlesse Ꟶ stubburne generacyon, a generacyon that set not their herte a ryght, and whose sprete cleued not stedfastly vnto God.
Lyke as the chyldren of Ephraim, which beyng harnessed and caryeng bowes, turned them selues backe in the daye of batayll.
They kepte not the couenaunt of God, and wolde not walke in hys lawe.
But forgat what he had done, and the wonderfull worckes that he had shewed for them.
Maruelous thynges dyd he in the syght of oure fathers in the lande of Egypte, euen in the felde of zoan.
He deuyded the see, and let them go thorow: he made the waters to stande on a heape.
In the daye tyme also he led them wyth a cloude, and all the nyght thorow wt a light of fyre.
He cloaue the hard rockes in the wyldernesse, and gaue them drincke therof, as it had bene out of the greate deapth.
He brought waters out of the stony rocke, so that it gusshed out lyke the ryuers.
Yet for all this they synned more agaynst hym, and prouoked the moost hyest in the wyldernes.
They tempted God in theyr hertes, and requyred meate for theyr lust.
They spake agaynst God also sayenge: Shall God prepare a table in the wildernesse?
He smote the stony rocke in dede, that the water gushed out, and the streames flowed withall: but can he geue bred also, or prouyde flesh for his people?
When the Lord hearde thys, he was wroth: so the fyre was kyndled in Iacob, Ꟶ ther came vp heuy dyspleasure agaynst Israel.
Because they beleued not in God, and put not their truste in his helpe.
So he commaunded the cloudes aboue, and opened the dores of heauen.
He rayned downe Manna also vpon them, for to eate, and gaue them foode from heauen.
So man dyd eate angels fode, for he sent them meate ynough.
He caused the East wynd to blowe vnder the heauen, and thorow his power he brought in the south west wynde.
He rayned flesh vpon them as thicke as dust, and fethered foules lyke as the sande of the see.
He let it fall amonge their tentes euen rounde aboute their habytacyon.
So they dyd eate, and were well fylled, for he gaue them their awne desyre. They were not disapoynted of their lust.
But whyle the meate was yet in theyr mouthes: the heuy wrath of God came vpon them, Ꟶ slewe the welthiest of them, yee, and smote downe, the chosen men that were in Israel.
But for all this they synned yet more, and beleued not hys wonderous worckes.
Therfore, their dayes dyd he consume in vanyte, and their yeares in trouble.
When he slewe them, they sought hym, and turned them early and enquered after God.
And they remembred that God was their strength, and that the hye God was their redemer.
Neuerthelesse, they dyd but flatter hym wyth their mouth, and dyssembled with him in their tonge.
For their herte was not whole wyth hym, nether contynued they stedfast in hys couenaunt.
But he was so mercyfull, that he forgaue theyr mysdedes, and destroyed them not.
Yee, many a tyme turned he hys wrath awaye, and wolde not suffre is whole dyspleasure to aryse.
For he consydered that they were but flesh: and that they were, euen a wynde that passeth awaye, and commeth not agayne.
Many a tyme dyd they prouoke him in the wyldernesse, and greued him in the deserte.
They turned backe, Ꟶ tempted God, Ꟶ moued the holy one in Israel.
They thought not of hys hand, and of the daye when he delyuered them from the hande of the enemye.
How he had wrought hys myracles in Egypte, and his wondres in the felde of zoan.
He turned their waters into bloude, so that they myght not dryncke of the ryuers.
He sent lyce amonge them, and deuoured them vp and frogges to destroye them.
He gaue their frutes vnto the catyr pyller, and their laboure vnto the greshopper.
He destroyed their vynes wt hayle stones, and their mulbery trees wyth the frost.
He smote their catel also with haylestones, Ꟶ their flockes with hote thonder boltes.
He cast vpon them the furyousnesse of hys wrath, anger, displeasure and trouble, and sent euell angels among them.
He made awaye to his indignacion, and spared not their soule from death, but gaue their lyfe ouer to the pestylence.
And smote all the fyrst borne in Egypt, the moost principall and myghtyest in the dwellynges of Ham.
But as for hys awne people, he lead them forth lyke shepe, and caryed them in the wyldernesse lyke a flocke
He brought them out safely, that they shulde not feare, Ꟶ ouer whelmed their enemyes with the see.
And brought them within the borders of hys Sanctuary: euen to this mountayne, whych he purchased with hys ryght hande.
He cast out the Heathen also before them, caused their lande to be denyded amonge them for an heritage, and made the trybes of Israell to dwell in their tentes.
So they tempted and displeased the most hye God, and kepte not hys testimonyes.
But turned their backes, and fell awaye lyke their forfathers, startynge asyde lyke a broken bowe.
For they greued hym with their hyll alters, and prouoked him to displeasure wyth their ymages.
When God hearde this, he was wroth, and toke sore dyspleasure at Israel.
So that he forsoke the Tabernacle in Silo, euen the tent that he had pitched among men.
He delyuered their power into captiuyte, and their bewtye into the enemyes hande.
He gaue his people ouer also into the swerde, and was wroth wyth hys inherytaunce.
The fyre consumed their yong men, and their maydens were not geuen to mariage.
Their Preastes were slayne wt the swerde, and there were no wyddowes to make lamentacion.
So the Lorde awaked as one out of slepe, and lyke a gyaunte refreshed wyth wyne.
He smote his enemyes in the hynder partes, and put them to a perpetuall shame.
He refused the tabernacle of Ioseph, and chose not the trybe of Ephraim.
But chose the trybe of Iuda, euen the hyll of Sion which he loued.
And there he buylded hys temple on hye, and layed the foundacion of it lyke the grounde, whych he hath made continually.
He chose Dauid also his seruaunt, and toke him awaye from the shepe foldes.
As he was folowinge the ewes greate with yonge ones, he toke hym, that he myght fede Iacob hys people, and Israel his enheritaunce. So he fed them with a faythfull and true hert, Ꟶ ruled them prudently withall his power.
A Psalme of Asaph. O God the Heathen are come into thy inheritaunce: thy holy temple haue they defyled, and made Ierusalem an heape of stones.
The deed bodyes of thy seruauntes haue they geuen to be meate, vnto the foules of the ayre, and the flesh of thy saynctes vnto the beastes of the lande.
Their bloud haue they shed lyke water on euery syde of Ierusalem, and there was no man to burye them.
We are become an open shame vnto oure enemies, a very scorne and derysyon vnto them that are rounde aboute us.
Lorde, how longe wylt thou be angrye? shall thy gelousy burne lyke fyre for euer?
Poure out thyne indignacion vpon the Heathen that haue not knowne the, and vpon the kyngdome that haue not called vpon thy name.
For they haue deuoured Iacob, and layed waste his dwellinge place.
O remembre not oure olde synnes, but haue mercy vpon vs, and that soone, for we are come to greate misery.
Helpe vs, O God of oure saluacion, for the glory of thy name: O delyuer vs, and be mercyfull vnto oure synnes for thy names sake.
Wherfore do the Heathen saye: where is now their God?
O let the vengeaunce of thy seruauntes bloude that is shed, be openly shewed vpon the Heathen in oure syght.
O let the sorowfull syghyng of the presoners come before the: accordyng vnto the greatnesse of thy power, preserue thou those that are appoynted to dye.
And for the blasphemy (wherwith oure neyghbours haue blasphemed the) rewarde thou them, O Lorde, seuen folde into their bosome. So we, that be thy people and shepe of thy pasture, shall geue the thanckes for euer, and wyl alwaye be shewynge forth thy prayse from generacion to generacion.
To the chaunter vpon Sosanim, a testimonye and Psalme of Asaph. Heare O thou shepherde of Israel, thou that leadest Ioseph lyke a shepe. shewe thy selfe also thou that syttest vpon the Cherubyns.
Before Ephraim, Ben Iamin, and Manasses: stere vp thy strength, and come helpe vs.
Turne vs agayne, O God, shewe the lyght of thy countenaunce, and we shalbe whole.
O Lorde God of Hostes, how longe wilt thou be angry wyth thy people that prayeth?
Thou fedest them with the bred of teares and geuest them plenteousnes of teares to dryncke.
Thou hast made vs a very stryfe vnto oure neyghbours, and oure enemyes laugh vs to scorne.
Turne vs agayne, thou God of Hostes, shewe the lyght of thy countenaunce, and we shalbe whole.
Thou hast brought a vyne out of Egypte, thou hast cast out the Heathen, and planted it.
Thou madest rowme for it: and whan it had taken rote it fylled the lande.
The hylles were couered with the shadowe of it, and the bowes therof were lyke the goodly Cedre trees.
She stretched out her braunches vnto the see, and her bowes vnto the ryuer.
Why hast thou then broken downe her hedge, that all they whych go by, plucke of her grapes?
The wylde bore out of the wood doth rote it vp, and the wylde beastes of the felde deuoureth it.
Turne the agayne, thou God of Hostes, loke downe from heauen, beholde, and vyset thys vyne.
And the place of the vynyarde that thy ryght hande hath planted, and the braunch that thou madest so stronge for thy selfe..
It is brent wyth fyre, and cut downe: and they shall perysh at the rebuke of thy countenaunce.
Let thy hand be vpon the man of thy ryght hande, Ꟶ vpon the sonne of man whom thou madest so strong for thyne awne selfe.
And so will not we go back from the: Oh let vs lyue, Ꟶ we shall call vpon thy mame.
Turne vs agayne, O Lorde God of Hostes, shewe the lyght of thy countenaunce, Ꟶ we shalbe whole.
To the chaunter vpon Githith of Asaph Singe we merely vnto God or strength make a chearfull noyse vnto the God of Iacob.
Take the Psalme, bryng hyther the tabret, the mery harpe wt the lute.
Blowe vp the trompett in the newe mone, euen in the tyme appoynted, and vpon oure solempne feast daye
For this was made a statute for Israel, Ꟶ a lawe of the God of Iacob.
This he ordened in Ioseph for a testymony, when he came out of the lande of Egypt, and had hearde a straunge language.
I eased hys shoulder from the burthen, Ꟶ his handes were delyuered from (makyng) the pottes.
Thou calledst vpon me in troubles, and I delyuered the, and hearde the what tyme as the storme fell vpon me.
I proued the also at the waters of stryfe. Sela.
Heare, O my people, and I will assure the of Israel, yf thou wylt herken vnto me.
There shall no straunge God be in the, nether shalt thou worshippe any other God.
I am the Lorde thy God, whych brought the out of the lande of Egypt, open thy mouth wyde, and I shall fyll it.
But my people wold not heare my voyce, and Israel wolde not obey me.
So I gaue them vp vnto their awne hertes lust, and let them folowe their awne ymaginacyons.
O that my people wolde haue herkened vnto me, for yf Israel had walked in my wayes.
I shulde soone haue put downe their enemyes, Ꟶ turned myne hand agaynst their aduersaryes.
The haters of the Lorde shulde haue bene founde lyars, but their tyme shulde haue endured for euer. He shuld haue fed them also wyth the fynest wheate floure, and with hony out of the stony roke shulde I haue satisfyed the.
A Psalme of Asaph. God standeth in the congregacyon of prynces: he is Iudge amonge Goddes.
How longe will ye geue wrong iudgement, and accepte the personnes of the vngodly? Sela.
Defende the poore and fatherlesse, se that soch as be in nede and necessite haue ryght.
Delyuer the out caste Ꟶ poore: saue them from the hande of the vngodly.
They wyll not be lerned ner vnderstande, but walcke on styll in darcknesse: all the foundacyons of the erth be out of course.
I haue sayde. ye are Goddes, and ye all are chyldren of the moost hyest.
But ye shall dye lyke men, and fall lyke one of the prynces.
Aryse, O God, and iudge thou the earth, for thou shalt take all Heathen to thine enheritaunce.
A songe and Psalme of Asaph. Holde not thy tonge, O God, kepe not styll sylence, refrayne not thy self O God.
For lo thyne enemyes make a murmurynge, and they that hate the haue lyft vp their heade.
They haue ymagyned craftely agaynst thy people, and taken councell agaynst thy secrete ones.
They haue sayde: come, Ꟶ let vs rote them out that they be nomore a people, Ꟶ that the name of Israel maye be nomore in remembraunce.
For they haue cast their heades together wyth one consent, and are confederate agaynst the.
The tabernacles of the Edomites and Ismaelytes, the Moabytes and Hagarenes.
Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalech: the Philistynes with them that dwell at Tyre.
Assur also is ioyned vnto them, and haue helped the chyldren of Loth. Sela.
But do thou to them as vnto the Madianites, vnto Sisera, and vnto Iabin at the broke of Kyson.
Whych peryshed at Endor, and became as the donge of the earth.
Make them Ꟶ their prynces lyke Oreb and zeb. Yee, make all their Prynces lyke as zebea and Salinana.
Whych saye: let vs take to oure selues the houses of God in possessyon.
O my God, make them lyke vnto a whele, and as the stubble before the wynde.
Lyke as a fyre that burneth vp the wod, and as the flame that consumeth the mountaynes.
Persecute them euen so with thy tempest, and make them afrayed wyth thy storme.
Make their faces ashamed, O Lorde, that they maye seke thy name.
Let them be confounded and vexed euer more and more: let them be put to shame and perish.
And they shall know, that thou (whose name is Iehoua) art only the moost hyest ouer all the earth.
To the chaunter vpon Githith, a Psalme of the sonnes of Corah. O how amyable are thy dwellynges, thou Lorde of Hostes?
My soule hath a desyre and longinge to entre into the courtes of the Lorde: my hert and my flesh reioyse in the liuyng God.
Yee, the sparow hath founde her an house, and the swalowe a nest, where she may laye her yonge: euen thy aulters O Lorde of Hostes, my kynge and my God.
Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they wilbe all waye praysyng the. Sela.
Blessed is that man whose strength is in the, in whose herte are thy wayes.
Whych goinge thorow the vale of misery vse it for a well, and the pooles are fylled with water.
They wyll go from strength, and vnto the God of Goddes appeareth euery one of them in Sion.
O Lorde God of Hostes, heare my prayer: herken O God of Iacob. Sela.
Behold O God oure defender, and loke vpon the face of thyne anoynted.
For one daye in thy courtes is better then a thousande.
I had rather be a dore keper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tentes of vngodlynesse.
For the Lorde God is a lyght and defence, the Lorde will geue grace and worshype, and no good thynge shall he wytholde from them that lyue a godly lyfe. O Lord God of Hostes, blessed is the man, that putteth his trust in the.
To the chaunter, a Psalme of the sonnes of Corab. Lorde, thou art become gracyous vnto thy lande, thou hast turned awaye the captiuite of Iacob.
Thou hast forgeuen the offence of thy people, and couered all theyr synnes. Selah.
Thou hast taken awaye all thy displeasure, and turned thy selfe from thy wrathfull indignacyon.
Turne vs then, O God oure Sauyour, and let thyne anger ceasse from vs.
Wylt thou be displeased at vs for euer? and wylt thou stretch out thy wrath from one generacyon to another?
Wylt thou not turne agayne Ꟶ quycken vs, that thy people maye reioyse in the?
Shewe vs thy mercy O Lord and graunt vs thy saluacyon.
I wyll herken what the Lorde God will saye: for he shall speake peace vnto his people and to hys saynctes, that they turne not agayne.
For his saluacyon is nye them that feare him, that glory maye dwell in oure lande.
Mercy and trueth are met together, ryghtuousnesse and peace haue kyssed eche other.
Trueth shall florish out of the earth, Ꟶ ryghtuousnesse hath loked downe from heauen.
Yee, the Lorde shall shewe louynge kyndnesse, and oure lande shall geue her encrease.
Ryghtuousnesse shall go before hym, and he shall directe hys goynge in the waye.
A prayer of Dauid. Bowe downe thyne eare, O Lorde, Ꟶ heare me, for I am poore Ꟶ in misery.
Preserue thou my soule, for I am holy: my God saue thy seruaunt, that putteth his trust in the.
Be mercyfull vnto me (O Lorde) for I wyll call dayly vpon the
Comforte the soule of thy seruaunt, for vnto the (O Lorde) do I lyft vp my soule.
For thou Lord art good and gracious, and of greate mercy vnto all them that call vpon the.
Geue eare Lord vnto my prayer, and pondre the voyce of my humble desyres.
In the tyme of my trouble I wyll call vpon the, for thou hearest me.
Amonge the Goddes there is none lyke vnto the (O Lord) there is not one that can do as thou doest.
All nacyons whom thou hast made, shall come and worshyppe the (O Lord) and shall gloryfye thy name.
For thou art great, and doest wonderous thynges, thou art God alone.
Teach me thy waye, (O Lord) and I will walke in thy trueth: O knytt my hert vnto the, that it maye feare thy name.
I wyll thanke the, O Lorde my God with all my hart, and wyll prayse thy name for euer.
For great is thy mercy towarde me and thou hast delyuered my soule from the nethermost hell.
O God, the proude are rysen agaynst me, and the congregacyons of naughtye men haue sought after my soule, and haue not set the before theyr eyes.
But thou, O Lorde God, art full of compassyon, and mercy, longe suffrynge, plenteous in goodnes and trueth.
O turne the then vnto me and haue mercy vpon me: geue thy strength vnto thy seruaunt, and helpe the sonne of thyne handmayde.
Shewe some token vpon me for good, that they whych hate me, maye se it, and be ashamed, because thou Lord hast helped me, and comforted me.
A Psalme and songe of the sonnes of Corah. Her foundacions are vpon the holy hylles: the Lorde loueth the gates of Sion more then all the dwellynges of Iacob.
Uery excellent thynges are spoken of the, thou cyte of God. Selah.
I wyll thynke vpon Rahab and Babylon, wyth them that knowe me.
Beholde, yee the Philistynes also, and they of Tyre with the Morians. Lo, there was he borne.
And of Syon it shalbe reported, that he was borne in her, and the moost hyest shall stablish her.
The Lorde shall rehearse it, whan he wryteth vp the people, that he was borne there. Selah.
The syngers also and trompetters shall he rehearse. All my freshe sprynges shalbe in the.
A song and Psalme of the sonnes of Corah, to the chaunter vpon Mahelath, to geue thankes: an instruccion of Heman the Ezrahyte. O lorde God of my saluacion, I haue cryed daye and nyght before the: Oh let my prayer entre into thy presence, encline thyne eare vnto my callynge.
For my soule is full of trouble, and my lyfe draweth nye vnto hell.
I am counted as one of them that go downe vnto the pytte, and I haue bene euen as a man that hath no strength.
Fre amonge the deed, lyke vnto them that be wounded lye in the graue, whych be out of remebraunce, and are cut awaye from thy hande:
Thou hast layed me in the lowest pytt, in a place of darcknesse and in the depe.
Thyne indignacyon lyeth harde vpon me, and thou hast vexed me wyth all thy stormes. Selah.
Thou hast put awaye myne acquaintaunce farre fro me, and made me to be abhorred of them:
I am so fast in preson, that I can not get forth.
My syght fayleth for very trouble: Lorde I haue called dayly vpon the, I haue stretched out myne handes vnto the.
Doest thou shewe wonders amonge the deed? Or shall the deed ryse vp agayne, and prayse the?
Shall thy louynge kyndnes be shewed in the graue, or thy faythfulnesse in destruccion?
Shall thy wonderous workes be knowen in the darcke, and thy ryghtuousnes in the lande where all thynges are forgotten?
Unto the haue I cryed O Lorde, and early shall my prayer come before the.
Lorde, why abhorrest thou my soule? and hydest thou thy face fro me?
I am in mysery, Ꟶ lyke vnto hym that is at the poynt to dye (euen fro my youth vp) thy terrours haue I suffred with a troubled mynde.
Thy wrathfull dyspleasure goeth ouer me, and the feare of the hath vndone me.
They came rounde about me daylye lyke water, and compassed me together on euery syde.
My louers and frendes hast thou put awaye fro me, and hyd myne acquayntaunce out of my syght.
An instruccyon of Ethan the Ezrahyte. My songe shalbe all waye of the louynge kyndnesse of the Lorde, wyth my mouth wyll I euer be shewynge thy trueth from one generacyon to another.
For I haue sayde: mercy shalbe set vp for euer, thy trueth shalt thou stablysh in the heauens.
I haue made a couenaunt wyth my chosen, I haue sworne vnto Dauid my seruaunt.
Thy sede wyll I stablysh for euer, and set vp thy trone from one generacyon to another. Selah.
O Lorde the very heauens shall prayse thy wonderous worckes, Ꟶ thy trueth in the congregacyon of the saynctes.
For who is he amonge the cloudes, that shall be compared vnto the Lorde?
And what is he amonge the goddes, that shalbe lyke vnto the Lorde?
God is very greatly to be feared in the councell of the sayntes and to be had in reuerence of all them that are aboute hym.
O Lord God of Hostes, who is lyke vnto the? thy trueth (most myghtie lord) is on euery syde.
Thou rulest the ragynge of the see, thou stillest the waues therof, when they aryse.
Thou hast subdued Egypte and destroyed it, thou hast scatred thyne enemyes abroad wyth thy myghtie arme.
The heauens are thyne, the earth also is thyne: thou hast layed the foundacyon of the rounde worlde, and all that therin is.
Thou hast made the north and the south, Tabor and Hermon shall reioyse in thy name.
Thou hast a myghtie arme, stronge is thy hande, and hye is thy ryght hande.
Ryghteousnes and equite is the habitacyon of thy seate, mercy and trueth shall go before thy face.
Blessed is the people (O Lorde) that can reioyse in the: they shall walke in the lyght of thy countenaunce.
Theyr delyte shalbe daylye in thy name, Ꟶ in thy ryghteousnesse shall they make theyr boast.
For thou art the glory of theyr strength, Ꟶ in thy louynge kyndnesse thou shalt lyft vp oure hornes.
For the Lord is oure defence, The holy one of Israel is oure kynge.
Thou spakest somtyme in vysyons vnto thy saynctes, and saydest: I haue layed helpe vpon one that is myghty, I haue exalted one chosen out of the people.
I haue founde Dauid my seruaunt: with my holy oyle haue I anoynted him.
My hand shall holde hym fast, and myne arme shall strengthen hym:
The enemye shall not be able to do hym violence, the sonne of wickednesse shall not hurte hym.
I shall smyte downe hys foes before hys face, and plage them that hate hym.
My trueth also and my mercy shalbe wyth hym, and in my name shall hys horne be exalted.
I wyll set hys dominion also in the see, and hys ryght hande in the floudes.
He shall call me: thou art my father, my God, Ꟶ my stronge saluacion.
And I wyll make hym my fyrst borne, hyer then the kynges of the earth.
My mercy wyll I kepe for hym for euermore, Ꟶ my couenaunt shall stande fast wyth hym.
Hys sede also wyll I make to endure for euer, and hys trone as the dayes of heauen.
But yf hys chyldren forsake my lawe, and walke not in my iudgementes.
If they breake my statutes and kepe not my commaundementes.
I wyll vyset theyr offences with the rod and theyr synne wyth scourges.
Neuerthelesse, my louynge kyndnesse will I not vtterly take from hym, ner suffre my trueth to fayle.
My couenaunt wyll I not breake, nor alter the thinge that is gone out of my lyppes.
I haue sworne once by my holynesse, that I wyll not fayle Dauid.
Hys sede shall endure for euer, and hys seate is lyke as the sunne before me.
He shall stande fast for euermore as the moone, and as the faythfull wytnesse in heauen. Selah:
But thou hast abhorred Ꟶ forsaken thyne anoynted, Ꟶ art displeased at him.
Thou hast broken the couenaunt of thy seruaunt, cast his crowne to the grounde.
Thou hast ouerthrowne all hys hedges, and broken downe hys stronge holdes.
All they that go by, spoyle hym, and he is become a rebuke vnto hys neyghboures.
Thou hast set vp the ryght hande of hys enemyes: Ꟶ made all hys aduersaryes to reioyce.
Thou hast taken awaie the edge of his swearde: Ꟶ geuest hym not victory in the battayle.
Thou hast put out his glory, Ꟶ cast his trone downe to the grounde.
The dayes of his youth hast thou shortened: and couered him wt dishonoure. Selah.
Lorde, howe longe wilt thou hid thy selfe? for euer? and shall thy wrath burne lyke fyre?
O remembre, how shorte my tyme is, wherfore hast thou made all men for naught?
What man is he that lyueth, and shall not se death? and shall he deliuer his awne soule from the hande of hell? Selah.
Lorde, where are thy olde louyng kyndnesses, which thou sworest vnto Dauid in thy treuth?
Remember (Lorde) the rebuke that thy seruauntes haue Ꟶ how I do beare in my bosome thy rebukes of many people.
Wher with thyne enemies haue blasphemed the, and sclaunder the fotesteppes of thyne anoynted. Praysed be the Lord for euermore: Amen: Amen.
A prayer of Moses the man of God. Lorde, thou hast bene oure refuge from one generacyon to another.
Before the mountaynes were brought forth, or euer the earth Ꟶ the worlde were made, thou art God from euerlastyng and worlde without ende.
Thou turnest man to destruccion. Agayne, thou sayest: come agayne ye chyldren of men.
For a thousande yeares in thy syght are but as yesterdaye, seynge that is past as a watch in the nyght.
As sone as thou scatrest them, they are euen as a slepe, and fade awaye sodenly lyke the grasse,
In the mornyng it is grene and groweth vp, but in the euenynge it is cut downe and withered.
For we consume awaye in thy displeasure, Ꟶ are afrayed at thy wrathfull indignacyon.
Thou hast set oure misdedes before the, and oure secrete synnes in the lyght of thy countenaunce.
For when thou art angrye, all oure dayes are gone: we brynge our yeares to an ende, as it were a tale that is tolde.
The dayes of oure age are thre score yeares and ten: and though men be so stronge that they come to foure score yeares, yet is theyr strength then but laboure and sorowe: so soone passeth it awaye, and we are gone.
But who regardeth the power of thy wrath, for euen therafter as a man feareth, so is thy displeasure.
O teach vs, to nombre oure dayes, that we maye applye oure hertes vnto wysdome.
Turne the agayne (O Lorde) at the laste, and be gracious vnto thy seruauntes.
O satisfye vs with thy mercy, and that soone: so shall we reioyse and be glad all the dayes of oure lyfe.
Comforte vs agayne, now after the tyme that thou hast plaged vs, and for the yeares wherin we haue suffred aduersyte.
Shewe thy seruauntes thy worke, and theyr chyldren thy glory.
And the glorious maiesty of the Lorde oure God be vpon vs: prospere thou the worke of oure handes vpon vs, O prospere thou oure handy worke.
Who so dwelleth vnder the defence of the most hyest, shal abyde vnder the shadow of the Almightye.
I wyll saye vnto the Lorde: Thou art my hope, and my stronge holde, my God, in hym will I trust.
For he shall delyuer the from the snare of the hunter, and from the noysome pestylence.
He shall defende the vnder hys wynges, and thou shalte be safe vnder hys fethers: hys faythfulnesse and trueth shall be thy shylde and buckler.
Thou shalte not be afrayed for any terrour by night, ner for the arow that flyeth by daye.
For the pestilence that walketh in the darknesse, ner for the sicknesse that destroyeth in the noone daye.
A thousande shall fall besyde the Ꟶ ten thousande at thy ryght hand, but it shall not come nye the.
Yee, with thyne eyes shalt thou beholde, and se the rewarde of the vngodly.
For thou Lorde arte my hope, thou hast set thyne house of defence very hye
There shall no euell happen vnto the, nether shall eny plage come nye thy dwellyng.
For he shall geue his angels charge ouer the, to kepe the in all thy wayes.
They shall beare the in theyr handes, that thou hurt not thy fote agaynste a stone.
Thou shalt go vpon the Lyon and Adder, the yonge Lyon and the Dragon shalte thou treade vnder thy fete.
Because he hath set hys loue vpon me, therfore shall I delyuer him: I shall set him vp, because he hath knowne my name.
He shall call vpon me, Ꟶ I wyll heare hym: yee I am with hym in trouble, I will deliuer hym, and brynge hym to honoure.
With longe lyfe wyll I satisfye hym, and shewe hym my saluacion.
A Psalme and songe for the Sabboth daye. It is a good thing to geue thankes vnto the Lorde, and to synge prayses vnto thy name, O moste hyest.
To tell of thy louyng kyndnesse early in the mornyng, and of thy trueth in the nyght season.
Upon an instrument of ten strynges, Ꟶ vpoon the lute: vpon a lowde instrument Ꟶ vpon the harpe.
For thou Lord hast made me glad thorow thy workes, and I wyll reioyse in geuyng prayse for the operacions of thy handes.
O Lord, how glorious are thy workes: thy thoughtes are very depe.
An vnwyse man doth not well considre this, and a foole doth not vnderstande it.
Whan the vngodly are grene as the grasse, Ꟶ whan all the workes of wyckednes do florish, then shall they be destroyed for euer.
But thou Lord art the most hyest for euermore.
For lo, thyne enemies, O Lord, lo, thyne ennemies shall perishe, and all the workers of wickednes shalbe destroyed.
But my horne shalbe exalted like the horne of an Unicorne, for I am anoynted with fresh oyle.
Myne eye also shall se hys lust of myne enemyes,
and myne eare shall heare hys desyre of the wycked that ryse vp agaynst me.
The ryghteous shal florish lyke a palme tree, and shal sprede abroade lyke a Cedre in Libanus.
Soch as be planted in the house of the Lorde shall florishe in the courtes of our God. They shall also bryng forth more frute in theyr age, Ꟶ shalbe fat and well likyng.
That they maye shewe, how true the Lord my strength is, and that there is no vnryghtuousnesse in hym.
The Lord is Kyng, and hath put on gloryous apparell: the Lorde hath put on his apparell, Ꟶ gyrded hym selfe with strength:
he hath made the rounde worlde so sure, that it can not be moued.
Euer sens the world beganne hath thy seate bene prepared, thou art from euerlastynge.
The floudes are rysen (O Lord) the floudes haue lyft vp theyr noyse, the floudes lyft vp the waues.
The waues of the see are myghtie, Ꟶ rage horribly: but yet the Lorde that dwelleth on hye, is mightier. Thy testimonies, O Lorde, are very sure, holynesse becommeth thyne house for euer.
O lord God to whome vengeaunce belongeth: thou God to whome vengeaunce belongeth, shewe thy selfe.
Aryse thou iudge of the worlde, and rewarde the proude after theyr deseruynge.
Lord how longe shall the vngodly, how longe shall the vngodly triumphe?
Howe longe shall all wicked doers speake so disdaynfully, Ꟶ make soch proude boasting?
They smyte down thy people, O Lorde, and trouble thyne heritage.
They murthur the wyddow and the straunger, and put the fatherlesse to death.
And yet they saye. Tush the Lorde shal not se, nether shall the God of Iacob regard it.
Take hede, ye vnwyse amonge the people, O ye fooles, whan will ye vnderstande?
He that planted the eare, shall he not heare? Or he that made the eye, shall not he se?
Or he that nurtureth the heathen, it is he that teacheth man knowlege, shal not he punysh?
The Lorde knoweth the thoughtes of man, that they are but vayne.
Blessed is the man, whome thou chastenest (O Lorde) Ꟶ teachest hym in thy lawe.
That thou mayest geue hym pacience in tyme of aduersitie, vntyll the pyt be dygged vp for the vngodly.
For the Lorde will not fayle hys people, nether will he forsake his inheritaunce.
Untill righteousnes turne agayne vnto iudgement all soch as be true of hert shall folow it.
Who will ryse vp wt me agaynst the wicked? Or who will take my part agaynst the euell doers?
If the Lord had not helped me it had not failed, but my soule had bene put to sylence.
But when I sayd: my fote hath slipped, thy mercy (O Lord) helde me vp.
In the multitude of the sorowes that I had in my herte thy comfortes haue refreshed my soule.
Wilt thou haue any thynge to do with the stoole of wickednesse, whiche ymagineth mischefe as a lawe?
They gather them together agaynste the soule of the righteous, and condemne the innocent bloude
But the Lord is my refuge, Ꟶ my God is the strength of my confidence.
He shall recompence them their wickednes and destroye them in their owne malice, yee the Lorde our God shall destroye them.
O come, let vs synge vnto the Lord, let vs hertely reioyse in the strength of our saluacion.
Let vs come before his presence wt thankesgeuynge, Ꟶ shewe oure selfe glad in hym wt psalmes.
For the Lorde is a great God, Ꟶ a great kynge aboue all goddes.
In his hande are all the corners of the earth, Ꟶ the strength of the hylles is his also.
The see is hys, and he made it, Ꟶ his handes prepared the drye lande.
O come, let vs worshyppe Ꟶ fall downe, and knele before the Lord oure maker.
For he is oure God: and we are the people of his pasture, and the shepe of his handes.
To daye yf ye will heare his voyce, harden not your hertes, as in the prouokacion Ꟶ as in the daye of temptacion in the wildernes.
When youre fathers tempted me, proued me, and saw my workes.
Fourty yeares long was I greued with that generacion, Ꟶ sayd: it is a people that do erre in theyr hertes: for they haue not knowen my wayes.
Unto whom I sware in my wrath that they shulde not enter in to my rest.
O synge vnto the Lorde a new songe, synge vnto the Lorde all the whole earth.
Synge vnto the Lorde, and prayse his name, be tellynge of his saluacion from daye to daye.
Declare hys honoure vnto the Heathen, and his wonders vnto all people.
For the Lord is great, and can not worthely be praysed: he is more to be feared then all goddes.
As for all the goddes of the Heathen, they be but Idols, but it is the Lorde that made the heauens.
Glorye and worshyppe are before hym, power Ꟶ honoure are in hys Sanctuary.
Ascrybe vnto the Lord, (O ye kynredes of the people) ascrybe vnto the Lorde worshipe and power.
Ascrybe vnto the Lord the honoure due vnto his name, brynge presentes, Ꟶ come into hys courtes.
O worshipe the Lord in the beutye of holynesse, lett the whole earth stande in awe of hym.
Tell it out amonge the Heathen, that the Lorde is kynge: and that it is he which hath made the rounde worlde so fast, that it can not be moued, and how that he shall iudge the people ryghteously.
Let the heauens reioyse, and let the earth be glad: let the see make a noyse, and all that therin is.
Let the felde be ioyfull and all that is in it, shall all the trees of the wodd reioyce.
before the Lorde, for he commeth: for he commeth to iudge the earth: and with righteousnesse to iudge the worlde, and the people with his trueth.
The Lorde is kynge, the earth maye be glad therof: yee the multytude of the Iles maye be glad therof.
Cloudes and darcknesse are rounde aboute hym, ryghteousnesse and iudgment are the habitacyon of his seate.
There shall go a fyre before hym, and burne vp hys enemyes on euery syde.
His lightenynges gaue shyne vnto the worlde, the earth sawe it and was afrayed.
The hilles melted lyke waxe at the presence of the Lorde, at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth.
The heauens haue declared his ryghteousnes, Ꟶ all the people haue sene hys glory.
Confounded be all they that worshipe carued ymages, and that delyte in vayne goddes: worshipe hym all ye goddes.
Sion heard of it and reioysed: and the daughters of Iuda were glad because of thy iudgementes, O Lorde.
For thou Lorde art hyer then all that are in the earth, thou art exalted farre aboue all goddes.
O ye that loue the Lorde, se that ye hate the thynge whych is euell: the Lorde preserueth the soules of hys saynctes, he shall delyuer them from the hande of the vngodly.
There is spronge vp a lyght for the ryghteous, and a ioyfull gladnesse for soch as be true herted.
Reioyse in the Lorde, ye ryghteous: and geue thanckes for a remembraunce of his holynesse.
A Psalme. O synge vnto the Lord a new songe, for he hath done maruelous thynges.
With hys awne ryght hande and wyth his holy arme hath he gotten hym selfe the victory.
The Lord declared hys saluacyon, his ryghteousnes hath he openly shewed in the syght of the Heathen.
He hath remembred hys mercy and trueth towarde the house of Israel: and all the endes of the worlde haue sene the saluacyon of oure God.
Shewe youre selues ioyfull vnto the Lorde all ye landes, synge, reioyse, and geue thankes.
Prayse the Lorde vpon the harpe, synge to the harpe wyth a psalme of thanckesgeuyng.
With trompettes also and shawmes: O shewe youre selues ioyfull before the Lorde the kynge.
Let the see make a noyse and all that therin is, the rounde worlde, and they that dwell therin.
Let the floudes clappe their handes, and let the hylles be ioyfull together. Before the Lord, for he is come to iudge the earth. Wyth ryghteousnes shall he iudge the worlde, Ꟶ the people with equite.
The Lorde is kynge, be the people neuer so vnpacient: he sytteth betwene the Cherubins, be the earth neuer so vnquiet.
The Lorde is greate in Sion, and hye aboue all people.
They shall geue thankes vnto thy name, which is great, wonderfull Ꟶ holy.
The kynges power loueth iudgement, thou hast prepared equyte, thou hast executed iudgment and ryghteousnes in Iacob.
O magnifye the Lorde oure God, and fall downe before his fote stole, for he is holy.
Moses and Aaron among his preastes, and Samuel amonge soche as call vpon hys name: these called vpon the Lorde, and he hearde them.
He spake vnto them out of the cloudy pyller, for they kepte hys testimonyes, and the lawe that he gaue them.
Thou heardest them (O Lord oure God) thou forgauest them O God, and punyshedst theyr awne inuencyons.
O magnifye the Lorde oure God, and worshippe him vpon his holy hyll, for the Lorde oure God is holy.
A Psalme for thankes geuynge. O be ioyfull in the Lorde (all ye landes) serue the Lorde with gladnes, and come before hys presence with a songe.
Be ye sure, that the Lorde he is God:
It is he that hath made vs, and not we oure selues: we are his people, and the shepe of his pasture.
O go youre waye into hys gates with thanckesgeuyng, and into his courtes wyth prayse: be thankfull vnto hym, and speake good of hys name.
For the Lorde is gracyous, hys mercy is euerlastynge, and his treuth endureth from generacion to generacion.
A Psalme of Dauid. My songe shalbe of mercy and iudgment: vnto the (O Lord) will I synge.
O let me haue vnderstandynge in the waye of godlynesse: Whan wylt thou come vnto me? I wyll walcke in my house with a perfecte herte.
I wyll take no wicked thinge in hand. I hate the synnes of vnfaythfulnesse, there shall no soch cleue vnto me.
A frowarde herte shall departe fro me, I wyll not knowe a wycked personne.
Who so preuely slaundreth hys neyghboure, hym will I destroye: Who so hath also a proude loke and an hye stomack, I wyll not suffre hym.
Myne eyes loke vnto soch as be faithfull in the lande, that they maye dwell with me: who so leadeth a godly lyfe, he shalbe my seruaunt.
There shall no disceatfull personne dwell in my house: he that telleth lyes, shall not tary in my syght.
I shall soone destroye all the vngodly that are in the lande, that I maye rote out all wycked doers from the cytie of the Lorde.
A prayer of the afflyct, when he hath an heuy hart, and powereth out hys complaynte before the Lorde. Heare my prayer, O Lorde, and lett my cryenge come in vnto the.
Hyde not thy face fro me in the tyme of my trouble: enclyne thyne eares vnto me when I call, O heare me, and that ryght soone.
For my dayes are consumed awaye lyke smoke, and my bones are brent vp, as it were a fyre brande.
My hert is smytten downe and wythered lyke grasse, so that I forget to eate my bred.
For the voyce of my gronynge, my bone wyll scarse cleue to my flesh.
I am become lyke a Pellycane of the wildernes, and lyke an owle that is in the deserte.
I haue watched, Ꟶ am euen as it were a sparow, that sitteth alone vpon the house toppe.
Myne enemyes reuyle me all the daye longe: Ꟶ they that are madd vpon me, are sworne together agaynst me.
For I haue eaten ashes as at were bred, and mengled my drynck with wepynge.
And that because of thyne indignacyon Ꟶ wrath, for thou hast taken me vp, Ꟶ cast me downe.
My dayes are gone lyke a shadowe, and I am wythered lyke grasse.
But thou, O Lord, shalt endure for euer, and thy remembraunce thorow out all generacyons.
Thou shalt aryse, Ꟶ haue mercy vpon Sion, for it is tyme that thou haue mercy vpon her, yee the tyme is come.
And why: thy seruauntes thinck vpon her stones, and it pitieth them to se her in the dust.
The Heathen shall feare thy name, O Lord, Ꟶ all the kynges of the earth thy maiesty.
Whan the Lord shall buylde vp Sion, and whan his glory shal apeare:
Whan he turneth him vnto the prayer of the poore destitute, Ꟶ despyseth not theyr desyre.
This shalbe wrytten for those that come after: Ꟶ the people which shalbe borne, shall prayse the Lord.
For he hath loked downe from his Sanctuary, out of the heauen dyd the Lorde beholde the earth.
That he might heare the mournynges of soch as be in captiuite, and delyuer the chyldren appoynted vnto death.
That they maye declare the name of the Lorde in Sion, and his worshipe at Ierusalem:
When the people are gathered together, Ꟶ the kyngdomes also to serue the Lorde.
He brought downe my strength in my iourney, and shortened my dayes.
But I sayed: O my God, take me not awaye in the myddest of myne age: as for thy yeares, they endure thorow out all generacions.
Thou Lorde in the begynnyng hast layed the foundacyon of the earth, and the heauens are the worcke of thy handes.
They shall perishe, but thou shalt endure: they all shall wexe olde as doth a garment,
and as a vesture shalt thou chaunge them, and they shalbe chaunged. But thou art the same, and thy yeares shall not fayle.
The children of thy seruauntes shall contynue, Ꟶ their sede shall stonde fast in thy syght.
Of Dauid. Prayse the Lord, O my soule, and all that is wtin me prayse his holy name.
Prayse the Lorde, O my soule, and forget not all hys benefytes.
Whych forgeueth all thy synne, Ꟶ healeth all thyn infirmities.
Which saueth thy lyfe from destruccyon, and crowneth the with mercy and louynge kyndnesse.
Whych satisfyeth thy mouth wyth good thynges, makyng the yonge and lusty as an Aegle.
The Lorde executeth ryghteousnesse and iudgment, for all them that are oppressed with wronge.
He shewed hys wayes vnto Moses, hys worckes vnto the chyldren of Israel.
The Lord is full of compassyon Ꟶ mercy, longe sufferyng, and of great goodnesse.
He will not allwaye be chydynge, nether kepeth he his anger for euer.
He hath not dealt with vs after oure synnes, ner rewarded vs according to oure wyckednesses.
For loke how hye the heauen is in comparison of the earth, so greate is hys mercy also towarde them that feare him.
Loke how wyde also the east is from the west, so farre hath he set oure synnes from vs.
Yee like as a father pitieth his awne children, euen so is the Lorde mercyfull vnto them that feare him.
For he knoweth wherof we be made, he remembreth that we are but dust.
The dayes of man are but as grasse, for he florisheth as a floure of the felde.
For as soone as the wynde goeth ouer it, it is gone, and the place therof shall knowe it nomore.
But the mercyful goodnesse of the Lorde endureth for euer Ꟶ euer, vpon them that feare him, Ꟶ hys ryghteousnesse vpon chylders chyldren.
Euen vpon soch as kepe his couenaunt, Ꟶ thincke vpon hys commaundementes to do them.
The Lord hath prepared hys seate in heauen, and kis kyngdome ruleth ouer all.
O prayse the Lorde ye angels of his, ye that excell in strength: ye that fulfyll his commaundement, Ꟶ herken vnto the voyce of his wordes.
O prayse the Lord all ye his Hostes, ye seruauntes of his, that do his pleasure.
O speake good of the Lord all ye workes of his, in all places of his dominion: prayse thou the Lorde, O my soule.
Prayse the Lord O my soule: O Lord my God, thou art become exceadynge glorious, thou art clothed with maiesty and honoure.
Thou deckest thy selfe with lyght, as it were with a garment, and spredest out the heauens lyke a curtayne.
Which layeth the beames of his chambers in the waters, Ꟶ maketh the cloudes his charet, Ꟶ walketh vpon the wynges of the wynde.
He maketh his angels spretes, and his mynisters a flamynge fyre.
He layed the foundacyon of the earth, that it neuer shulde moue at eny tyme.
Thou coueredst it wt the depe lyke as wyth a garment: the waters stande in the hylles.
At thy rebuke they flye, at the voyce of thy thonder they are afrayed.
They go vp as hye as the hylles, and downe to the valleys beneth: euen vnto the place, which thou hast appoynted for them.
Thou hast set them their boundes, which they shall not passe: nether turne agayne to couer the earth.
He sendeth the springes into the ryuers, which runne among the hylles.
All beastes of the felde dryncke therof: and the wylde asses quench theyr thyrste.
Besyde them shall the foules of the ayre haue theyr habitacyon, Ꟶ synge amonge the braunches.
He watreth the hylles from aboue, the earth is fylled wyth the frute of thy worckes.
He bryngeth forth grasse for the cattell, and grene herbe for the seruice of men:
that he maye brynge fode out of the earth: and wyne that maketh glad the herte of man, and oyle to make him a chearfull countenaunce, and bred to strength mans herte.
The trees of the Lord also are full of sappe, euen the Cedres of Libanus which he hath planted.
Wherin the byrdes make their nestes, and the fyrre trees are a dwellyng for the storcke.
The hye hilles are a refuge for the wilde goates, and so are the stony rockes for the conyes.
He appoynted the Moone for certayne seasons, and the Sunne knoweth hys goynge downe.
Thou makest darcknesse, that it maye be night, wherin all the beastes of the forest do moue.
The lyons roaring after their praye to seke theyr meate at God.
The sunne aryseth, and they get them awaye together, and lye them downe in their dennes.
Man goeth forth to his worcke, and to hys laboure vntyll the euenyng.
O Lorde, how manifolde are thy worckes? in wysdome hast thou made them all: the earth is full of thy ryches.
So is this greate and wyde see also, wherin are thynges crepynge innumerable, both small and greate beastes.
There go the shippes, and there is that Leuiathan, whom thou hast made, to take hys pastyme therin.
These wayte all vpon the, that thou mayest geue them meate in due season.
When thou geuest it them, they gather it: and when thou openest thyne hand, they are fylled with good.
When thou hydest thy face, they are troubled: whan thou takest awaye their breth, they dye, and are turned agayne to their dust.
When thou lettest thy breth goo forth, they shalbe mad, and thou shalt renue the face of the earth.
The glorious maiesty of the Lord shall endure for euer, the Lorde shall reioyse in hys worckes.
The earth shall tremble at the loke of hym: yf he do but touch the hylles, they shall smoke.
I wyll synge vnto the Lorde as longe as I lyue, I will prayse my God whyle I haue my beynge.
And so shall my wordes please him: my ioye shalbe in the Lorde.
As for synners, they shalbe consumed out of the earth, and the vngodly shall come to an ende: prayse thou the Lorde, O my soule. Prayse the Lorde.
O geue thankes vnto the Lorde, and cal vpon hys name: tell the people, what thynges he hath done.
O let your songes be of hym: and prayse hym, and let youre talkynge be of all hys wonderous worckes.
Reioyse in his holy name, let the hert of them reioyse, that seke the Lorde.
Seke the Lord, and his strength, seke his face euermore.
Remembre the maruelous worckes that he hath done, his wonders and the iudgmentes of his mouth.
O ye sede of Abraham his seruaunt, ye chyldren of Iacob his chosen.
He is the Lorde oure God: his iudgementes are in all the worlde.
He hath bene alwaye myndfull of hys couenaunt, and promyse that he made to a thousand generacions.
Euen the couenaunt that he made with Abraham, and the ooth that he sware vnto Isahac.
And apoynted the same vnto Iacob for a lawe, and to Israel for an euerlastynge testament.
Sayenge: vnto the wyll I geue the lande of Canaan, the lot of youre inherytaunce.
When there was yet but a fewe of them, and they straungers in the lande.
What tyme as they went from one nacion to another, from one kyngdome to another people.
He suffred no man to do them wrong, but reproued euen kynges for their sakes.
Touch not myne anoynted, Ꟶ do my prophetes no harme.
Morouer, he called for a darth vpon the lande, and destroyed all the prouisyon of bread.
But he had sent a man before them, euen Ioseph whych was solde to be a bonde seruaunt.
Whose fete they hurt in the stockes the yron entred into his soule.
Untill the tyme came that his cause was knowne, the worde of the Lord tryed him.
The kyng sent and delyuered him: the prince of the people let him go fre.
He made him Lorde also his of house, and ruler of all his substaunce.
That he might enfourme his princes after his will, Ꟶ teach his Senatours wysdome.
Israel also came into Egypte, and Iacob was a straunger in the land of Ham.
And he increased his people exceadingly, and made them stronger then their enemies.
Whose hert turned, so that they hated his people, Ꟶ dealt vntruly with his seruauntes.
Then sent he Moses his seruaunt, and Aaron, whom he had chosen.
And these shewed his tokens amonge them, and wonders in the lande of Ham.
He sent darcknesse, Ꟶ it was darcke, and they were not obedyent vnto hys worde.
He turned theyr waters into bloude, and slewe their fyshe.
Their land brought forth frogges, yee euen in their kynges chambers.
He spake the worde, and their came all maner of flyes, and lyce in all their quarters.
He gaue them hayle stones for rayne, and flammes of fyre in their lande.
He smote these vines also and fyge trees, Ꟶ destroyed the trees that were in their coastes.
He spake the worde, and the greshoppers came, Ꟶ catyrpyllers innumerable.
And dyd eate vp all the grasse in their land, and deuoured the frute of their grounde.
He smote all the fyrst borne in their lande, euen the chefe of all theyr strength.
He brought them forth also wt syluer and golde, there was not one feble persone among their trybes.
Egypte was glad at their departyng, for they were afrayed of them.
He spred out a cloude to be a coueryng, and fyre to geue lyght in the nightceason.
At their desyre, he brought quayles, and he fylled them with the bread of heauen.
He opened the rocke of stone, and the waters flowed out: so that ryuers ranne in the drye places.
For why? he remembred hys holy promes, and Abraham his seruaunt.
And he brought forth his people with ioye, and his chosen wt gladnesse.
And gaue them the landes of the Heathen, and they toke the labours of the people in possessyon.
That they myght kepe hys statutes, and obserue hys lawes. Prayse the Lorde.
Prayse the Lorde. O geue thancke vnto the Lorde, for he is gracyous, and his mercy endureth for euer.
Who can expresse the noble actes of the Lorde or shewe forth all hys prayse?
Blessed are they that allwaye kepe iudgement, and do ryghteousnes.
Remembre me, O Lorde, accordynge to the fauoure that thou bearest vnto thy people: O vyset me wyth thy saluacyon.
That I maye se the felicite of thy chosen, and reioyse in the gladnesse of thy people, Ꟶ geue thankes wyth thyne enherytaunce.
We haue synned wyth oure fathers, we haue done amysse, and dealt wyckedly.
Oure fathers regarded not thy wonders in Egypte, nether kepte they thy greate goodnesse in remembraunce: but were disobedient at the see, euen at the reed see.
Neuertheles, he helped them for hys names sake, that he myght make hys power to be knowne.
He rebuked the reed see also, Ꟶ it was dryed vp: so he ledd them thorow the depe as thorow a wyldernesse.
And he saued them from the aduersaries hande, and delyuered them from the hande of the enemye.
As for those that troubled them, the waters ouerwhelmed them, there was not one of them left.
Then beleued they hys wordes, and sange prayse vnto hym.
But wythin a whyle they forgat hys worckes, Ꟶ wolde not abyde hys councell.
But lust came vpon them in the wildernesse, and they tempted God in the deserte.
And he gaue them their desyre, and sent leanesse withall in to their soule.
They angred Moses also in the tentes, and Aaron the sayncte of the Lorde.
So the earth opened, and swalowed vp Dathan, Ꟶ couered the congregacion of Abiram.
And the fyre was kyndled in their company, the flame brent vp the vngodly.
They made a calfe in Horeb, and worshipped the molten ymage.
Thus they turned their glory into the similitude of a calfe, that eateth haye.
And they forgat God their Sauioure, which had done so greate thynges in Egipte.
Wonderous worckes in the lande of Ham, and fearfull thinges by the reed see.
So he sayd he wolde haue destroyed them, had not Moses his chosen stande before hym in that gappe: to turne awaye his wrathful indignacion, lest he shulde destroye them.
Yee they thought scorne of that pleasaunt lande, and gaue no credence vnto his word.
But murmured in their tentes, and herkened not vnto the voyce of the Lorde.
Then lyft he vp his hand agaynst them, to ouerthrowe them in the wildernes.
To cast out their sede amonge the nacions, and to scater them in the landes.
They ioyned them selues vnto Baal Peor, and eate the offeringes of the deed.
Thus they prouoked him vnto anger with their awne inuencions and the plage was greate amonge them.
Then stode vp Phinehes and prayed, Ꟶ so the plage ceased.
And that was counted vnto him for righteousnesse, amonge all posterites for euermore.
They angered him also at the waters of stryfe, so that he punyshed Moses for their sakes.
Because they prouoked his sprete, so that he spake vnaduisedly with his lyppes.
Nether destroyed they the Heathen, as the Lorde commaunded them.
But were myngled among the Heathen, and lerned their worckes.
In so moch that they worshipped their ydoles, which turned to their awne decaye.
Yee they offred their sonnes and their daughters vnto deuel
And shed innocent bloude, euen the bloude of their sonnes Ꟶ of their daughters, whom they offred vnto the ydoles of Canaan, and the lande was defyled with bloud.
Thus were they stayned with their awne worckes, and went a whorynge wyth their awne inuencions.
Therfore was the wrath of the Lorde kynled agaynst hys people, in so moch that he abhorred hys awne enheritaunce.
And he gaue them ouer into the hande of the Heathen, and they that hated them, were lordes ouer them.
Their enemyes oppressed them, and had them in subieccion.
Many a tyme did he delyuer them, but they rebelled agaynst him with their awne inuencions, Ꟶ were brought downe in their wyckednesse.
Neuerthelesse, when he sawe their aduersyte, he herde their complaynte.
He thought vpon his couenaunt, Ꟶ pytied them, accordyng vnto the multitude of his mercyes.
Yee he made all those that had ledd them awaye captiue, to pytie them.
Delyuer vs (O Lorde oure God) and gather vs from amonge the Heathen: that we maye geue thanckes to thy holy name, Ꟶ make oure boast of thy prayse.
Blessed be the Lorde God of Israel from euerlastyng and worlde without ende, Ꟶ let all people saye: Amen, Amen. Prayse the Lord
O geue thanckes vnto the Lord, for he is gracyous, and his mercy endureth for euer.
Let them geue thanckes whom the Lorde hath redemed, and delyuered from the hande of the enemye.
And gathered them out of the landes, from the East, and from the west, from the North and from the South.
They went a straye in the wildernesse out of the waye, Ꟶ founde no citie to dwel in.
Hongrie Ꟶ thirstye: their soule faynted in them.
So they cryed vnto the Lorde in their trouble, and he delyuered them from their distresse.
He led them forth by the ryght waye, that they myght go to the cytie where they dwelt.
O that men wolde therfor prayse the Lorde, for his goodnes, and declare the wonders that he doth for the chyldren of men.
For he satisfyed the emptie soule, and filled the hongrye soule with goodnesse.
Soch as syt in darcknesse Ꟶ in the shadow of death, beyng fast bound in mysery Ꟶ yron.
Because they rebelled agaynst the wordes of the Lorde, and lyghtly regarded the councell of the most hyghest,
He also brought downe their hart thorow heuinesse: they fell downe, Ꟶ there was noue to helpe them.
So whan they cried vnto the Lord in their trouble, he deliuered them out of their distresse
For he brought them out of darcknesse Ꟶ out of the shadow of death, Ꟶ brake their bondes in sonder.
O that men wold therfore prayse the Lorde for hys goodnesse: Ꟶ declare the wonders that he doth for the children of men.
For he hath broken the gates of brasse, and smytten the barres of yron in sonder,
Folysh men are plaged for their offence, Ꟶ because of their wyckednesse.
Their soule abhorred all maner of meat, and they were euen hard at deathes dore.
So whan they cryed vnto the Lord in their trouble, he delyuered them out of their dystresse.
He sent his word, and healed them, and they were saued from their destruccion.
O that men wold therfore prayse the Lorde for hys goodnesse, and declare the wonders that he doth for the chyldren of men.
That they wold offre vnto hym the sacrifyce of thanckesgeuyng, and tell out hys worckes wt gladnes.
They that go downe to the see in shyppes, and occupie their busynesse in great waters.
These men se the worckes of the Lord, and his wonders in the deape.
For at his word, the stormy wynd ariseth, which lyfteth vp the waues therof.
They are caryed vp to the heauen, and downe agayne to the deape, their soule melteth awaye because of the trouble.
They rele to and fro, and stacker lyke a droncken man, Ꟶ are at their wittes ende.
So whan they crye vnto the Lord in their trouble, he delyuereth them out of their distresse.
For he maketh the storme to ceasse, so that the waues therof are styll.
Then are they glad because they be at rest, and so he bryngeth them vnto the hauen where they wolde be.
O that men wold therfore prayse the Lorde for hys goodnes, and declare the wondres that he doth for the children of men.
That they wolde exalte him also in the congregacion of the people, and loaue him in the seat of the elders.
Which turneth the floudes into a wildernesse: and dryeth vp the water sprynges.
A frutefull lande maketh he baren, for the wyckednesse of them that dwell therin.
Agayne, he maketh the wildernes a standynge water, and water sprynges of a drye ground.
And there he setteth the hongrie, that they maye buylde them a cytie to dwell in
That they maye sowe their londe, and plante vyneyardes, to yelde them frutes of increase.
He blesseth them, so that they multiplye exceadingly, and suffreth not their catell to decrease.
And agayne: when they are minished and brought lowe thorow oppression, thorow eny plag or trouble.
Though he suffre them to be euell intreated thorowe tyrauntes, and lett them wandre out of the waye in the wildernesse.
Yet helpeth he the poore out of misery, Ꟶ maketh him housholdes lyke a flocke of shepe.
The ryghteous wyll consydre this, and reioyse, Ꟶ the mouth of all wyckednesse shall be stopped.
Who so is wyse, wyll pondre these thynges: and they shall vnderstand the louyng kyndnesses of the Lord.
A songe and a Psalme of Dauid. O god my hert is ready I will synge, and geue prayse, wt the best membre that I haue.
Awake thou lute and harpe, I my selfe wyll awake ryght early.
I will geue thanckes vnto the (O Lorde) among the people, I wyll synge prayses vnto the among the nacions.
For thy mercy is greater then the heauens and thy trueth reacheth vnto the cloudes.
Set vp thy selfe (O God) aboue the heauens, and thy glory aboue all the earth.
That thy beloued maye be delyuered: let thy ryght hande saue them, and heare thou me.
God hath spoken in his holynes, I wyll reioyse. therfore, and deuyde Sichem, and meete out the valley of Suchoth.
Gilead is myne, and Manasses is myne, Ephraim also is the strength of my head,
Iuda is my lawgeuer. Moab is my washpotte, ouer Edom will I cast out my shoe: vpon Philistea will I triumphe.
Who wyll leade me in to the stronge cytie? And who wyll bryng me in to Edom?
Hast not thou forsaken vs (O God)? And wilt not thou God, go forth with oure hostes?
O helpe vs agaynst the enemye: for vayne is the helpe of man.
Thorow God we shall do great actes: Ꟶ it is he, that shall treade downe our enemyes.
To the chaunter, a Psalme of Dauid Holde not thy tonge (O God) of my prayse. For the mouth of the vngodly, yee and the mouth of the disceatfull is opened vpon me,
Ꟶ they haue spoken against me with false tonges. They compased me about also with wordes of hatred, Ꟶ fought agaynst me without a cause.
For the loue that I had vnto them, lo, they take now my contrary part, but I geue my self vnto prayer.
Thus haue they rewarded me euell for good, and hatred for my good wyll.
Set thou an vngodly man to be ruler ouer hym, and let Satan stande at his ryght hande.
When sentence is geuen vpon him, let him be condemned, and let his prayer be turned into synne.
Let his dayes be few, and let another take his office.
Let his chyldren be fatherlesse, and his wyfe a wydow.
Let his children be vagaboundes, Ꟶ begg their bred: lett them seke it also out of desolate places.
Let the extorcioner consume all that he hath, and let straungers spoyle his laboure.
Let there be no man to petye hym, ner to haue compassyon vpon his fatherlesse chyldren.
Let his posterite be destroyed, and in the next generacyon let hys name be cleane put out.
Let the wickednesse of hys fathers be had in remembraunce in the syght of the Lorde, and let not the synne of his mother be done awaye.
Let them alwaye be before the Lorde, that he maye rote out the memoriall of them from of the earth.
And that because hys mynde was not to do good, but persecuted the poore helplesse man, that he myght slaye him, that was vexed at the hert
His delyte was in cursyng, Ꟶ it shall happen vnto him: he loued not blessyng, therfore shall it be farre from him.
He clothed him self with cursyng lyke as with a rayment: Ꟶ it shall come in to his bowels lyke water, and lyke oyle in to hys bones.
Lett it be vnto him as the cloke that he hath vpon him, and as the gyrdle that he is allwaye gyrded wt all.
Let it thus happen from the Lorde vnto myne enemyes, and to those that speake euell agaynst my soule.
But deale thou wt me (O Lorde God) accordyng vnto thy name, for swete is thy mercy.
O delyuer me, for I am helplesse and poore, Ꟶ my hert is wounded within me.
I go hence lyke the shadow that departeth, and am dryuen awaye as the greshopper.
My knees are weake thorow fastyng, my flesh is dryed vp for want of fatnesse.
I became also a rebuke vnto them: they that loked vpon me, shaked their heades.
Helpe me (O Lord my God) oh saue me accordynge to thy mercye.
And they shall know, how that thys is thy hand, and that thou Lord hast done it.
Though they curse, yet blesse thou:
and let them be confounded, that ryse vp agaynst me, but let thy seruaunt reioyse.
Lett myne aduersaryes be clothed with shame: and let them couer them selues wt their owne confusion, as wt a cloake.
As for me, I wyll geue great thanckes vnto the Lorde with my mouth, and prayse him among the multitude.
For he shall stand at the ryght hand of the poore, to saue his soule from vnryghteous iudges.
A Psalme of Dauid. The Lorde sayde vnto my Lorde: Syt thou on my ryght hand, vntill I make thine enemyes thy fotestole.
The Lord shall sende the rodde of thy power out of Sion, be thou ruler euen in the myddest among thyne enemyes.
In the daye of thy power shall thy people offre the frewyll offrynges wt an holy worshippe, the dewe of thy byrth is of the wombe of the mornyng.
The Lord sware, Ꟶ wyll not repent: Thou art a prest for euer after the order of Melchisedec.
The Lorde vpon thy ryght hande, shall wounde euen kynges in the daye of his wrath.
He shall be iudge among the Heathen, he shall fyll the places with deed bodyes, Ꟶ smyte a sonder the heades ouer diuerse countres.
He shall dryncke of the broke in the waye, therfore shall he lyft vp his head.
Prayse the Lorde. I Wyll geue thanckes vnto the Lord with my whole hert: secretly among the faithfull, and in the congregacion.
The worckes of the Lorde are great, sought out of all them that haue pleasure therin.
His worcke is worthy to be praysed Ꟶ had in honoure, and his ryghteousnesse endureth for euer.
The mercyfull Ꟶ gracyous Lorde hath so done his maruelous workes, that they ought to be had in remembraunce.
He hath geuen meat vnto them that feare him, he shal euer be mindfull of hys couenaunt.
He hath shewed his people the power of his worckes, that he maye geue them the herytage of the Heathen.
The worckes of his handes are veryte Ꟶ iudgement, all his commaundmentes are true.
They stand fast for euer and euer, and are done in trueth and equite.
He sent redempcyon vnto his people, he hath commaunded his couenaunt for euer, holy and reuerent is his name.
The feare of the Lorde is the begynning of wisdome, a good vnderstandyng haue all they that do therafter: the prayse of it endureth for euer.
Prayse the Lorde. Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, he hath great delyte in hys commaundmentes.
His sede shall be myghtye vpon earth: the generacyon of the faytfull shalbe blessed:
Ryches and plenteousnesse shalbe in hys house, and his ryghteousnes endureth for euer.
Unto the godly there aryseth vp lyght in the darcknesse he is mercyfull, louyng and ryghteous.
A good man is mercyfull, and lendeth: and wyll gyde his wordes wt discrecion.
For he shall neuer be moued: and the ryghteous shall be had in an euerlasting remembraunce.
He will not be afrayed for eny euell tydinges, for his hert standeth fast, and beleueth in in the Lord.
His hert is stablished: Ꟶ will not shryncke, vntill he se his desyre vpon his enemyes.
He hath sparsed abroad, and geuen to the poore: and his ryghteousnes remayneth for euer, hys horne shalbe exalted wyth honoure.
The vngodly shall se it, and it shall greue him: he shall gnash with his teeth, Ꟶ consume awaye: the desyre of the vngodly shall perysh.
Prayse the Lorde. Prayse the Lord (ye seruauntes) O prayse the name of the Lorde.
Blessed be the name of the Lorde, from thys tyme forth for euermore.
The Lordes name is praysed, from the risyng vp of the Sunne vnto the goynge downe of the same.
The Lord is hye aboue all Heathen, and his glory aboue the heauens.
Who is lyke vnto the Lorde oure God, that hath hys dwellyng so hye,
Ꟶ yet humbleth him self, to behold the thynges that are in heauen Ꟶ earth?
He taketh vp the simple out of the dust, and lyfteth the poore out of the myre.
That he maye sett him with the princes, euen with the prynces of his people.
He maketh the baren woman to kepe house, and to be a ioyfull mother of children. Prayse the Lorde.
When Israel came out of Egypt, and the house of Iacob from amonge that straung people.
Iuda was his Sanctuary, and Israell his domynion.
The see sawe that, and fled Iordan was dryuen backe.
The mountaynes skipped lyke rammes, and the lytle hilles lyke yonge shepe.
What ayleth the, O thou see, that thou fleddest? and thou Iordan, that thou wast dryuen backe?
Ye mountaynes, that ye skypped lyke rammes: Ꟶ ye lytle hylles, lyke yong shepe?
Tremble thou erth at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Iacob.
Which turned the hard rocke in to a standynge water, and the flynt stone into a spryngynge well.
Not vnto vs (O Lorde) not vnto vs, but vnto thy name geue the prayse, for thy louing mercy, Ꟶ for thy truthes sake.
Wherfore shall the Heathen saye: where is now their God?
As for oure God, he is in heauen, he hath done whatsoeuer pleased him.
Their ydoles are syluer and gold, euen the worcke of mens handes.
They haue mouth, and speake not: eyes haue they, and se not.
They haue eares, Ꟶ heare not: noses haue they, and smell not.
They haue handes and handle not: fete haue they, and walke not, nether speake they thorow their throte.
They that make them, are lyke vnto them, and so are all soch as put their trust in them.
But Israel trust thou in the Lord, he his their succoure Ꟶ defence.
Ye house of Aaron put youre trust in the Lorde: he is their helper, and defender.
Ye that feare the Lorde, put youre trust in the Lord, he is their helper and defender.
The Lorde hath bene myndfull of vs, and he shall blesse vs: euen he shall blesse the house of Israel, he shall blesse the house of Aaron.
He shall blesse them that feare the Lorde, both small and great.
The Lorde shall encrease you more and more: you, Ꟶ youre children.
Ye are the blessed of the Lord, which made heauen Ꟶ earth.
All the whole heauens are the Lordes, the earth hath he geuen vnto the children of men.
The deed prayse not the (O Lord) nether all they that go downe in to the sylence.
But we wyll prayse the Lorde, from thys tyme forth for euermore. Prayse the Lorde.
I Am well pleased, that the Lorde hath herd the voyce of my prayer.
That he hath enclined his eare vnto me, therfore will I call vpon him as longe as I lyue.
The snares of death compased me round about, and the paynes of hell gat hold vpon me,
I shall fynde trouble and heuynesse, and I shall call vpon the name of the Lorde (O Lord) I besech the delyuer my soule.
Gracious is the Lorde, and ryghteous, yee oure God is mercyfull.
The Lord preserueth the symple: I was in mysery, and he helped me.
Turne agayne then vnto thy rest, O my soule, for the Lorde hath rewarded the.
And why thou hast delyuered my soule from death, mine eyes from teares, and my fete from fallyng.
I will walcke before the Lord, in the land of the lyuyng.
I beleued, and therfore wyll I speake, but I was sore troubled.
I sayd in my hast: All men are lyers.
What reward shall I geue vnto the Lorde, for all the benefytes that he hath done vnto me?
I wyll receaue the cuppe of saluacion, and call vpon the name of the Lord.
I wyll paye my vowes now in the presence of all his people, ryght deare in the syght of the Lorde is the death of hys saynctes.
Behold (O Lorde) how that I am thy seruaunt: I am thy seruaunt,
and the sonne of thy handmayde, thou hast broken my bondes in sonder.
I wyll offre to the, the sacrifyce of thanckesgeuynge, and wyll call vpon the name of the Lord.
I wyll paye my vowes vnto the Lord in the syght of all his people,
in the courtes of the Lordes house, euen in the myddest of the, O Ierusalem. Prayse the Lorde.
O prayse the Lord all ye Heithen, prayse him all ye nacions.
For his mercyfull kyndnes is euermore and more toward vs, and the truth of the Lord endureth for euer. Prayse the Lorde.
O geue thanckes vnto the Lorde, for he hys gracious, because hys mercy endureth for euer.
Let Israel now confesse, that his mercy endureth for euer.
Let the house of Aaron now confesse, that his mercy endureth for euer.
Yee let them now that feare the Lord confesse, that his mercy endureth for euer.
I called vpon the Lord in trouble, and the Lord herd me at large.
The Lord is on my syde, I wyll not feare what man doeth vnto me.
The Lorde taketh my parte wt them that help me: therfore shall I se my desyre vpon myne enemyes.
It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put eny confydence in man.
It is better to trust in the Lorde, then to put eny confydence in prynces.
All nacions compased me rounde about, but in the name of the Lorde will I destroy them.
They kept me in on euery syde, they kept me in (I saye) on euery syde, but in the name of the Lorde, I wyll destroye them.
They came aboute me lyke bees, and are extincte, euen as the fyre amonge the thornes, for in the name of the Lorde I wyl destroye them.
Thou hast thrust sore at me, that I myght fall, but the Lorde was my helpe.
The Lorde is my strength, Ꟶ my songe, and is become my saluacion.
The voyce of ioye and health is in the dwellynges of the ryghteous: the ryght hande of the Lorde bryngeth myghtye thynges to passe.
The ryght hande of the Lorde hath the preeminence, the ryght hande of the Lorde bryngeth mightie thynges to passe.
I wyll not dye, but lyue, and declare the workes of the Lorde.
The Lorde hath chastened Ꟶ correcte me, but he hath not geuen me ouer vnto death.
Open me the gates of righteousnes, that I may go into them, Ꟶ geue thankes vnto the Lorde.
Thys is the gate of the Lorde, the ryghteous shal entre into it.
I wyl thanke the, for thou hast herde me, and arte become my saluacion.
The same stone whyche the buylders refused, is become the heade stone in the corner.
Thys was the Lordes doynge, and it is maruelous in oure eyes.
Thys is the daye, whych the Lorde hath made, we wyll reioyse and be glad in it.
Helpe now O Lorde, o Lorde, sende vs nowe prosperitie.
Blessed be he that commeth in the name of the Lorde, we haue wyshed you good lucke, ye that be of the house of the Lorde.
God is the Lorde, Whyche hath shewed vs lyght: bynde the sacrifice with coardes, yee euen vnto the hornes of the aulter
Thou arte my God, and I wyll thanke the: thou arte my God and I wyl prayse the.
O geue thankes vnto the Lorde, for he is gracious and hys mercye endureth for euer.
Blessed are those that be vndefyled in the waye: and walke in the lawe of the Lorde.
Blessed are they that kepe hys testimonies, and seke hym wyth theyr whole herte.
For they whych do no wyckednes, walke in hys wayes.
Thou hast charged that we shall diligently kepe thy commaundementes.
O that my wayes were made so directe, that I myght kepe thy statutes.
So shall I not be confounded, whyle I haue respecte vnto al thy commaundementes.
I wyl thanke the wyth an vnfayned herte, whan I shall haue learned the iudgementes of thy ryghteousnesse
I wyll kepe thy ceremonies, O forsake me not vtterly.
Where wyth all shall a yonge man clense hys waye? Euen by rulynge hymselfe after thy worde.
Wyth my whole herte haue I sought the. O let me not go wronge out of thy commaundementes.
Thy wordes haue I hyd wythin my herte, that I shulde not synne agaynst the.
Blessed art thou O Lorde, O teach me thy statutes.
Wyth my lyppes haue I bene tellynge of all the iudgementes of thy mouth.
I haue hadde as great delyte in the waye of thy testimonies, as in all maner of ryches.
I wyll talke of thy commaundementes, and haue respect vnto thy wayes.
My delyte shalbe in thy statutes, and I wyll not forget thy worde.
O do wel vnto thy seruaunt, that I may lyue and kepe thy worde.
Open thou mine eyes, that I maye se the wonderous thinges of thy lawe.
I am a straunger vpon earth, O hyde not thy commaundementes from me.
My soule breaketh out, for the very feruent desyre that it hath alway vnto thy iudgementes.
Thou hast rebuked the proude, and cursed are they that do erre from thy commaundementes.
O turne fro me shame and rebuke, for I haue kept thy testimonies.
Prynces also dyd sytte Ꟶ speake agaynst me, but thy seruaunt is occupied in thy statutes.
For thy testimonies are my delyte, and my councelers.
My soule cleaueth to the dust, O quycken thou me accordynge to thy worde.
I haue knowledged my wayes, and thou herdest me, O teach me thy statutes.
Make me to vnderstande the waye of thy commaundementes, and so shall I talke of thy wonderous workes.
My soule melteth awaye for very heuynesse, comforte thou me accordyng vnto thy worde.
Take from me the way of lyeng, Ꟶ cause thou me to make much of thy lawe.
I haue chosen the waye of truth, and thy iudgementes haue I layed before me.
I haue stycken vnto thy testimonies, O Lorde confounde me not.
I wyll runne the waye of thy commaundementes, when thou hast set my herte at lybertie.
Teach me O Lorde the waye of thy statutes, and I shal kepe it vnto the ende.
Geue me vnderstandynge, and I shall kepe thy lawe, yee I shall kepe it wyth my whole herte.
Make me to go in the path of thy commaundementes, for therin is my desyre.
Enclyne my herte vnto thy testimonies, and not to couetousnesse.
O turne awaye myne eyes, lest they beholde vanitie: and quycken thou me in thy waye.
O stablysh thy worde in thy seruaunt that I maye feare the.
Take awaye the rebuke that I am afrayed of, for thy iudgementes are good.
Beholde, my delyte is in thy commaundementes, O quycken me in thy ryghteousnesse.
Let thy louynge mercy come also vnto me, O Lorde, euen thy saluacion accordyng vnto thy word.
So shal I make answere vnto my blasphemers, for my trust is in thy worde.
O take not the worde of treuth vtterly oute of my mouth, for my hope is in thy iudgementes.
So shall I alwaye kepe thy lawe, yee for euer Ꟶ euer.
And I will walke at liberty, for I seke thy commaundementes.
I wyll speake of thy testimonies also euen before kynges, Ꟶ wyll not be ashamed.
And my delite shalbe in thy commaundementes, which I haue loued.
My handes also wyll I lyfte vp vnto thy commaundementes whyche I haue loued, and my studye shalbe in thy statutes.
O, thincke vpon thy seruaunt as concernynge thy worde, wherin thou hast caused me to put my trust.
The same is my comforte in my trouble, for thy worde hath quyckned me.
The proude haue had me exceadyngly in derision yet haue I not shrynked from thy lawe.
For I remembred thyne euerlastynge iudgementes, O Lorde, and receaued conforte:
I am horriblye afrayed for the vngodly, that forsake thy lawe.
Thy statutes haue bene my songes, in the house of my pilgremage.
I haue thought vpon thy name, O Lorde, in the night season, and haue kept thy lawe.
Thys I hadde, because I kepte thy commaundementes.
Thou arte my porcion, O Lorde, I haue promysed to kepe thy lawe.
I made myne humble peticion in thy presence with my whole herte, O be mercyfull vnto me accordynge vnto thy worde.
I call myne owne wayes to remembraunce, and tourne my fete into thy testimonie
I made haste, and prolonged not the tyme, to kepe thy commaundementes.
The congregacions of the vngodly haue robbed me, but I haue not forgotten thy law.
At mydnyght wyll I ryse, to gyue thankes vnto the, bycause of thy ryghtuous iudgementes.
I am a companion of all them that feare the and kepe thy commaundementes.
The earth, O Lorde, is full of thy mercy. O teache me thy statutes.
O Lord, thou hast dealt graciously with thy seruaunt accordynge vnto thy worde.
O learne me true vnderstandynge, and knowledge, for I haue beleued thy commaundementes.
Before I was troubled, I went wronge, but nowe haue I kept thy worde.
Thou art good and gracious, O teach me thy statutes.
The proude haue ymagined a lye agaynst me, but I wyll kepe thy commaundementes wyth my whole herte.
Theyr herte is as fat as brawne, but my delyte hath bene in thy lawe:
It is good for me that I haue bene in trouble, that I maye learne thy statutes.
The lawe of thy mouth is dearer vnto me, then thousandes of golde and syluer.
Thy handes haue made me and fashioned me, O geue me vnderstandynge, that I maye learne thy commaundementes.
They that feare the, wyll be glad when they se me, because I haue put my trust in thy worde.
I knowe, O Lorde, thay thy iudgementes are ryght, Ꟶ that thou of very faythfulnesse haste caused me to be troubled.
O Let thy mercyfull kyndnesse be my comforte, accordyng to thy worde vnto thy seruaunte.
O let thy louynge mercyes come vnto me, that I may lyue, for thy lawe is my delyte.
Let the proude be confounded, for they go wyckedly aboute to destroye me: but I wyll be occupyed in thy commaundementes.
Let soch as feare the, and haue knowen thy testimonies, be turned vnto me.
O let myne herte be sounde in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed.
My soule hath longed for thy saluacion: and I haue a good hope because of thy worde.
Myne eyes longe sore for thy worde, sayenge. O whan wylte thou comforte me.
For I am become lyke a bottell in the smoke, yet do not I forget thy statutes.
How many are the dayes of thy seruaunt? when wylt thou be auenged of them that persecute me?
The proude haue dygged pyttes for me, whych are not after thy lawe.
All thy commaundementes are true, they persecute me falsly, O be thou my helpe.
They had almost made an ende of me vpon earth, but I forsoke not thy commaundementes.
O quycken me after thy louyng kyndnes, Ꟶ so shall I kepe the testimonies of thy mouth.
O Lorde, thy worde endureth for euer in heauen.
Thy truth also remayneth from one generacion to another: thou haste layed the foundacion of the earth, and it abydeth.
They continue thys daye accordynge to thyne ordinaunce, for all thynges serue the.
If my delyte had not bene in thy lawe, I shulde haue peryshed in my trouble.
I wyl neuer forget thy commaundementes, for with them thou hast quickened me.
I am thyne, Oh saue me, for I haue sought thy commaundementes.
The vngodly layed wayte for me to destroye me, but I wyll consyder thy testimonies.
I se that al thynges come to an ende, but thy commaundement is exceadynge broade.
What loue haue I vnto thy lawe? al the daye longe is my studye in it.
Thou thorow thy commaundementes hast made me wyser than myne enemyes, for they are euer with me.
I haue more vnderstandynge than my teachers, for thy testimonies are my studie.
I am wyser then the aged, bycause I kepte thy commaundementes.
I haue refrayned my fete from euery euel way, that I may kepe thy worde
I haue not shrynked from thy iudgementes, for thou teachest me.
O how swete are thy wordes vnto my throte? Yee sweter than hony vnto my mouth.
Thorowe thy commaundementes I get vnderstandynge, therfore I hate all wycked wayes.
Thy worde is a lanterne vnto my fete, and a lyght vnto my pathes.
I haue sworne and am stedfastly purposed, to kepe thy righteous iudgementes.
I am troubled aboue measure: quycken me, O Lorde, accordynge vnto thy worde.
Let the fre wyll offerynges of my mouth please the, O Lorde, and teache me thy iudgementes.
My soule is alwaye in my hande, yet do not I forget thy lawe.
The vngodly haue layed a snare for me, but yet swarued not I from thy commaundementes.
Thy testymonies haue I claymed as myne heritage for euer: and why? they are the very ioye of my hert.
I haue applied myne herte to fulfyll thy statutes alwaye, euen vnto the ende.
I hate them that ymagen euell thynges, but thy lawe do I loue.
Thou art my defence and shylde, and my trust is in thy worde.
Awaye fro me ye wycked, I will kepe the commaundementes of my God.
O stablishe me accordinge vnto thy worde, that I maye lyue, and let me not be disapoynted of my hope.
Holde thou me vp, and I shall be safe: yee my delite shall euer be in thy statutes.
Thou hast troden downe all them that departe from thy statutes, for they ymagin, but disceate.
Thou puttest awaye all the vngodly of the earth lyke drosse therfore I loue thy testimonyes.
My fleshe trembleth for feare of the, and I am afrayed of thy iudgementes.
I deale with the thynge that is laufull Ꟶ ryght, O geue me not ouer vnto myne oppressours.
Make thou thy seruaunt to delyte in that which is good, that the proude do me no wronge.
Myne eyes are wasted awaye with lokynge for thy health, and for the worde of thy ryghteousnesse.
O deale wyth thy seruaunt accordynge vnto thy louynge mercy, and teache me thy statutes.
I am thy seruaunt. O graunte me vnderstandinge, that I maye knowe thy testimonyes.
It is tyme for the Lorde to laye to thyne hande, for they haue destroyed thy lawe.
For I loue thy commaundementes aboue gold Ꟶ precious stone.
Therfore holde I streyght all thy commaundementes and all false wayes I vtterly abhorre.
Thy testimonyes are wonderfull, therfore doth my soule kepe them.
When thy worde goeth forth, it geueth lyght and vnderstandynge euen vnto the symple.
I opened my mouth and drewe in my breath, for my delyte was in thy commaundementes.
O loke thou vpon me, Ꟶ be mercyfull vnto me, as thou vsest to do vnto those that loue thy name.
Order my steppes in thy worde, and so shall no wyckednesse haue dominion ouer me.
O delyuer me from the wrongeous dealynges of men, and so shall I kepe thy commaundementes.
Shewe the lyght of thy countenaunce vpon thy seruaunt, and teache me thy statutes.
Myne eyes gusshe out wyth water, because men kepe not thy lawe.
Ryghteous art thou, O Lorde, and true is thy iudgement.
The testimonies that thou hast commaunded are exceadynge ryghteous and true.
My zele hath euen consumed me, because myne enemyes haue forgotten thy wordes.
Thy worde is tried to the vttermost, and thy seruaunte loueth it.
I am small and of no reputacyon, yet do not I forget thy commaundementes.
The righteousnesse is an euerlastinge righteousnes, and thy lawe is the trueth.
Trouble and heuynesse haue taken holde vpon me, yet is my delyte in thy commaundementes.
The ryghteousnesse of thy testimonyes is euerlastynge, O graunte me vnderstandynge, Ꟶ I shall lyue.
I call wt my whole hert, heare me, O Lord, I will kepe thy statutes.
Yee euen vpon the do I call, helpe me, and I shall kepe thy testimonies.
Early in the mornynge do I crye vnto the, for in thy word is my trust.
Myne eyes preuente the nyght watches, that I myggt be occupied in thy wordes.
Heare my voyce, O Lord, accordinge vnto thy louinge kyndnesse: quycken me accordynge as thou art wont.
They drawe nye that of malice persecute me, and are farre from thy lawe.
Be thou nye at hande, O Lorde, for all thy commaundementes are true.
As concernynge thy testimonyes, I haue knowne longe sens, that thou hast grounded them for euer.
O consydre myne aduersyte, and delyuer me, for I do not forget thy lawe
Auenge thou my cause, and delyuer me, quycken me accordynge vnto thy worde.
Health is farre from the vngodly, for they regarde not thy statutes.
Greate is thy mercy, O Lorde, quycken me as thou art wont.
Many there are that trouble me, and persecute me, yet do not I swarue from thy testimonyes.
It greueth me, when I se the transgressours: because they kepe not thy lawe.
Consydre, O Lorde, howe I loue thy commaundementes, O quycken me accordynge to thy louinge kyndnesse.
Thy worde is true from euerlastynge, all the iudgementes of thy ryghteousnesse endure for euer more.
Prynces haue persecuted me wythout cause, but my herte standeth in awe of thy wordes.
I am as glad of thy worde, as one that fyndeth greate spoyles.
As for lyes, I hate and abhorre them, but thy lawe do I loue.
Seuen tymes a daye do I prayse the, because of thy ryghteous iudgementes.
Greate is the peace that they haue whych loue thy lawe, and they are not offended at it.
Lord, I haue loked for thy sauynge health, and done after thy commaundementes.
My soule hath kept thy testimonyes, and loued them exceadyngly.
I haue kept thy commaundementes and testimonyes, for all my wayes are before the.
Let my complaynte come before the, O Lorde, geue me vnderstandynge, accordinge vnto thy worde.
Oh let my supplicacyon come before the, delyuer me accordynge to thy worde.
My lippes shall speake of thy prayse, whan thou hast taught me thy statutes.
Yee, my tonge shall synge of thy worde, for all thy commaundementes are ryghteous.
Let thyne hande helpe me, for I haue chosen thy commaundementes.
I haue longed for thy sauynge health, O Lord, and in thy lawe is my delite.
Oh let my soule lyue and it shall prayse the, and thy iudgementes shall helpe me.
I haue gone astraye, lyke a shepe that is lost: Oh seke thy seruaunt, for I do not forget thy commaundementes.
A songe of the steares. When I was in trouble, I called vpon the Lorde, and he hearde me.
Delyuer my soule, O Lorde, from lyenge lyppes, and from a disceatfull tonge.
What rewarde shall be geuen or done vnto the, thou false tonge?
Euen myghtie Ꟶ sharpe arowes, wt hote burnynge coales.
Woo is me, that I am constrayned to dwell with Mesech, and to haue myne habitacyon amonge the tentes of Cedar.
My soule hath longe dwelt amonge them, that be enemyes vnto peace.
I laboure for peace, but when I speake therof, they make them to battayle.
A songe of the steares. I Will lyft vp myne eyes vnto the hylles, from whence commeth my helpe?
My helpe commeth euen from the Lorde, which hath made heauen and earth.
He wyll not suffre thy fote to be moued, and he that kepeth the, wyll not slepe.
Beholde, he that kepeth Israel, shall nether slombre nor slepe.
The Lorde hym selfe is thy keper, the Lorde is thy defence vpon thy ryght hande.
So that the sunne shall not burne the by daye, nether the moone by nyght.
The Lorde shall preserue the from all euell, yee it is euen he that shall kepe thy soule.
The Lorde shall preserue thy goynge out and thy commynge in, from thys tyme forth for euer more.
A songe of the steares of Dauid. I Was glad, when they sayde vnto me: we will go into the house of the Lord.
Our fete shall stande in thy gates, O Ierusalem.
Ierusalem is buylded as a cytie, that is at vnite in it selfe.
For thyther the trybes go vp, euen the trybes of the Lorde: to testifye vnto Israel, to geue thanckes vnto the name of the Lorde.
For there is the seate of iudgement, euen the seate of the house of Dauid.
O praye for the peace of Ierusalem: they shall prospere that loue the.
Peace be within thy walles, and plenteousnes wythin thy palaces.
For my brethren and companions sakes, I wyll wyshe the prosperite.
Yee, because of the house of the Lorde oure God, I wyll seke to do the good.
A songe of the steares. Vnto the lyft I vp myne eyes, thou that dwellest in the heauens.
Beholde, euen as the eyes of seruauntes loke vnto the hande of their masters: and as the eyes of a mayden vnto the hande of her mastresse, euen so our eyes wayte vpon the Lorde oure God, vntyll he haue mercy vpon vs.
Haue mercy vpon vs, O Lorde, haue mercy vpon vs, for we are vtterly despysed.
Oure soule is fylled wyth the scornefull reprofe of the welthy, and wyth the despitefulnesse of the proude.
A songe of the steares of Dauid. If the Lorde hym selfe had not bene of our syde (nowe maye Israel saye) If the Lord him selfe had not bene of our syde when men rose vp agaynst vs.
They had swalowed vs vp quycke, when they were so wrathfully displeased at vs.
Yee, the waters had drowned vs, and the streame had gone ouer oure soule.
The depe waters of the proude had gone euen ouer our soule.
But praysed be the Lorde, whych hath not geuen vs ouer for a praye vnto their teeth.
Our soule is escaped, euen as a byrde out of the snare of the fouler:
the snare is broken, and we are delyuered.
Our helpe standeth in the name of the Lorde, whych hath made heauen and earth.
A songe of the steares. They that put their trust in the Lorde, shalbe euen as the mount Syon, which maye not be remoued, but standeth fast for euer.
The hylles stande about Ierusalem, euen so standeth the Lorde rounde about hys people, from thys tyme forth for euermore.
For the rod of the vngodly cometh not into the lot of the ryghteous, lest the ryghteous put their hande vnto wyckednesse.
Do well, O Lorde, vnto those that be good and true of herte
As for soche as turne backe vnto their awne wyckednesse, the Lorde, shall leade them forth wyth the euyll doers, but peace shall be vpon Israel.
A songe of the stayres. When the Lord turned agayne the captiuyte of Sion, then were we lyke vnto them that dreame.
Then was oure mouth fylled with laughter, and oure tonge with ioye.
Then sayd they amonge the Heathen: the Lorde hath done greate thynges for them.
Yee, the Lorde hath done greate thynges for vs all ready, wherof we reioyse.
Turne oure captyuite, O Lorde, as the ryuers in the south.
They that sowe in teares, shall reape in ioye. He that nowe goeth in hys waye wepynge and beareth forth good sede, shall doutheles come agayne wyth ioye, and brynge hys sheaues with him.
A songe of Salomon of the stayres. Except the Lorde buylde the house, their laboure is but lost that buylde it.
Except the Lorde kepe the cytie the watchman waketh but in vayne.
It is but lost laboure that ye haste to ryse vp early, and so late take rest, and eate the breade of carefulnesse: for so he gyueth hys beloued sleape.
Lo, chyldren and the frute of the wombe are an herytage and gyfte, that commeth of the Lorde.
Lyke as the arowes in the hande of the gyaunt, euen so are the yonge chyldren. Happy is the man, that hath hys quyuer full of them, they shall not be ashamed, when they speake wyth theyr enemyes in the gate.
A songe of the stayres. Blessed are all they that feare the Lord, and walke in hys wayes.
For thou shalt eate the laboures of thyne handes O well is the, and happy shalt thou be.
Thy wyfe shalbe as the frutefull vyne vpon the walles of thy house.
Thy chyldren lyke the Olyue braunches rounde aboute thy table.
Lo, thus shall the man be blessed, that feareth the Lorde.
The Lorde frome out of you shall so blesse the, that thou shalt se Ierusalem in prosperyte all thy lyfe longe. Yee that thou shalt se thy chylders chyldren, and peace vpon Israel.
A songe of the stayres. Many a tyme haue they fought agaynst me fro my youth vp (maye Israel nowe saye.)
Yee, many a tyme haue they vexed me fro my youth vp, but they haue not preuayled agaynst me.
The plowers plowed vpon my backe, Ꟶ made longe forowes.
But the ryghteous Lorde hath hewen the snares of the vngodly in peces.
Let them be confounded and turned backwarde, as many as haue euyll wyll at Sion.
Let them be euen as the grasse growynge vpon the house toppes, whych wythereth afore it be pluckte vp.
Wherof the mower fylleth not hys hande, nether he that byndeth vp the sheaues, hys bosome.
So that they whych go by, saye not so moche: as the Lorde prospere you, we wysh you good lucke in the name of the Lorde.
A songe of the stayres. Out of the depe haue I called vnto the O Lorde, Lorde heare my voyce.
Oh let thyne eares consydre well the voyce of my complaynte.
If thou Lorde wylt be extreme to marcke what is done amysse, Oh Lorde who maye abyde it?
For there is mercy wyth the, therfore shalt thou be feared.
I loke for the Lord, my soule doth wayte for hym, in hys worde is my trust.
My soule fleythe vnto the Lorde, before the mornynge wache (I saye) before the mornynge watche:
O Israel trust in the Lorde, for wyth the Lorde there is mercy, and with hym is plenteous redempcyon.
And he shall redeme Israel, from all hys synnes.
Dauids songe of the stayres. Lorde, I am not hye mynded, I haue no proude lookes.
I do not exercyse my selfe in greate matters, which are to hye for me.
But I refrayne my soule and kepe it lowe, lyke as a chylde that is weaned from hys mother: yee, my soule is euen as a weaned chylde. O Israel trust in the Lorde, from thys tyme forth for euermore.
A songe of the steares. Lord, remembre Dauid, and all his trouble.
Howe he swore vnto the Lorde, and vowed a vowe vnto the almyghtye God of Iacob:
I wyll not come wythin the tabernacle of my house, nor clyme vp in to my bedd.
I wyll not suffre myne eyes to slepe, nor myne eye lyddes to slomber.
Untill I fynde out a place for the temple of the Lorde, an habitacion for the myghtye God of Iacob.
Lo, we hearde of the same at Ephrata, and founde it in the wood.
We wyll go in to hys tabernacle, and fall lowe on oure knees before hys fote stole.
Aryse, O Lord, into thy restynge place, thou and the arcke of thy strength.
Let thy Preastes be clothed wyth ryghteousnesse, Ꟶ let thy saynctes synge with ioyfulnesse,
For thy seruaunt Dauids sake, turne not awaye the presence of thyne anoynted.
The Lorde hath made a faythfull othe vnto Dauid, Ꟶ he shall not shryncke from it:
Of the frute of thy body shall I set vpon thy seate.
If thy chyldren wyll kepe my couenaunt, and my testimonyes that I shall lerne them: theyr chyldren also shall syt vpon thy seate for euermore.
For the Lord hath chosen Sion, to be an habitacion for him selfe hath he longed for her.
This shalbe my rest for euer, here wyll I dwell, for I haue a delyte therin.
I wyll blesse her vytaylles wyth increasse, Ꟶ will satisfye her poore wyth bread.
I will decke her Preastes wt health, and her saynctes shall reioyse and synge.
There shall I make the horne of Dauid to florysh, I haue ordened a lanterne for myne anoynted. As for hys enemyes, I shall clothe them wyth shame, but vpon hym selfe shall hys crowne floryshe.
A songe of the stayres of Dauid: Beholde, howe good and ioyfull a thing it is, brethren to dwell together in vnitye. It is lyke the precyous oyntement vpon the heade, that ranne downe vnto the beerd: euen vnto Aarons beerd, and wente downe to the skyrtes of hys clothynge.
Lyke the dewe of Hermon, which fell vpon the hyll of Sion.
For there the Lord promised hys blessynge, and lyfe for euermore.
A songe of the stayres. Beholde, prayse the Lorde, all yee seruauntes of the Lorde, yee that by nyght stande in the house of the Lorde,
Lyft vp youre handes in the Sanctuary, Ꟶ prayse the Lorde.
The Lorde that made heauen and earth, gyue the blessynge out of Sion.
O prayse the Lorde laude ye the name of the Lorde, prayse it O ye seruauntes of the Lorde.
Ye that stande in the house of the Lorde, in the courtes of the house of oure God.
O prayse the Lorde, for the Lord is gracious: O synge prayses vnto his name, for it is louely.
For why? the Lorde hath chosen Iacob vnto hym selfe, Ꟶ Israel for hys awne possessyon.
For I knowe that the Lorde is greate, and that oure Lorde is aboue all goddes.
Whatsoeuer the Lorde pleased, that dyd he in heauen and in earth, in the see, Ꟶ in all deape places:
He bringeth forth the cloudes from the endes of the worlde, Ꟶ sendithe for the lyghteninges with the rayne, brynginge the wyndes out of hys treasuryes.
He smote the fyrst borne of Egypte, both of man Ꟶ of beast.
He hath sent tokens and wonders into the myddest of the, O thou lande of Egypte, vpon Pharao and all hys seruauntes.
He smote diuerse nacyons, and slewe myghtye Kynges:
Sehon Kynge of the Amorytes, and Og the kinge of Basan, Ꟶ all the Kingdomes of Canaan.
And gaue theyr lande to be an heritage, euen an heritage vnto Israel his people.
Thy name, O Lorde, endureth for euer, so doth thy memoriall, O Lorde, from one generacyon to another.
For the Lord wyll auenge hys people, Ꟶ be gracyous vnto his seruauntes.
As for the ymages of the Heathen, they are but syluer and golde, the worcke of mens handes.
They haue mouthes, Ꟶ speake not: eyes haue they, but they se not.
They haue eares, and yet they heare not, nether is there any breth in theyr mouthes.
They that make them, are lyke vnto them, and so are all they that put theyr trust in them.
Prayse the Lorde ye house of Israel, prayse the Lorde ye house of Aaron.
Prayse the Lorde ye house of Leui, ye that feare the Lorde, prayse the Lorde.
Praysed be the Lord out of Sion, which dwelleth at Ierusalem. Halleluiah.
O geue thankes vnto the Lorde, for he is gracyous, and hys mercy endureth for euer.
O geue thankes vnto the God of all goddes, for hys mercy endureth for euer.
O thanke the Lord of all Lordes, for hys mercy endureth for euer.
Whych only doth greate wonders, for his mercy endureth for euer.
Which by his excellentt wysdome made the heauens, for hys mercy endureth for euer.
Whych layed out the earth aboue the waters, for hys mercy endureth for euer.
Whych hath made greate lyghtes, for hys mercy endureth for euer.
The sunne to rule the daye, for hys mercy endureth for euer.
The Moone and the starres to gouerne the nyght, for his mercy endureth for euer.
Whych smote Egypt wyth theyr fyrst borne, for hys mercy endureth for euer.
And brought out Israel from amonge them, for hys mercy endureth for euer.
Wyth a myghtye hande and stretched out arme, for hys mercy endureth for euer.
Whych deuyded the reed see into partes, for hys mercy endureth for euer.
And made Israel to go thorowe the myddest of it, for hys mercy endureth for euer.
But as for Pharao and hys hoost, he ouerthrewe them in the reed see, for hys mercy endureth for euer.
Which led his people thorowe the wildernesse, for hys mercy endureth for euer.
Which smote great kinges: for his mercy endureth for euer.
Yee, Ꟶ slue myghtye kynges: for his mercy endureth for euer.
Sehon kynge of the Amorites: for hys mercy endureth for euer.
And Og the kyng of Basan: for hys mercy endureth for euer.
And gaue awaye theyr lande for an heritage: for his mercy endureth for euer.
Euen for an heritage vnto Israel hys seruaunt: for hys mercy endureth for euer.
Which remembred vs, when we were in trouble: for his mercy endureth for euer.
And hath delyuered vs from oure enemyes: for his mercy endureth for euer.
Whych geueth fode vnto all flesshe: for hys mercy endureth for euer.
O geue thanckes vnto the God of heauen, for hys mercy endureth for euer.
By the waters of Babilon we sat downe and weapte, when we remembred Syon.
As for oure harpes, we hanged them vp vpon the trees, that are therin.
For they that led vs awaye captyue, requyred of vs then a songe Ꟶ melody in our heuynes: synge vs one of the songes of Sion.
Howe shall we synge the Lordes songe in a straunge lande.
If I forget the, O Ierusalem, let my ryght hande forget her connynge.
If I do not remembre the, let my tong cleue to the rofe of my mouth: yee, yf I preferre not Ierusalem in my myrth.
Remembre the chyldren of Edom, O Lorde, in the daye of Ierusalem, how they sayde: downe wt it, downe with it: euen to the grounde.
O daughter of Babylon, wasted with miserye: yee, happye shall he be, that rewardeth the, as thou hast serued vs.
Blessed shall he be, that taketh thy chyldren, and throweth them agaynst the stones.
Of Dauid. I Will geue thankes vnto the, O Lord, with my whole hert, euen before the goddes, wyll I synge prayse vnto the.
I wyll worshyppe towarde thy holy temple, and prayse thy name, because of thy louynge kyndnesse and trueth: for thou hast magnifyed thy name and thy worde aboue all thynges.
When I called vpon the, thou hardest me, and endewdest my soule wt moch strength.
All the kynges of the earth shall prayse the, O Lorde, for they haue heard the wordes of thy mouthe.
Yee, they shall synge in the wayes of the Lorde, that great is the glory of the Lorde.
For though the Lorde be hye, yet hath he respecte vnto the lowly: as for the proude, he beholdeth him a farre of.
Though I walke in the myddest of trouble: yet shalt thou refressh me: thou shalt stretch forth thyne hand vpon the furiousnes of myne enemyes, Ꟶ thy ryght hand shall saue me.
The Lord shall make good his louyng kyndnesse towarde me: yee, thy mercy, O Lorde, endureth for euer, despyse not then the worckes of thyne awne handes.
To the chaunter, a psalme of Dauid. O lorde, thou hast searched me out, and knowen me.
Thou knowest my downe syttinge and myne vprysing: thou vnderstandest my thoughtes longe before.
Thou art about my path, and about my bedd: Ꟶ spyest out all my wayes.
For lo, there is not a worde in my tonge, but thou, O Lorde knowest it all together.
Thou hast fassyoned me behynde and before, and layed thyne hande vpon me.
Soch knowledge is to wonderfull Ꟶ excellent for me: I can not attayne vnto it.
Whyther shall I go then from thy sprete? or whither shall I go then from thy presence?
If I clyme vp into heauen, thou art ther: yf I go downe to hell thou, art there also.
If I take the wynges of the mornynge, Ꟶ remayne in the vttermost partes of the see.
Euen ther also shall thy hande lead me: and thy right hande shall holde me
If I saye: paraduenture the darcknesse shall couer me, then shall my nyght be turned to daye.
Yee, the darcknes is no darcknes with the: but the night is all cleare as the daye, the darcknes Ꟶ lyght (to the) are both a lyke.
For my reynes are thyne, thou hast couered me in my mothers wombe.
I will geue thankes vnto the: for I am fearfully Ꟶ wonderously made: maruelous are thy workes, Ꟶ that my soule knoweth right well.
My bones are not hyd from the, though I be made secretly and fasshioned beneth in the earth.
Thyne eyes dyd se my substaunce, yet being vnparfect: Ꟶ in thy boke were all my membres written. Which daye by daye were fashyoned, when as yet there was none of them.
Howe deare are thy councels vnto me, O God? O howe great is the summe of them?
If I tell them, they are mo in nombre then the sande: when I wake vp, I am present wt the.
Wylt thou not slaye the wicked, O God? departe from me ye bloude thirsty men.
For they speake vnrighteously agaynst the: Ꟶ thyne enemies take thy name in rayne.
Do not I hate them, O Lorde, that hate the? Ꟶ am not I greued with those that ryse vp agaynst the?
Yee, I hate them ryght sore, euen as though they were myne enemyes.
Trye me, O God, and seke the grounde of myne hert: proue me and examen my thoughtes.
Loke well yf there be any waye of wyckednes in me, and leade me in the waye euerlastynge.
To the chaunter, a psalme of Dauid. Delyuer me, O Lorde, from the euell man, and preserue me from the wycked man.
Which ymagin myschefe in their hertes: and stere vp strife all the daye longe.
They haue sharpened theyr tonges like a serpent: adders poyson is vnder their lyppes. Sela.
Kepe me, O Lorde, from the handes of the vngodly: preserue me from the wyckedmen, which are purposed to ouerthrowe my goynges.
The proude haue layed a snare for me: and spred a net abroad with coardes: yee, Ꟶ set trappes in my waye Sela.
I sayde vnto the Lorde: thou art my God, heare the voyce of my prayers, O Lorde.
O Lorde God, thou strength of my health, thou hast couered my heed in the day of battayll.
Let not the vngodly haue his desyre, O Lorde, let not hys mischeuous ymaginacyon prosper: lest they be to proude. Sela.
Let the mischefe of their awne lippes fall vpon the heed of them, that compasse me about.
Let hote burninge coales fall vpon them: let them be cast into the fyer and into the pyt: that they neuer ryse vp againe.
A man full of wordes shal not prosper vpon the erth: euell shall hunte the wycked person, to ouerthrowe hym.
Sure I am, that the Lorde wyll auenge the poore, and mainteyne the cause of the helpeles.
The righteous also shall geue thankes vnto thy name, and the iust shall contynue in thy syght.
A psalme of Dauid. Lorde, I call vpon the: haste the vnto me, Ꟶ consider my voyce, when I crye vnto the.
Let my prayer be set forth in thy sight as the incense: Ꟶ let the lyftyng vp of my handes be an eueninge sacrifyce.
Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth Ꟶ kepe the dore of my lippes.
O let not myne herte be inclyned to any euell thynge: let me not be occupyed in vngodly workes, with the men that worke wyckednesse, lest I eate of soch thynges as please them.
Let the ryghteous rather smyte me frendly Ꟶ reproue me.
But let not ther preciouse balmes: breake myne heed: yee, I wyll praye yet agaynste theyr wyckednesse.
Lett theyr iudges be ouerthrowen in stony places: that they may heare my wordes: for they are swete.
Our bones lye scatered before the pit, lyke as when one breaketh and heweth wood vpon the erth.
But myne eyes looke vnto the, O Lorde God: in the is my trust, Oh cast not out my soule.
Kepe me from the snare which they haue layed for me: Ꟶ from the trappes of the wicked doers. Let the vngodly fall into their awne nettes together: and let me euer escape them.
The instruccyon of Dauid, a prayer whan he was in the caue. I Cryed vnto the Lorde wt my voyce: yee, euen vnto the Lorde dyd I make my supplicacyon. I powred out my complayntes before hym, and shewed hym of my trouble.
When my sprete was in heuynesse, thou knewest my path: in the waye wherin I walked haue they preuely layed a snare for me.
I loked also vpon my right hande, and se, there was no man that wolde knowe me. I had no place to flee vnto, and no man cared for my soule.
I cryed vnto the, O Lorde, and sayde: thou arte my hope, and my porcyon in the lande of the lyuynge.
Consydre my complaynte: for I am brought very lowe.
O delyuer me from my persecutours: for they are to stronge for me.
Brynge my soule out of preson, that I maye geue thankes vnto thy name: which thynge yf thou wylt graunte me, then shall the ryghteous resorte vnto my company.
A psalme of Dauid. Heare my praier, O Lorde, and considre my desyre: herken vnto me for thy treuth and righteousnes sake.
And entre not into iudgement with thy seruaunt: for in thy sight shall no man lyuinge be iustifyed.
For the enemy hath persecuted my soule: he hath smyten my lyfe downe to the grounde: he hath layed me in the darcknes, as the men that haue bene longe deed.
Therfore is my sprete vexed within me: and my herte within me is desolate.
Yet do I remembre the tyme past, I muse vpon all thy workes: yee, I excercyse my selfe in the worckes of thy handes.
I streach forth myne handes vnto the: my soule gaspeth vnto the as a thyrsty lande. Selah.
Heare me, O Lorde, Ꟶ that soone: for my sprete wexeth faynte, hid not thy face from me, lest I be lyke vnto them that go downe into the pytt.
O let me heare thy louing kindnes by tymes in the morninge for in the is my trust: shewe thou me the waye that I shuld walke in, for I lyft vp my soule vnto the.
Delyuer me, O Lorde, from myne enemyes: for I flye vnto the to hyde me.
Teach me to do the thynge that pleaseth the, for thou art my God, let thy louinge sprete leade me forthe vnto the lande of ryghteousnes.
Quycken me, O Lord, for thy names sake, Ꟶ for thy ryghteousnes sake bringe my soule out of trouble.
And of thy goodnes slaye myne enemyes, and destroye all them that vexe my soule, for I am thy seruaunt.
Of Dauid. Blessed be the Lord my strengthe, which teacheth my handes to warre, Ꟶ my fyngers to fyght.
My hope and my fortresse, my castell, and delyuerer, my defender in whom I trust, whych subdueth my people that is vnder me.
Lorde, what is man, that thou hast soch respect vnto him? Or the sonne of man, that thou so regardest hym?
Man is lyke a thynge of naught, his tyme passeth awaye lyke a shadowe.
Bowe thy heauens, O Lorde, Ꟶ come downe, touche the mountaynes, Ꟶ they shall smoke.
Caste forth the lyghtynynge, Ꟶ teare them, shote out thyne arowes, and consume them.
Sende downe thyne hande from aboue, delyuer me, Ꟶ take me out of the great waters, from the hande of straunge chyldren,
Whose mouth talketh of vanyte, Ꟶ theyr ryght hande is a ryght hande of wyckednes.
I wyll synge a newe songe vnto the, O God, Ꟶ synge prayses vnto the vpon a tenstrynged lute.
Thou that geuest victory vnto kinges, and hast delyuered Dauid thy seruaunt from the parell of the swerde.
Saue me, and delyuer me from the hande of straunge chyldren, whose mouth talketh of vanite, and theyr ryght hande is a ryght hande of iniquite.
That oure sonnes maye growe vp as the yonge plantes, Ꟶ that oure daughters maye be as the polyshed corners of the temple.
That oure garners may be full and plenteous with all maner of stoare: that once shepe maye brynge forth thousandes, and ten thousandes in oure stretes.
That oure oxen maye be stronge to laboure, that there be no decaye, no ledynge into captyuitie, Ꟶ no complayninge in oure stretes.
Happye are the people that be in soche a case: yee blessed are the people, whych haue the Lorde for their God.
A thankesgeuynge of Dauid. I Wyll magnifye the, O God my kynge, and I wyll prayse thy name for euer and euer.
Euery daye wyll I geue thanckes vnto the, and prayse thy name for euer Ꟶ euer.
Greate is the Lorde, Ꟶ maruelous worthy to be praysed, there is no ende of hys greatnesse.
One generacyon shall prayse thy workes vnto another, and declare thy power.
As for me I wylbe talkyng of thy worship, thy glory, thy prayse, Ꟶ wonderous worckes.
So that men shall speake of the myght of thy maruelous actes, and I wyll also tell of thy greatnes.
The memoriall of thyne aboundant kyndnes shalbe shewed, and men shall synge of thy ryghteousnesse.
The Lorde is gracyous and mercyfull, long sufferynge, and of greate goodnesse.
The Lord is louyng vnto euery man, and hys mercy is ouer all hys workes.
All thy worckes prayse the, O Lord, and thy saynctes geue thanckes vnto the.
They shewe the glory of thy kingdome, and talke of thy power.
That thy power, thy glory Ꟶ mightinesse of thy kyngdome, myght be knowne vnto men.
Thy Kyngdome is an euerlastynge kyngdome, Ꟶ thy dominion endureth thorowe out all ages.
The Lorde vpholdeth all soche as fall, Ꟶ lyfteth vp all those that be downe.
The eyes of all wayte vpon the, Ꟶ thou geuest them theyr meate in due season.
Thou openest thyne hande, and fyllest all thynges lyuinge wyth plenteousnesse.
The Lorde is ryghteous in all his wayes, and holy in all hys worckes.
The Lorde is nye vnto all them that call vpon hym, yee all soche as call vpon hym faythfully.
He wyll fulfyll the desyre of them that feare hym, he also wyll heare theyr crye, Ꟶ will helpe them.
The Lorde preserueth all them that loue hym, but scatereth abroade all the vngodly.
My mouth shall speake the prayse of the Lorde, and let all flesh geue thankes vnto hys holy name for euer and euer.
Halleluiah. Prayse the Lorde, O my soule: whyle I lyue will I prayse the Lorde: yee as long as I haue any beynge, I will synge prayses vnto my God.
O put not youre trust in Princes, nor in any chylde of man, for there is no helpe in them.
For when the breth of man goeth forth he shall turne againe to his earth, and then all his thoughtes peryshe.
Blessed is he that hath the God of Iacob for hys helpe, and whose hope is in the Lorde hys God.
Which made heauen and earth, the see, and all that therin is, whych kepeth hys promyse for euer.
Whych helpeth them to ryght that suffre wronge, whych fedeth the hongrye.
The Lorde loseth men out of preson, the Lorde geueth syght to the blynde.
The Lorde helpeh them vp that are fallen, the Lorde careth for the ryghteous.
The Lorde careth for the straungers, he defendeth the fatherlesse Ꟶ wyddowe: as for the waye of the vngodly, he turneth it vpside downe,
The Lorde thy God, O Sion: shall be kynge for euermore, and thorowe out all generacyons. Halleluiah.
O prayse the Lord, for it is a good thing to synge prayse vnto oure God: yee a ioyfull and pleasaunt thynge is it to be thankfull.
The Lorde doth buylde vp Ierusalem, and shall gather to gether the outcastes of Israel.
He healeth those that ar broken in harte Ꟶ gyueth medycine to heale ther sycknes.
He telleth the nombre of the starres, and calleth them all by ther names.
Greate is oure Lorde, and greate is hys power: yee hys wysdome is infynite.
The Lorde setteth vp the meke, and bryngeth the vngodly downe to the grounde.
O synge vnto the Lorde with thankesgeuynge, synge prayse vpon the harpe vnto oure God.
Whych couereth the heauen wyth cloudes, and prepareth rayne for the earth, and maketh the grasse to growe vpon the mountaynes.
Whych geueth fodre vnto the catell, Ꟶ fedeth the yong rauens that call vpon hym.
He hath not pleasure in the strength of an horse, nether delyteth he in any mans legges.
But the Lordes delyte is in them that feare hym, and put their trust in hys mercy.
Prayse the Lord, O Ierusalem: prayse thy God, O Sion.
For he hath made fast the barres of thy gates, Ꟶ hath blessed thy chyldren wythin the.
He maketh peace in thy borders, and fylleth the wyth the floure of wheate.
He sendeth forth hys commaundement vpon earth, and hys worde runneth very swyftly.
He geueth snowe lyke wolle, Ꟶ scatereth the horefrost lyke ashes.
He casteth forth hys yse lyke morsels, who is able to abyde hys frost?
He sendeth out his worde Ꟶ mealteth them, he bloweth with his wynd, and the waters flowe.
He sheweth hys worde vnto Iacob, hys statutes Ꟶ ordinaunces vnto Israel.
He hath not dealte so wt anye nacyon, nether haue the heathen knowledge of hys lawes. Haleluiah.
Haleluiah. Prayse the euerlastynge. O prayse the Lorde of heauen, prayse hym in the heygth.
Prayse him all ye angels of hys, prayse hym all hys hoost.
Prayse hym Sunne and Moone, prayse hym all ye starres and lyght.
Prayse hym all ye heauens, Ꟶ ye waters that be aboue the heauens.
Let them prayse the name of the Lorde, for he commaunded, and they were created.
He hath made them fast for euer and euer, he hath geuen them a lawe, whych shall not be broken.
Prayse the Lorde vpon earth, ye dragons, and all depes.
Fyre an hayle, snowe and vapors, wynde and storme, fulfyllyng hys worde.
Mountaynes Ꟶ all hylles, frutefull trees and all Cedres.
Beastes and all catell, wormes and federed foules.
Kynges of the earth and all people, Princes and all iudges of the worlde.
Yonge men and maydens, olde men and chyldren:
prayse the name of the Lorde, for his name only is excellent, Ꟶ hys prayse aboue heauen and earth.
He shall exalte the horne of hys people, all hys saynctes shall prayse hym, euen the chyldren of Israel, euen the people that serueth hym. Haleluiah.
Haleluiah. Prayse the euerlastynge. O synge vnto the Lorde a newe songe, let the congregacyon of sainctes prayse hym.
Let Israel reioyce in him that made hym, and let the chyldren of Sion be ioyfull in their king.
Let them prayse his name in the daunce, let them synge prayses vnto hym with tabrette Ꟶ harpe.
For the Lorde hath pleasure in hys people, and helpeth the meke harted.
Let the saynctes be ioyfull with glory, let them reioyse in their beddes.
Let the prayses of God be in their mouth, and a two edged swerde in their handes.
To be auenged of the Heathen, and to rebuke the people.
To bynde their Kynges in cheynes, and their nobles wt lynkes of yron.
That they maye be auenged of them, as it is wrytten: soche honoure haue all hys saynctes. Haleluiah.
Haleluiah. O prayse God in his holynes, prayse hym in the fyrmament of his power.
Prayse hym in hys noble actes, prayse hym accordynge vnto hys excellent greatnesse.
Prayse hym in the sounde of the trompet, prayse hym vpon the lute Ꟶ harpe.
Prayse him in the cymbales and daunse, prayse him vpon the strynges and pype.
Prayse hym vpon the welltuned cymbales, prayse hym vpon the loude cymbales.
Let euery thynge that hath breth, prayse the Lorde. Haleluiah.Prayse the euerlastynge.
The prouerbes of Salomon, the sonne of Dauid kynge of Israel:
to learne wisdome, Ꟶ to perceaue the instruccyon, and to perceaue the wordes of vnderstondynge: Ꟶ therby to receaue prudence,
ryghteousnes, iudgement and equite.
That the very simple myght haue wyt, and that the yonge men myght haue knowledge and true vnderstanding.
By hearing the wise man shall come by more wysedome: and he that is endewed wt vnderstanding
shal optayn wit to perceaue a parable, Ꟶ the interpretacyon therof, the wordes of the wyse, Ꟶ the darcke speaches of the same.
The feare of the Lorde is the begynnyng of wysdome. But fooles despyse wysdome Ꟶ instruccion.
My sonne, heare thy fathers doctrine: Ꟶ forsake not the lawe of thy mother:
for that shall bringe grace vnto thy heed, and shalbe as a cheyne about thy neck.
My sonne, consente not vnto synners,
yf they entise the, Ꟶ saye: come with vs, we will laye wayte for bloude, Ꟶ lurcke preuely for the innocent without a cause:
we shall swalowe then vp lyke the hell, Ꟶ deuoure them quycke and hole, as those that go downe into the pyt.
So shall we fynde all maner of costelye ryches, Ꟶ fill our houses wt spoyles.
Cast in thy lot among vs: Ꟶ let vs haue all one purse.
My sonne, walke not thou with them: refrayne thy fote from their waye.
For their fete runne to euell: Ꟶ are hasty to shed bloud.
But in vayn is the net laied forth before the byrdes eyes:
yee they them selues laye wayte one for anothers bloud Ꟶ one of them wold sleye another.
These are the wayes of all soch as be couetous, the one wold rauysh anothers lyfe.
Wisdome cryeth wtout, Ꟶ putteth forth her voyce in the stretes.
She calleth before the congregacyon in the open gates, Ꟶ sheweth her wordes thorow the citye, saying:
O ye children, how longe wyll ye loue childesshnes? how longe wyll the scorners delyte in scorning, Ꟶ the vnwyse be enemyes vnto knowledge?
O turne you vnto my correccion: lo, I wyll expresse my mynde vnto you, Ꟶ make you vnderstande my wordes.
I haue called, Ꟶ ye refused it: I haue stretched out my hande: Ꟶ no man regarded it:
but all my councels haue ye despised: Ꟶ set my correccion at naught.
Therfore shall I also laugh in youre destruccion, Ꟶ mocke you, when that thinge that ye feare commeth vpon you:
euen when the thynge that ye be afrayed of, falleth in sodenly lyke a storme, Ꟶ your misery lyke a tempest: yee, when trouble Ꟶ heuines commeth vpon you.
Then shal they call vpon me, but I wyll not heare: they shall seke me early, but they shall not fynde me.
And that because they hated knowledge, Ꟶ receaued not the feare of the Lorde:
but abhorred my councell, and despysed all my correccion.
Therfore shall they eate the frutes of theyr awne waye, Ꟶ be filled with their awne inuencions:
for the turnynge awaye of the vnwyse shall sleye them, and the prosperytie of fooles shalbe their awne destruccyon.
But whoso harkneth vnto me, shall dwell safely, and be sure from any feare of euyll.
My sonne, yf thou wilt receaue my wordes, and kepe my commaundementes by the,
that thou wylt enclyne thyne eare vnto wysdome, applye thyne hert then to vnderstandynge.
For yf thou cryest after wisdome, and callest for knowledge:
yf thou sekest after her as after money, and dyggest for her as for treasure,
then shalt thou vnderstande the feare of the Lorde, and fynde the knowledge of God.
For it is the Lorde that geueth wisdome, out of his mouth commeth knowledge and vnderstandynge.
He hydeth vp healthe for the ryghteous. He preserueth the welfare of the ryghteous, and defendeth them that walke syncerely:
he kepeth them in the ryght pathe, and preserueth the waye of soche as serue hym with godlynesse.
Then shalt thou vnderstande ryghteousnesse, iudment, and equyte: yee, and euery good path.
Yf wysdome entre into thyne herte, and thy soule delyte in knowledge:
then shall councell preserue the, and vnderstandynge shall kepe the.
That thou mayest be delyuered from the euell waye, and from the man that speaketh frowarde thinges.
From soche as leaue the hye strete, Ꟶ walke in the wayes of darckenesse:
which reioyse in doynge euell: and delyte in wycked thynges:
whose wayes are croked, and they frowarde in thyr pathes.
That thou mayest be deliuered also from the straunge woman, and from her that is not thyne awne: which geueth swete wordes,
forsaketh the husbande of her youth, Ꟶ forgetteth the conuenaunt of her God.
For her house is enclyned vnto death, Ꟶ her pathes vnto hell.
All they that go in vnto her come not agayn, nether take they holde of the waye of lyfe.
Therfore, walke thou in the waye of soch as be verteous, and kepe the pathes of the ryghteous.
For the iust shall dwell in the lande: and they that be perfecte shall remayne in it:
but the vngodly shalbe roted out of the lande: and the wycked doers shalbe roted out of it.
My sonne, forget not thou my lawe, but se that thyne hert kepe my commaundementes.
For they shall prolonge the dayes Ꟶ yeres of thy lyfe, and bringe the peace.
Let mercy and faythfulnes neuer go from the: bynde them about thy necke, and wryte them in the tables of thyne herte.
So shalt thou fynde fauour Ꟶ good vnderstanding, in the syght of God and men.
Put thy trust in God with all thyne herte: and leane not vnto thyne awne witte.
In all thy wayes haue respecte vnto hym: Ꟶ shall order thy goynges.
Be not wyse in thyne awne conceate: but feare the Lorde, and departe from euell:
so shall thy nauell be whole, and thy bones stronge.
Honoure the Lord wt thy substaunce: and with thy firstlinges of all thyne encrease
so shall thy barnes be fylled with plenteousnesse: and thy presses shall flowe ouer with swete wyne.
My sonne, despyse not the chastenynge of the Lorde, nether faynte when thou art rebuked of hym.
For whom the Lorde loueth, hym he chasteneth, and yet deliteth in him, euen as a father in his awne sonne.
Well is him that findeth wysdome, and opteyneth vnderstandinge:
for the getting of it is better then any marchaundise of syluer, and the profet of it is better then golde.
Wysdome is more worth then precious stones: and all the thinges that thou canst desire are not to be compared vnto her.
Upon her ryght hande is longe lyfe, and vpon her left hande is riches and honour.
Her wayes are pleasaunt wayes and all her pathes are peaceable.
She is a tree of lyfe to them that laye hold vpon her, and blessed is he that kepeth her fast.
With wysdome hath the Lorde layed the foundacion of the erth: and thorowe vnderstandinge hath he stablyshed the heauens.
Thorowe his wisdome the deapthes breake vp, and the cloudes droppe downe the dew.
My sonne, let not these thynges departe, from thyne eyes: but kepe my lawe and my councell,
that thou mayest haue the pleasure of longe lyfe and vnderstandynge: for they shalbe lyfe vnto my soule, Ꟶ grace vnto my mouth.
Then shalt thou walke safely in thy waye: and thy fote shall not stomble.
If thou slepest, thou shalt nott be afrayed: but shalt take thy rest, and slepe swetely.
Thou nedest not to be afrayed of any soden feare, nether for the vyolent russhynge in of the vngodly when it commeth.
For the Lorde shall stonde by thy syde, and kepe thy fote, that thou be not taken.
Withdrawe no good thinge from them that haue nede, so longe as thyne hand is able to do it.
Saye not vnto thy neyghboure: go thy waye, Ꟶ come agayne, to morowe wyll I geue the:
where as thou haste nowe to geue hym. Intende no hurte vnto thy neyghboure, seynge he dothe dwell in reest by the.
Stryue not lyghtely with anye man without cause, where as he hathe done the no harme.
Folowe not a wicked man, and chose none of hys wayes:
for the Lorde abhorreth the frowarde: but hys councell is amonge the ryghteous.
The curse of the Lorde is in the house of the vngodly: but he blesseth the dwellynges of the ryghteous.
As for the scornefull dothe not he laugh them to scorne? but he geueth grace vnto the lowly.
The wise shall haue honour in possession: but shame is the promocion that foles shall haue.
Heare, O ye chyldren, the fatherly exhortacyon, and take good heade, that ye maye lerne wysdome.
For I haue geuen you a good doctryne, forsake nott ye my lawe.
For when I my selfe was my fathers deare sonne, and tenderly beloued of my mother:
he taught me also, and sayde vnto me: Lett thyne herte receaue my wordes, kepe my commaundementes, and thou shalt lyue.
Get the wysdome: and get the vnderstanding: forget not the wordes of my mouth, and shrynke not from them.
Forsake her not and she shall preserue the: loue her, and she shall kepe the.
The chefe poynte of wysdome is, that thou be wyllynge to optayne wysedome: and before all thy goodes to gett the vnderstandynge.
Make moche of her and she shall promote the: Yee, yf thou embrace her, she shall brynge the vnto honoure.
She shall make the a gracyous heed, and garnysshe the with a crowne of glory.
Heare my sonne, and receaue my wordes and the yeares of thy lyfe shall be many.
I haue shewed the, the waye of wysdome, and ledd the into the ryght pathes.
So that yf thou goest therin, there shall no straytenes hynder the: and when thou runnest, thou shalte not fall.
Take fast holde of doctryne, and let her nott go: kepe her, for she is thy lyfe.
Come nott in the pathe of the vngodly: and walke nott in the waye of the wycked.
Abhorre it, and go not therin: departe asyde, and passe ouer by it.
For they cannot slepe, excepte they haue fyrst done some myschefe: nether take they anye reste, excepte they haue fyrst done some harme.
For they eate the breade of wyckednesse, and dryncke the wyne of robberye.
The pathe of the ryghtewes shyneth as the lyght, that is euer brighter and brighter vnto the perfect daye.
But the waye of the vngodly is as the darcknesse: they knowe nott where they fall.
My sonne, marcke my wordes, and enclyne thyne eare vnto my sayinges.
Let them not departe from thyne eyes: but kepe them euen in the myddest of thyne herte.
For they are lyfe vnto all those that fynde them, and health vnto all theyr bodyes.
Kepe thyne herte with all diligence, for there vpon hangeth lyfe.
Put awaye from the a frowarde mouth, Ꟶ let the lyppes of sclaunder be farre from the.
Let thyne eyes beholde the thyng that is ryght, and let thyne eye lyddes loke strayght before the.
Pondre the path of thy fete, and let all thy wayes be ordred a ryght.
Turne not asyde, nether to the ryght hande net to the lefte, but witholde thy fote from euell.
My sonne, geue hede vnto my wysdome, and bowe thyne eare vnto my prudence:
that thou mayest regarde good councel, and that thy lippes maye kepe knowledge
For the lyppes of an harlot are a droppyng hony combe and her throte is more glisterynge them oyle.
But at the last she is as bytter as wormwod, and as sharpe as a two edged swerde.
Her fete go downe vnto death and her steppes pearse thorowe vnto hell.
Parchaunse thou dwellynge with her wylt ponder the path of lyfe? so vnstedfast are her wayes, that thou canst not knowe them.
Heare me nowe therfore (O my sonnes) Ꟶ departe not from the wordes of my mouth.
Kepe thy waye farre from her, and come not nye the dores of her house.
That thou geue not thy strength vnto other, Ꟶ thy yeares to the cruell.
That other men be not fylled with thy goodes, and that thy laboures come not in a straunge house.
Yee that thou mourne not at the last (when thou hast spent thy body and lusty greane youth)
and then saye: Alas, why hated I nourtoure: why did my herte despise correccion?
Wherfore was not I obedient vnto the voyce of my teachers, and herkened not vnto them that infourmed me?
I am come almost into all misfortune, in the myddest of the multitude and congregacion.
Drincke of the water, of thyne awne well and of the ryuers that runne out of thyne awne springes.
Let thy welles flowe out abroade, that there may he ryuers of water in the stretes:
but let them be onely thyne awne, and not straungers with the.
Let thy well be blessed and be glad with the wyfe of thy youth.
Louinge is the hynde, and frendly is the Roo: let her brestes alwaye satisfye the, and holde the euer content with her loue.
My sonne, why wylt thou haue pleasure in an harlot, Ꟶ embrace the bosome, of another woman?
For euery mans wayes are open in the syght of the Lorde, and he pondreth all theyr goynges.
The wyckednesse of the vngodly shall catch hymselfe, and with the snares of hys awne synnes shall he be trapped.
He shall dye without amendement, and for hys greate folyshnesse he shall go astraye.
My sonne yf thou be suertye for thy neyghboure, and hast fastened thyne hand for another man,
thou art bounde wt thyne awne wordes, and taken with thine awne speache.
Therfore, my sonne, do thys Ꟶ thou shalt be discharged: when thou art come into thy neighbours daunger. Goo thy wayes then soone, humble thy selfe, and with thy frendes intreate thy creditour:
let not thyne eyes slepe, ner thyne eye lyddes slomber.
Saue thy selfe as a doo from the hande of the huntre, Ꟶ as a byrde from the hande of the fouler.
Go to the Emmet (thou slougard) consydre herwayes, Ꟶ lerne to be wyse.
She hath no guyde, no ouersear nor ruler:
yet in the Sommer she prouideth her meate, and gathereth her fode to gether in the haruest.
Howe longe wylt thou slepe, thou slougysh man? When wylt thou aryse out of thy slepe?
Yee slepe on styll a lytle, slomber a lytle, foulde thyne handes together yet a lytle, that thou mayest slepe:
so shall pouertye come vnto the as on that trauayleth by the waye, Ꟶ necessytelke a weapened man.
An vngodly person, a wycked man goeth with a frowarde mouth
he wyncketh with his eyes, he tokeneth with hys fete, he poynteth with hys fyngers,
he is euer ymagenynge myschefe, and frowardnesse in hys herte, Ꟶ causeth discorde.
Therfore shall hys destruccyon come hastly vpon him, sodenly shall he be all to broken, and not be healed.
These syxe thynges doth the Lord hate, and the seuenth he vtterly abhorreth:
A proude looke a lyinge tonge, handes that shed innocent bloude,
an herte that goeth aboute wyth wycked ymaginacyons fete that be swyfte in rennynge to do myschefe,
a false wytnesse that bringeth vp lyes, and soche one as soweth discorde amonge brethren.
My sonne, kepe thy fathers commaundement, and forsake not the lawe of thy mother.
Put them vp together in thyne herte, and bynde them aboute thy neck.
That they may leade the where thou goest, preserue the when thou art a slepe, and that when thou awakest, thou mayest talke of them.
For the commaundement is a lanterne, and the lawe a lyght: yee chastenyng and nourtoure is the waye of lyfe
that they may kepe the from the euell woman, and from the flatteryng tonge of the harlote:
that thou lust not after her beauty in thyne herte, and lest thou be taken with her fayre lookes.
An harlot wyll make a man to begge his bread, and a woman wyll hunt for the precyous lyfe.
Maye a man take fyre in hys bosome and hys clothes not be brent?
Or can one go vpon hote coales, and hys fete not be hurte?
Euen so, whosoeuer goeth into his neyghbours wyfe, and toucheth her, cannot be vngylty.
Men do not vtterly despyse a thefe that stealeth to satisfye hys soule, when he is hungry:
but yf he maye be gotten, he restoreth agayne seuen tymes as moche, or els he maketh recompense with all the good of hys house.
But whoso committeth aduoutry with a woman, he is a foole and bryngeth his lyfe to destruction.
He getteth hym selfe also shame and dishonour, soche as shall neuer be put out.
For the gelousy and wrath of the man wyll not be intreated,
no though thou woldest offre him great gyftes to make amendes, he will not receaue them.
My sonne, kepe my wordes, Ꟶ laye vp my commaundementes by the.
Kepe my commaundementes and my lawe, euen as the apple of thyne eye, and thou shalt lyue.
Bynde them vpon thy fyngers, and wryte them in the table of thyne hert.
Saye vnto wysdome: thou art my syster, and call vnderstandynge thy kynswoman:
that they maye kepe the from the straunge woman, and from the harlot which geueth swete wordes.
For out of the wyndowe of my house I loked thorowe the latysse,
Ꟶ behelde the symple people: and amonge other yonge folkes I spyed one yonge foole,
goinge ouer the stretes, by the corner in the waye towarde the harlottes house,
in the twylight of the euenynge, when it beganne nowe to be nyght Ꟶ darcke.
And beholde, there mett hym a woman wt open tokens of an harlot, onely her herte was hyde,
She was full of loude wordes, Ꟶ redy to daly: whose fete coulde not abyde in the house,
nowe is the without, now in the stretes, and layeth abayte in euery corner,
she caught the yongeman, kyssed hym, and was not ashamed, sayinge:
I had a vowe of peace offerynges to paye, and thys daye I perfourme it.
Therfore came I forth to mete the, that I myght seke thy face, and so I haue founde the.
I haue deckte my bed with couerynges and clothes of Egypte.
My bed haue I made to smell of Mirre, Aloes, and Cynamon.
Come lett vs ly together, and take oure pleasure tyll it be daye lyght: and we wyll enioye the pleasures of loue.
For the good man is not at home, he is gone farre of.
He hath taken the bagge of moneye with hym: And will retourne home at the appoynted solempne feste?
Thus with many swete wordes she ouercame him, and with her flatterynge lyppes she entysed hym
sodenlye to folowe her: as it were an oxe led to the slaughter, Ꟶ lyke as it were a foole that laugheth when he goeth to the stockes, to be punyshed,
so longe tyll she had wounded hys lyuer with her dart: lyke as yf a byrde hasted to the snare, not knowynge that the parell of hys lyfe lyeth ther vpon.
Heare me nowe therfore, O my chyldren, and marcke the wordes of my mouth.
Let not thyne herte wandre in her wayes, and be not thou disceaued in her pathes.
For many one hath she wounded and cast downe, yee many a stronge man hath bene slayne by the meanes of her.
Her houses are the waye vnto hell, and brynge men downe into the chambers of death.
Doth not wysdome crye? doth not vnderstandynge put forth her voyce?
Standeth she not in the hye places in the stretes and wayes?
doth she not crye before the whole cytie, and in the gates where men go out and in?
It is you, O ye men (sayeth she) whom I call: Unto (the chyldren of men) do I lyft vp my voyce.
Take hede vnto knowledge O ye ignoraunt be wyse in herte, O ye foles.
Geue eare, for I wyll speake of greate matters, and open my lyppes to tell thynges that be ryght.
For my throte shalbe talkynge of the trueth and my lyppes abhorre vngodlynesse.
All the wordes of my mouth are righteous, there is no frowarnedsse nor falshede therin.
They are all playne to soche as wyll vnderstande, and ryght to them that fynde knowledge.
Receaue my doctryne, and not syluer: and my knowledge, more then fyne golde.
For wysdome is more worth then precious stones, yee all thynges that thou canst desyre, maye not be compared vnto it.
I wysdome haue my dwellynge with knowledge, and prudent councell is myne awne.
The feare of the Lorde abhorreth wyckednesse, pryde dysdayne, and the euell waye: and a mouth that speaketh wycked thynges, I vtterly abhorre.
I can geue councell, and I conferre thinges: I haue vnderstanding, I haue strength.
Thorowe me, kynges reygne: thorowe me counselars make iust lawes.
Thorowe me, do prynces beare rule, and all iudges of the earth execute iudgement.
I am louynge vnto those that loue me: and they that seke me early shall fynde me.
Ryches and honoure are with me, ye excellent goodes and ryghteousnes.
My frute is better then golde and precious stone, and myne encrease more worth then fyne syluer.
I wyll guyde the in the waye of ryghteousnes, and in the strete of iudgement.
That I maye sende prosperite to those that loue me, and to encrease their treasure.
The Lorde him selfe had me in possessyon in the begynnynge of his wayes, or euer he beganne his worckes a fore tyme.
I haue bene ordened from euerlastynge, and from the begynnynge or euer the earth was made.
When I was borne, there were nether depthes nor sprynges of water.
Before the foundacyons of the mountaynes were layed, yee before all hylles was I borne.
The earth and all that is vpon the earth was not yet made, no not the grounde it selfe.
For when he made the heauens, I was present: when he sett vp the depthes in ordre,
when he hanged the cloudes aboue: when he fastened the sprynges of the depe:
When he shut the see within certayne bowndes, that the waters shulde not go ouer their marckes that he commaunded. When he layed the foundacyons of the earth
I was with him, ordrynge all thynges: delytinge dayly, and reioysynge all waye before him.
As for the rounde compase of thys worlde, I make it ioyfull: for my delyte is to be amonge the chyldren of men.
Therfore herken vnto me, O ye chyldren, blessed are they that kepe my wayes.
O geue eare vnto nurtoure, be wyse, and refuse it not.
Blessed is the man that heareth me, watchynge dayly at my gates, and geuynge attendaunce at the postes of my dores.
For who so fyndeth me, fyndeth lyfe, and shall obtayne fauour of the Lorde.
But who so offendeth agaynst me, hurteth his awne soule. All they that hate me, are the louers of death.
Wysdome hath buylded her selfe an house, Ꟶ hewen out seuen pyllers:
she hath kylled her vitayles, powred out her wyne, Ꟶ prepared her table.
She hath sent forth her maydens to crye vpon the hyest place of the cytie:
Who so is ignoraunt, let hym come hyther. And to the vnwyse she sayde:
O come on your waye, eate my bread, and drincke my wyne, which I haue poured out for you.
Forsake ignoraunce, and ye shall lyue: and se that ye go in the waye of vnderstandynge.
Who so reproueth a scornefull personne, getteth him selfe dishonoure: and he that rebuketh the vngodly, stayneth him selfe.
Reproue not a scorner lest he owe the euell wyll: but rebuke a wyse man, and he wyll loue the.
Geue a discrete man but an occasyon, and he wylbe the wyser: teache a ryghteous man, and he wyll increase in knowledge.
The feare of the Lorde is the beginnynge of wysdome, Ꟶ the knowledge of holy thynges is vnderstandynge.
For thorowe me thy dayes shalbe prolonged, and the yeares of thy lyfe shalbe many.
If thou be wyse, thy wisdome shall do thy selfe good but yf thou thynkest scorne therof, it shalbe thyne awne harme.
A folyshe restlesse woman, full of wordes, and soch a one as hath no knowledge,
sytteth at the dore of her house, and in the hye places of the cyte,
to call soch as go by, and that walke streyght in theyr wayes.
Who so is ignoraunt (sayth she) let hym come hyther, and to the vnwyse she sayeth:
stollen waters are swete, and the bread that is preuely eaten, hath a good taste.
And he doth not consydre, that they are but deed which be there, and that her gestes are in the depe of hell.
Prouerbes of Salomon. A wyse sonne maketh a glad father, but an vndiscrete sonne is an heuynesse vnto hys mother.
Treasures that are wyckedly gotten, profyte nothynge: but ryghteousnesse deliuereth from death.
The Lorde wyll not let the soule of the righteous suffre honger, but he taketh awaye the ryches of the vngodlye:
An ydle hande maketh poore, but a quycke labouringe hande maketh ryche.
Who so gathereth in Sommer, is wyse: but he that is slougysh in haruest, bringeth him selfe to confusyon.
Blessynges are vpon the heade of the ryghteous, and the mouth of the vngodly kepeth myschefe in secrete.
The memoryall of the iust shall haue a good reporte, but the name of the vngodly shall stincke.
A wyse man will receaue warnynge, but a pratinge fole shall be punyshed.
He that leadeth an innocent lyfe, walketh surely: but who so goeth a wronge waye shalbe knowne.
He that wynciteth with his eye, will do some harme: but he that hath a foolyshe mouth, shalbe beaten.
The mouth of a ryghteous man is a well of lyfe, but the mouth of the vngodly kepeth mischefe in secrete.
Euyll wyll stereth vp stryfe, but loue couereth the multitude of synnes.
In the lyppes of him that hath vnderstandynge, a man shall fynde wisdome, but that rod belongeth to the backe of the folyshe.
Wyse men laye vp knowledge, but the mouth of the folyshe is nye destruccion.
The riche mans goodes are his stronge holde, but theire awne pouertye feareth the poore.
The ryghteous laboureth to do good, but the vngodly vseth hys encrease vnto synne.
To take hede vnto the chastenynge of nurtoure, is the waye of lyfe: but he that refuseth to be refourmed disceaueth him selfe.
Dissemblynge lyppes kepe hatred secretely, and he that speaketh any sclaunder, is a foole.
Where moch bablynge is, there must nedes be offence: and he that refrayneth his lyppes, is wyse.
An innocent tonge is a noble treasure, but the herte of the vngodly is nothynge worth.
The lyppes of the ryghteous sede a whole multitude, but foles shall dye in their awne folye.
The blessynge of the Lorde maketh ryche men as for carefull trauayle, it doth nothynge therto.
A fole doth wyckedly and maketh but a sporte of it, but wysdome ruleth the man that hath vnderstandynge.
The thynge that the vngodly are afrayed of, shall come vpon them, but the ryghteous shall haue their desyre.
The vngodly passeth when the tempest commethe: but the ryghtwyse remayneth sure for euer.
As vyneger is to the teth, and as smoke is vnto the eyes, euen so is a slougysh personne to them that sende hym forth.
The feare of the Lorde maketh a longe lyfe, but the yeares of the vngodly shalbe shortened.
The pacient abydinge of the ryghteous shalbe turned to gladnesse, but the hope of the vngodly shall perishe.
The waye of the Lorde geueth a courage vnto the godly, but it is a feare for wycked doers.
The ryghteous shall neuer be ouerthrowne, but the vngodly, shall not remayne in the lande.
The mouth of the iust wylbe talkynge of wysdome, but that the tonge of the frowarde shall peryshe.
The lyppes of the ryghteous are occupyed in acceptable thynges, but the mouth of the vngodly taketh them to the worst.
A False balaunce is an abhomynacyon vnto the Lorde, but a true weight pleaseth him.
Where pryde is, there is shame also and confusyon: but where as is lowlynes, there is wysdome.
The innocent dealynge of the iust shall leade them, but the wyckednes of such as dissemble, shalbe their awne destruccyon.
Riches helpe not in the daye of vengeaunce, but ryghteousnesse delyuereth from death.
The ryghteousnes of the innocent ordreth his waye, but the vngodly shall fall in his awne wyckednesse.
The ryghteousnesse of the iust shall delyuer them, but the wycked shalbe taken in theyr awne vngodlynesse.
When an vngodly man dyeth, his hope is gone, the confydence of riches shall perishe.
The ryghteous shalbe delyuered out of trouble, and the vngodly shall come in his steade.
Thorowe the mouth of the dissembler is his neyghboure destroyed, but thorowe knowledge shall the iust he delyuered.
When it goeth well with the ryghteous, the cytie is mery: and when the vngodly peryshe, there is gladnesse.
When the iust are in wealth, the cytye prospereth: but when the vngodly haue the rule, it decayeth.
A foole bringeth vp a selaunder of his neyghbour, but a wyse man wyll kepe it secrete.
A dyssemblynge person wyll discouer preuy thynges, but he that is of a faythfull herte, wyll kepe councell.
Where no good councell is, there the people decaye: but where as many are that can geue councell, there is wealth,
He that is suertye for a straunger, hurteth him selfe: and he that medleth not wt suertieshyppe, is sure.
A gracious woman maynteyneth honestye, as for the wycked, they maynteyne ryches.
He that is mercyfull doth hym selfe a benefyte, but who so hurteth his neyghbour, is a tyraunt.
The labour of the vngodly prospereth not, but he that soweth ryghteousnes, shall receaue a sure rewarde.
Lyke as ryghteousnes bryngeth lyfe: euen so to cleue vnto euell, bryngeth death.
The Lorde abhorreth them that be of a fayned hert, but he hath pleasure in them that are of an vndefyled conuersacyon.
The wycked amendeth not for plage vpon plage, but the sede of the ryghteous shalbe preserued.
A fayre woman without discrete maners, is lyke a rynge of gold in a swynes snoute.
The desyre of the ryghteous is acceptable, but the hope of the vngodly is indignacyon.
Some man geueth out his goodes, and is the rycher, but the nygard (hauynge ynough) wyll departe from nothynge, and yet is euer in pouertye.
He that is liberall in geuynge, shall haue plenty, and he that watereth, shall be watered also him selfe.
Who so hoordeth vp his corne, shalbe cursed amonge the people: but blessynge shall lyght vpon his head that geueth foode.
He that laboureth for honesty, fyndeth his desyre: but who so seketh after myschefe, it shall happen vnto hym.
He that trusteth in his ryches, shall haue a fall, but the ryghteous shall floryshe as the grene leafe.
Who so maketh disquyetnes in his awne house, he shall haue wynde for his heritage, and the foole shalbe seruaunt to the wyse.
The frute of the ryghteous is a tree of lyfe: and he that endeuoureth him selfe to wynne mens soules is wyse.
If the ryghteous be recompensed vpon earth, howe moch more then the vngodly and the synner?
Who so loueth wysdome, wyll be content to be refourmed: but he the hateth to be reproued, is a foole.
A good man is acceptable vnto the Lorde, but the wycked ymaginer will he condempne.
A man cannot endure in vngodlynesse, but the rote of the ryghteous shall not be moued.
A huswifly woman is a crowne vnto her husbande: but she that behaueth her selfe vnhonestly, is a corrupcion in hys bones.
The thoughtes of the ryghteous are ryght, but the ymaginacion of the vngodly are disceatfull.
The talkynge of the vngodly is howe they maye laye wayte for bloud, but the mouth of the ryghteous wyll deliuer them.
God ouer turneth the estate of the wycked Ꟶ they stande not: but the house of the ryghteous shall stande steadfaste.
A man shalbe commended for hys wysdome, but a fole shalbe despysed.
A symple man which laboureth and worketh, is better then one that is gorgyous and lacketh bread.
A ryghteous man regardeth the lyfe of hys catell, but the vngodly haue cruel hertes.
He that tylleth his lande, shall haue plenteousnesse of bread: but he that foloweth ydylnes: is a very foole.
The desyre of the vngodly hunteth after myschefe, but the rote of the ryghteous bringeth forth fruyte.
The wycked falleth into the snare thorow the malyce of hys awne mouth, but the iust shall eschape out of parell.
Euery man shall enioye good accordynge to the frute of hys mouth, and after the workes of hys handes shall he be rewarded.
Loke what a foole taketh in hande, he thynketh it well done: but he that is wyse, wyll be counceled.
A foole vttereth hys wrath in all the haste, but a discrete man couerith wronge.
A iust man wyll tell the trueth, and shewe the thynge that is ryght: but a false witnesse disceaueth.
A sclaunderous person prycketh lyke a swerde but a wyse mans tonge is wholsome.
A trewe mouth is euer constant, but a dissemblynge tonge is soone chaunged.
They that ymagyn euell in theyr mynde, wyll disceaue: but the councelers of peace, shall haue ioye folowynge them.
There shall no mysfortune happen vnto the iust, but the vngodly shalbe fylled with misery.
The Lorde abhorreth lyinge lyppes, but they that laboure for trueth please hym.
He that hath vnderstandynge, doth hyde wysdome: but an vndiscrete herte telleth out hys folyshnesse.
A diligent hande shall beare rule, but the ydle shalbe vnder tribute.
Heuynesse discorageth the herte of man, but a good worde maketh it glad agayne.
The ryghteous excelleth hys neygboure, but the waye of the vngodly wyll disceaue them selues.
The disceytfull man shall not roste, that he toke in huntynge, but the riches of the iuste man is of great valewe.
In the waye of ryghteousnesse there is lyfe, and in the same waye there is no death.
A Wyse sonne wyll herken to hys fathers warnynge, but he that is scornefull, will not heare when he is reproued.
A good man shall enioye the frute of his mouth but he that hath a frowarde mynde, shalbe spoyled.
He that kepeth hys mouth kepeth hys lyfe: but who so openeth hys lyppes to euell, destroyeth hym selfe.
The slogarde wolde fayne haue, Ꟶ cannot get hys desyre: but the soule of the diligent shall haue plenty.
A ryghteous man abhorreth lyes, but the vngodly shameth both other and hym selfe.
Ryghteousnesse kepeth the innocent in the waye, but vngodlynesse doth ouerthrowe the synner.
Some men are ryche, though they haue nothynge, agayne some men are poore, hauing greate ryches.
With goodes euery man delyuereth his lyfe, and the poore wyll not be reproued:
The lyght of the ryghteous maketh ioyfull, but the candle of the vngodly shalbe put out.
Amonge the proude there is euer stryfe, but amonge those that do all thynges with aduisement, there is wysdome.
Uaynlye gotten goddes are soone spent: but they that be gathered to gether with the hande, shall increace.
Longe taryenge for a thynge that is differred, greueth the herte: but when the desyre commeth: it is a tree of lyfe.
Whoso despyseth anye thinge, shalbe hurt for the same: but he that feareth the commaundement, shall haue the rewarde.
The lawe is a well of lyfe vnto the wyse, that it maye kepe hym from the snares of death:
Good vnderstandinge geueth fauour, but harde is the waye of the despysers.
A wyse man doth all thynges with discrecion, but a foole wyll declare hys foly.
An vngodly messaunger falleth into myschefe, but a faythfull ambassadour is wholsome.
He that thinketh scorne to be refourmed, commeth to pouerte Ꟶ sname: but whoso regardeth correccion shall come to honoure.
When a desyre is brought to passe, it delyteth the soule: but fooles counte it abhominacyon to departe from euell.
He that goeth in the company of wyse men, shalbe wyse: but whoso is a companyon of fooles, shalbe hurte.
Myschefe foloweth vpon synners, but the ryghteous shall haue a good rewarde.
He that is vertuous, leaueth an enheritaunce vnto hys chylders children and the ryches of the synner is layed vp for the iust.
There is plenteousnesse of fode in the feldes of the poore, but the felde not well ordred is without frute.
He that spareth the rodde, hateth hys sonne: but whoso loueth hym, chastiseth hym by tymes.
The ryghteous eateth, and is satisfyed, but the bely of the vngodly hath neuer ynough,
Wyse women vpholde theyr house, but a folysh wyfe plucketh it downe.
He that walketh in the ryght path of the Lorde feareth him: but he that turneth him selfe awaye from his wayes, dispyseth hym.
In the mouth of the foolysh is the rodd of pryde, but the lyppes of the wyse wyll preserue them.
Where no oxen are, there the crybbe is emptye: but where the oxen laboure there is moche frute.
A faythfull wytnesse wyll not dissemble, but a false recorde wyll make a lye.
A scornefull body seketh wysdome, and fyndeth it not: but knowledge is easy to come by, vnto hym that wyll vnderstande.
Se that thou medle not with a foole, in whom thou perceauest to be no knowledge.
The wysdome of hym that hath vnderstanding is, to take hede vnto his waye but the folyshnesse of the vnwyse disceaueth.
Foles make but a sporte of synne, but there is fauorable loue amonge the ryghteous.
The herte feleth hys owne lyues bytternesse: nether shall straunger be partaker of his ioye.
The house of the vngodly shalbe ouerthrowne, but the tabernacle of the ryghteous shall floryshe.
There is awaye which some men thynke to be ryght, but the ende therof leadeth vnto death.
The herte is sorowefull euen in laughter, and the ende of myrth is heuynes.
A backslydynge hert shalbe fylled wt his awne wayes, but a good man shall lyue of his frutes.
An ignoraunt body beleueth all thinges: but who so hath vnderstandinge, loketh well to his goinges.
A wyse man feareth, and departeth from euell, but a furiouse foole goeth on presumpteously:
An vnpacyent man dealeth folyshly: but he that is well aduysed, is hated of the fole.
The ignoraunt haue folyshnes in possessyon, but the wyse are crowned with knowledge.
The euell shall bowe them selues before the good, and the vngodly shall wayte at the dores of the ryghteous.
The poore is hated euen of hys awne neyghboures, but the ryche hath many frendes.
Whoso despyseth his neyghbour doth a misse: but blessed is he the hath pytie of the poore.
Without doute they erre that ymagyne wyckednes, but they that muse vpon good thynges, vnto soche shall happen mercy and faythfulnesse
In euery laboure there is some profecte. But only lippe laboure, bringeth forth penurye.
Ryches are as a crowne vnto the wyse, but the ignoraunce of fooles is very folyshnesse.
A faythfull witnesse delyuereth soules, but a disceytfull wytnesse bryngeth forth lyes.
The feare of the Lorde is a stronge holde, and hys chyldren are vnder a sure defence.
The feare of the Lorde is a well of lyfe, to auoyde the snares of death.
The increase and prosperite of the comens is the kynges honoure, but the decaye of the people is the confusyon of the Prynce.
He that is pacient, hath muche vnderstandyng: but he that is soone displeased, prouoketh folyshnesse.
A mery herte is the lyfe of the body, but rancoure consumeth awaye the bones.
He that doth a poore man wrong, blasphemeth his maker: but whoso hath pytie of the poore, doth honoure vnto God.
The vngodly is cast awaye for hys iniquitye, but the ryghteous hath a good hope euen in death.
Wysdome resteth in the herte of hym that hath vnderstandyng and it shalbe knowen amonge them that are vnlerned.
Ryghteousnesse setteth vp the people, but the sacrifyce of the hethen is synfull.
A discrete seruaunt is a pleasure vnto the kynge, but one that is not honest prouoketh hym vnto wrath.
A Softe answere putteth downe displeasure, but frowarde wordes prouoke vnto anger.
The tonge of suche as be wyse, vseth knowledge a right, as for a folysh mouth it blabbeth out nothyng, but folyshnesse.
The eyes of the Lord loke on euery place, beholdyng both the good Ꟶ badd
A wholsome tonge is a tree of lyfe, but he that abuseth it, hath a broken mynde.
A foole despyseth hys fathers correccyon, but he that taketh hede whan he is reproued shall haue the more vnderstandinge.
The house of the ryghteous is full of ryches, but the increase of the vngodly are nye destruccion.
A wyse mouth poureth oute knowledge but the herte of the folysh doth not so.
The Lord abhorreth the sacrifyce of the vngodly, but the prayer of the ryghteous is acceptable vnto hym.
The waye of the vngodly is an abhominacyon vnto the Lord: but whoso foloweth ryghteousnesse, hym he loueth.
He that forsaketh the ryght strete, shalbe sore punyshed: and who so hateth correccyon, shall dye.
The hell with her payne is knowen vnto the Lorde, howe moche more then the hertes of men?
A scornefull body loueth not one that rebuketh hym nether will he come vnto the wyse.
A mery herte maketh a chearfull countenaunce, but an heuy herte compelleth a man to syght.
The hert of hym that hath vnderstandyng, doth seke after knowledge, but the mouth of fooles is fedd with foolyshnesse.
All the dayes of the poore are myserable, but a quyete hert is as a continual feast.
Better is a lytle with the feare of the Lorde, then greate treasure with sorowe.
Better is a measse of potage with loue, then a fat oxe with euell will.
An angrye man stereth vp stryfe, but he that is pacient, stylleth discorde.
The waye of a slouthfull man, is as it were hedged with thornes, but the strete of the ryghteous is well clensed.
A wyse sonne maketh a glad father, but an vndiscrete body shameth his mother.
A foole reioyseth in foolyshe thinges, but a wyse man loketh well to his awne goynges.
Unaduysed thoughtes shall come to naught, but where as men are that canne geue councell, there is stedfastnesse.
A ioyfull thynge is it, to a man when his counsell is folowed: and very pleasunt is a worde spoken in due season.
The waye of lyfe leadeth vnto heauen, that a man shulde beware of hell beneth.
The Lorde will breake downe the house of the proude, but he shall make fast the borders of the widdowe.
The Lorde abhorreth the ymaginacyons of the wycked, but pure wordes of innocentes are pleasaunt vnto hym.
The couetous man roteth vp hys awne house, but who so hateth rewardes, shall lyue.
The herte of the ryghtuouse studieth his answere afore. but the wycked mans mouthe spueth out myschefe.
The Lorde is farre from the vngodly, but he heareth the prayer of the ryghteous.
Lyke as the clearnesse of the eyes reioyseth the herte, so doth a good name fede the bones.
The eare that harkeneth to the refourmacyon of lyfe, shall dwell amonge the wyse.
He that refuseth to be refourmed, despyseth hys awne soule: but he that submytteth hym selfe to correccyon, is wyse.
The feare of the Lorde is the ryght science of wysdome, and lowlynes goeth before honoure.
A Man maye well purpose a thynge in hys herte, but the answere of the tonge commeth of the Lorde.
A man thynketh all hys wayes to be cleane, but it is the Lorde that iudgeth the myndes.
Commytte thy worckes vnto the Lorde and loke what thou deuysest, it shall prospere.
The Lorde doth all thynges for hys awne sake, yee and when he kepeth the vngodly for the daye of wrath.
The Lorde abhorreth all such as be of a proude herte, his hande is against ther hande and they shall not escape as innocentes.
With louinge mercy Ꟶ faythfulnesse, synnes be forgeuen, Ꟶ who so feareth the Lord eschueth euell.
When a mans wayes please the Lorde, he maketh his very enemyes to be his frendes.
Better is it to haue a lytle thynge with ryghteousnes, then greate rentes, wrongeously gotten.
A man deuiseth awaye in his herte, but it is the Lorde that ordreth hys goynges.
When the prophecy is in the lyppes of the kynge, his mouth shall not go wronge in iudgment.
A trewe measure Ꟶ a trewe balaunce are the Lordes iudgment, he maketh all weyghtes.
It is a greate abhominacyon when kynges are wycked, for a kynges seate shulde be holden vp with ryghteousnesse.
Ryghteous lyppes are pleasaunt vnto kynges: and he that speaketh the trueth shalbe beloued.
The kynges displeasure is a messaunger of death, but a wyse man will pacifye him.
The cherefull countenaunce of the kynge is lyfe, and his louynge fauoure is as the euenynge dewe.
To haue wysdome in possessyon is better then to haue golde: and to get vnderstandynge, is rather to be chosen them to haue syluer.
The path of the ryghteous is to eschue euell: Ꟶ who so loketh well to his wayes, kepeth his awne soule.
Presumtpteousnes goeth before destruccyon, and after a proude stomake there foloweth a fall.
Better is it to be of humble mynde with the lowly, then to deuyde the spoyles with the proude.
He that handleth a matter wysely, opteyneth good: Ꟶ blessed is he, that putteth hys trust in the Lorde.
Who so hath a wyse vnderstandynge, shalbe called to councell: and he that can speake fayre, shall haue the more lernynge.
Understandinge is a well of lyfe vnto him that hath it: as for the chastenynge of fooles, it is but foolyshnesse.
A wyse hart ordreth hys mouth wysely, and amendeth the doctryne in his lyppes.
Fayre wordes are an hony combe, a refreshynge of the mynde, Ꟶ health of the bones.
There is awaye that men thyncke to be ryght, but the ende therof leadeth vnto death.
A troublous soule disquyeteth her selfe, for her awne mouth hath brought her therto.
An vngodly personne stereth vp euell, and in his lippes he is as an whote burnynge fyre.
A frowarde body causeth stryfe, and he that is a blabbe of hys tonge, maketh deuisyon amonge prynces.
A wycked man begyleth hys neyghbour, and leadeth him in to the waye that is not good.
The vngodly that loketh gastely wt hys eyes ymagineth myschefe, Ꟶ when he moueth his lyppes, he wyll do some harme.
Age is a crowne of worshype, yf it be founde in the waye of ryghteousnes.
A pacient man is better then one stronge: and he that can rule him selfe, is more worth then he that wynneth a cytye.
The lottes are cast in to the lappe, but the ordrynge ther of standeth all in the Lorde.
Better is a drye morsell wyth quyetnesse, then a house full of fatt offringe with stryfe.
A discrete seruaunt shall haue more rule then the sonnes that haue no wysdome, and shall haue lyke heritage with the brethren.
Lyke as syluer is tryed in the fyre, and golde in the fornace, euen so doth the Lorde proue the hertes.
A wycked body gyueth audience to false lyppes, Ꟶ a frowarde personne geueth eare to a disceatfull tonge.
Who so laugheth the poore to scorne, blasphemeth his maker: and he that is glad of another mans hurte, shall not be vnpunyshed.
Chylders chyldren are a worshyppe vnto the elders, and the fathers are the honoure of the chyldren.
Speach of auctorytie becommeth not a foole, moche lesse a lyinge mouth then besemeth a prince.
A rewarde is as a precious stone vnto him that hath it: but vnto whomsoeuer it turneth it maketh him vnwise.
Who so couereth another mans offence, seketh loue: but he that discloseth the faute, setteth the prynce agaynst him selfe.
One reprofe onely doth more good to hym that hath vnderstandynge, then an .C. strypes vnto a foole.
A sedycious personne seketh myschefe, Ꟶ therfore is a cruell messaunger sent agaynst him.
It were better to come agaynst a she Beare robbed of her whelpes, then agaynst a foole in his foolishnes.
Who so rewardeth euell for good, the plage shall not departe from his house.
The beginninge of stryfe is as when a man maketh an Issue for water, therfore or the metynge be leaue of contencyon.
The Lorde hateth as well him that iustifieth the vngodly, as him that condempneth the innocent.
What helpeth it to geue a foole treasure in hys hande, where as he hath no mynde to bye wysdome?
He is a frende that all waye loueth, and in aduersyte a man shall knowe who is hys brother.
Who so promyseth by the hande, and is suertye for his neyghboure, he is a foole.
He that delyteth in synne loueth stryfe: and who so setteth his dore to hye, seketh after a fall.
Who so hath a frowarde herte, opteyneth no good: and he that hath an ouerthwarte tonge, shall fall into myschefe.
He that begettith a fole begettith his sorowe, Ꟶ the father of a foole can haue no ioye.
A mery herte maketh a lusty age, but a sorowfull mynde dryeth vp the bones.
The vngodly taketh gyftes out of the bosome, to wreste the wayes of iudgement.
Wysdome shyneth in the face of him that hath vnderstandynge, but the eyes of fooles wandre thorowe out all landes.
An vndiscrete sonne is a grefe vnto hys father, and an heuynesse vnto hys mother.
To punyshe the innocent, and to smite the prynces that geue true iudgement, are both euell.
A wyse man, vseth fewe wordes, and he is a man of vnderstandynge, that maketh moch of hys sprete.
Yee a very foole (when he holdeth hys tonge) is counted wyse, and to haue vnderstandynge, when he shutteth hys lyppes.
He accompanieth hym selfe with all steadfast Ꟶ helth some doctryne, that hath a feruent desyre to it and is sequestrate from companye.
A foole hath no delyte in vnderstandinge, but onely in those thinges wherin his herte reioyseth.
When the vngodly commeth, them commeth also dysdayne, and with the dishonest person commeth shame and dishonour.
The wordes of a wyse mans mouth are lyke depe waters, and the well of wysdome is lyke a full streame.
It is not good to regarde the personne of the vngodly, or to put backe the ryghteous in iudgement.
A fooles lyppes are euer brawelynge, and his mouth prouoketh vnto battayll.
A fooles mouth is hys awne destruccyon, and hys lyppes are the snare for hys awne soule
The wordes of a sclaunderer are very woundes, and go thorowe vnto the ynmost partes of the body.
Who so is slouthfull and slacke in hys laboure, is the brother of him that is a waster.
The name of the Lord is a stronge castell, the ryghteous flyeth vnto it, and is in saue garde.
But the ryche mans goodes are his stronge holde, ye he taketh them for an hye wall rounde aboute him.
After pryde commeth destruccyon, and honour after lowlynes.
He that geueth sentence in a matter before he heare it, is a foole, and worthy to be confounded.
A good stomacke dryueth awaye a mans disease, but when the sprete is vexed, who maye byde it?
A wyse herte laboureth for knowledge and a prudent eare seketh vnderstandynge.
Lyberalite bryngeth a man to honoure and worshyppe, and setteth him amonge great men.
The righteous declareth his awne cause first him selfe, yf his neyghbour come, he shall finde him.
The lott pacifyeth the variaunce, Ꟶ parteth the myghtye a sunder.
A brother though he be greued wt offence, yet is he more worth then a very stronge castell: and they that holde together are lyke the barre of a palace.
A mans bely shalbe satisfyed wt the frute of his awne mouth, and with the increase of hys lyppes shall he be fylled.
Death and lyfe are in the instrument of the tonge: and they that loue it, shall enioye the frute therof.
Who so fyndeth a wyfe fyndeth a good thynge, and receaueth an wholsome benefyte of the Lorde.
The poore maketh supplicacyon Ꟶ praieth mekely: but the riche geueth a rough answere.
A man that loueth his frendes wyll be compinable with them: and some frende sticketh faster to a man then his brother.
Better is the pore that lyueth godly, then the blasphemer that is but a fole.
Where no discrecyon is, there the soule is inclined to the thyng that is not good, and is swyft on fote, and offendeth.
Folysshenes maketh a man to go out of hys waye, Ꟶ then is hys herte vnpacient against the Lorde.
Ryches make many frendes: but the pore is forsaken of hys neyghboure.
A false witnes shall not remayne vnpunysshed: and he that speaketh lyes shall not escape.
The multitude hangeth vpon great men: and euery man fauoureth hym that geueth rewardes.
As for the poore, he is hated amonge all his brethren: yee, hys awne frendes withdrawe from him: and yf he aske them the cause, they dysdayne to answere hym.
He that is wyse, loueth hys awne soule: and kepeth vnderstandinge, that he maye prospere.
A false witnes shall not remayne vnpunyshed: and he that speaketh lyes shall peryshe.
Pleasure becommeth not a foole, moch more vnsemely is it, a bonde man to haue the rule of prynces.
A wyse man can put of displeasure: and it is hys honoure to lett some fautes passe.
The kynges dysfauoure is lyke the roarynge of a lyon, but hys frendshypis lyke the dewe vpon the grasse.
An vndyscrete sonne is the heuynes of his father: Ꟶ a braulyng wyfe is lyke the top of an house, where thorowe it is euer droppynge.
House and rychesse maye a man haue by the herytage of hys elders: but a dyscrete woman is the gyft of the Lorde.
Slouthfulnes bryngeth slepe: and a soule accustomed with crafte shall suffre honger.
Whoso kepeth the commaundment, kepeth his awne soule: but he that regardeth not hys waye, shall dye.
He that hath pitye vpon the poore, lendeth vnto the Lorde: and loke what he layeth out, it shalbe payed hym agayne.
Chasten thy sonne whyle there is hope: but let not thy soule be moued to slaye hym.
A man of great wrath beareth a payne: and though thou once deliuer him, thou must agayne do asmoch for him.
O geue care vnto good councell, and be content to be reformed, that thou mayest be wyse in thy latter dayes.
There are many deuyces in a mans herte: neuertheles, the councell of the Lorde shall stande.
It is a mans worship to do good: Ꟶ better it is to be a pore man then a dissembler.
The feare of the Lord bringeth a man to lyfe: and he shall rest the hole night in plenteousnes, without visitacyon of anye plage.
A slouthfull man shuteth his handes into his bosom, as into the pot: and wyll not take payne to put it to hys mouth.
If thou smytest a scornefull persone, the ignoraunt shall take better heed: and yf thou reprouest one that hath vnderstondynge, he wylbe the wyser.
He that hurteth his father or shuteth out hys mother, is a shamefull and an vnworthy sonne.
My sonne, heare nomore the doctrine that leadeth the vnto errours from the wordes of vnderstondinge.
A false witnes laugheth iudgement to scorne: and the mouth of the vngodly eateth wickednesse.
Punyshementes are ordeyned for the scornefull: and stryppes for fooles backes.
Wyne maketh a man to be scornefull: and stronge dryncke causeth a man to be vnquyete: who so delyteth therin, shall neuer be wyse.
The kynge ought to be feared as the roaryng of a lion: who so prouoketh him vnto anger offendeth agenst his awne soule.
It is a mans honour to kepe him selfe from strife: but they that haue pleasure in braulynge are fooles euery one.
A slouthfull body wyll not go to plowe for colde of the wynter: therfore shall he go a beggyng in sommer, Ꟶ haue nothynge.
Wyse councell in the herte of man is lyke a water in the depe of the earth: and a man that hath vnderstondynge bryngethe it forth.
Many there be that wolde be called good doers: but where shall one fynde a true faythfull man.
Whoso leadeth a godly and an innocent life: is righteous and happy shall hys chyldren be whom he leaueth behynde him.
A kyng that sitteth in the throne of iudgment, and loketh well about hym, dryueth awaye all euell.
Who can saye, my hert is cleane, I am innocent from synne?
To vse two maner of weyghtes, or two maner of measures, both these are abhomynable vnto the Lorde.
A childe is knowne by his conuersacion, whether his worckes be pure Ꟶ ryght.
The eare to heare, the eye to se: the Lorde hath made them both.
Delyte not thou in slepe, lest thou come vnto pouertye: but open thyne eyes, that thou mayst haue bred ynough.
It is naught it is naught (sayeth he that byeth any thynge:) but when he commeth to his awne house, then he boasteth of hys peny worth.
A man that hath a mouth of vnderstandynge hathe many precyous stones and costly Iewels.
Take hys garment that is suretye for a straunger: and take a pledge of hym for the vnknowne mans sake.
Euery man lyketh the breed that is gotten with disceate: but at the last hys mouth shalbe fylled with grauell.
Thorowe councell, the thynges that men deuyse go forwarde: and wt discrecion ought warres to be taken in hande.
The crafty disceatfull bewrayth secret councell: and to him that custometh flaterynge lyppes ioyne nott thy selfe.
Whoso curseth hys father Ꟶ mother: his lyght shalbe put out in the myddest of darcknes.
The heritage that commeth to hastely at the first, shall not be praysed at the ende.
Saye not thou: I wyll recompense euell: but put thy trust in the Lorde, and he shall defende the.
The Lorde abhorreth two maner of weyghtes, and a false balaunce is an euell thinge.
The Lorde ordreth euery mans goinges: howe maye a man then vnderstande hys awne waye?
It is a snare for a man to deuoure that which is holy: and after the vowe to turne to thyne awne vse, the thynge thou hast vowed.
A wyse king destroyethe the vngodly, and bryngeth the whele ouer them.
The lanterne of the Lorde is the breth of man: and goth thorowe all the inwarde partes of the body.
Mercye and faythfulnes preserue the kinge: and with louynge kyndnes hys seate is holden vp.
The strength of yonge men is theyr worshyppe, and a gray heed is an honour vnto the aged.
Woundes dryue, awaye euell, Ꟶ so do strypes the inwarde partes of the body.
The kynges herte is in the hande of the Lorde, lyke as are the ryuers of water: he maye turne it whithersoeuer he wyll.
Euery man thynketh hys awne waye to be ryght: but the Lorde iudgeth the hertes.
To do ryghteousnesse and iudgement is more acceptable to the Lord then sacrifyce.
A presumpteous loke, a proude stomacke: and the plowynge of the vngodly is synne.
The deuyces of one that is diligent brynge plenteousnes: but he that is vnaduised commeth vnto pouertye.
Whoso hoordeth vp rychesse with the dysceatfulnesse of hys tonge, he is vayne and a foole, and lyke vnto them that seke theyr awne deeth.
The robberyes of the vngodly shalbe theyr awne destruccyon: for they wyll nott do the thynge that is ryght.
The wayes of the frowarde are straunge: but the worckes of hym that is cleane are ryght.
It is better to dwell in a corner vnder the house toppe, then with a braulynge woman in a wyde house.
The soule of the vngodly wysheth euell: and hath no pitye vpon hys neyghboure.
When the scornefull is punyshed, the ignoraunt take the better heade: and when he seyth the wyse men prospere, he wyll receaue the more vnderstandynge.
The ryghteous man wysely consydereth the house of the wicked: and for theyr wickednes God ouerthroweth the vngodly.
Whoso stoppeth hys eares at the cryenge of the poore: he shall crye hym selfe, and not be hearde.
A preuy rewarde pacyfyeth displeasure, and a gyfte in the bosome, stylleth furiousnesse.
The iuste delyteth in doynge the thyng that is ryght: but ouer the worckers of wyckednesse hangeth destruccyon.
The man that wandreth out of the waye of wysdome, shall remayne in the congregacyon of the deed.
He that hath pleasure in banckettes, shalbe a poore man. Whoso delyteth in wyne and delycates, shall nott be ryche.
The vngodly shalbe geuen for the ryghtewes: and the wycked for the iust.
It is better to dwell in a wildernes then with a chydynge Ꟶ an angrye woman.
In a wyse mannes house, there is greate treasure and oyle: but a foolysh body spendeth vp all.
Whoso foloweth ryghteousnesse and mercy, fyndeth bothe lyfe, ryghteousnesse, and honoure.
A wyse man wynneth the citye of the myghtye: and as for the strength that they trust in, he bryngeth it downe.
Whoso kepeth his mouth and hys tonge: the same kepeth hys soule from troubles.
He that is proude and presumptuous, is called a scornefull man, which in wrath darre worcke malicyouslye.
The volupteousnesse of the slouthfull is hys awne death: for his handes wyll not laboure.
He coueteth and desyreth all the daye longe: but the ryghteous is allwaye geuynge, and kepeth nothynge backe.
The sacrifyce of the vngodly is abhominacyon: howe moche more when they offre the thynge that is gotten with wyckednesse?
A false wytnes shall peryshe: but he that is a true man boldely speaketh that he hathe heard.
An vngodly man goeth forth rashly: but the iust reformeth hys awne waye.
There is no wisdome, there is no vnderstandynge, there is no councell agaynst the Lorde.
The horsse is prepared agaynst the daye of battayll: but the Lorde geueth the victorye.
A Good name is more worth then greate rychesse, and louinge fauoure is better then siluer and golde.
The ryche and poore are together: the Lorde is the maker of them all.
A wyse man seeth the plage, and hydeth hym selfe: but the folysh go on styll and are punysshed.
The ende of lowlynes and the feare of God is ryches, honoure, prosperite, and health.
Thornes and snares are in the waye of the frowarde: but he that doeth kepe hys soule, wyll fle from soche.
Teache a chylde in hys youth what waye he shulde go: for he shall not leaue it, when he is olde.
The ryche ruleth the poore: Ꟶ the borower is seruaunt to the lender.
He that soweth wyckednesse shall reape sorowe: and the rodde of hys crueltye shall peryshe.
He that hath a louynge eye shalbe blessed: for he geueth of his breed vnto the poore.
Cast out the scornefull man, and so shall stryfe go out wt hym: yee, variaunce Ꟶ sclaunder shall cease.
Whoso delyteth to be of a cleane herte and of gracyous lyppes, the kynge shall be his frende.
The eyes of the Lorde preserue knowledge, but as for the wordes of the despytefull, he bringeth them to naught.
The slouthfull body sayeth: there is a lyon without, I myght be slayn in the strete.
The mouth of an harlot is a depe pyt, wherin he falleth that the Lorde is angrie wyth all.
Folyshnes stycketh in the herte of the lad, Ꟶ the rodd of correccion shall dryue it awaye.
Who so doth a poore man wronge to increase his awne riches, Ꟶ geueth vnto the riche to please him, at the last commeth to pouerte him selfe.
My sonne, bowe downe thyne eare, and herken vnto the wordes of wysedome, applye thy mynde vnto my doctryne:
for thou shalt be excellent yf thou kepe it in thine herte, Ꟶ practise it in thy mouth:
that thou mayest put thy trust in the Lorde. I haue shewed the this daye the thynge the thou knowest.
Haue not I warned the very oft with councel Ꟶ learnyng?
that I might shew the the truth, and that thou with the verite myghtest answere them that sende vnto the?
Se that thou robbe not the poore, because he is weake, Ꟶ oppresse not the simple in iudgment:
for the Lord him selfe will defende their cause, Ꟶ do violence vnto them that haue vsed violence.
Make no frendshype wt an angrye wilfull man, Ꟶ kepe no company wt the furious:
lest thou learne his wayes, Ꟶ receaue hurte in thy soule.
Be not thou one of them that bynde theyr hande vpon promyse, Ꟶ are suertie for wayghty causes:
for yf thou hast nothyng to paye, they shall take awaye thy bed from vnder the.
Thou shalt not remoue the lande marcke, which thy fore elders haue sett.
Seest thou not, that they which be diligent in theyr busynes, stande before kynges and not amonge the symple people?
When thou syttest at the table to eate wt a Lorde, ordre thy selfe manerly wt the thynges
that are set before the. Measure thyne appetite:
Ꟶ yf thou wylt rule thyne awne selfe, be not ouer gredy of hys meate, for meate begyleth Ꟶ disceaueth.
Take not ouer greate trauayle Ꟶ labour to be riche, beware of soch a purpose.
Why wilt thou set thyne eye vpon the thynge, which sodenly vanisheth awaye? For riches make them selues winges, Ꟶ take theyr flyght lyke an Aegle in to that ayre.
Eate not thou with the ennyous, Ꟶ desyre not his meat,
for he doth as a man that pescribeth a mesure to the in his herte. He sayth vnto the: eate Ꟶ dryncke, where as his herte is not wt the.
Yee, the morsels that thou hast eaten shalt thou perbrake Ꟶ lese those swete wordes.
Tell nothinge in to the eares of a foole, for he wyll despyse the wysdome of thy wordes.
Remoue not the olde lande marke, Ꟶ come not within the felde of the fatherlesse:
For he that delyuereth them, is mightie, euen he shall defende theyr cause against the.
Applye thyne herte vnto correccion, Ꟶ thyne eare to the wordes of knowledge.
Witholde not correcion from the childe, for yf thou beatest him wt the rodd, he shall not dye therof.
Yf thou smyte him wt the rodde, thou shalt deliuer his soule from hell.
My sonne, yf thy herte receaue wysdome, my herte also shall reioyce:
yee, my reynes shalbe very glad: yf thy lippes speke the thinge that is ryght.
Let not thyne herte be gelous to folowe synners, but kepe the styll in the feare of the Lord all the daye longe:
for the ende is not yet come, Ꟶ thy pacient abydynge shall not be in vayne.
My sonne, geue eare Ꟶ be wyse, and set strayte thynehert in the waye of the Lord.
Kepe no company wt wyne bybbers Ꟶ ryotous eaters of flesh:
for soch as be dronckardes Ꟶ ryotous shall come to pouerte, Ꟶ he that is geuen to moch slepe, shall go wt a ragged coate.
Geue eare vnto thy father that begat the, Ꟶ despyse not thy mother when she is olde.
Labour for to get the trueth: sell yt not awaye, Ꟶ so do by wysdome, nourtour Ꟶ vnderstandyng:
for a ryghteous father is maruelous glad of a wyse sonne, and he that begettith a wyse chylde shall haue gret pleasure of him.
Do so that thy father Ꟶ mother may be glad of the, Ꟶ that she that bare the may reioyse.
My sonne, geue me thyne herte, Ꟶ lett thyne eyes haue pleasure in my wayes.
For an whore is a depe graue, and an harlot is a narow pytt.
She lurketh lyke a thefe, and bringeth vnto her such men as be full of vyce.
Who hath wo? Who hath sorow? Who hath strife? Who hath brauling? Ꟶ who hath woundes without cause Or who hath reed eyes?
Euen they that be euer at the wyne, Ꟶ seke excesse.
Loke not thou vpon the wyne, how redd it is, Ꟶ what a colour it geueth in the glasse.
It goeth downe softly, but at the last it byteth lyke a serpent, Ꟶ styngeth as an Adder.
So shall thine eyes loke vnto straunge wemen, Ꟶ thyne herte shall muse vpon frowarde thynges.
Yee, thou shalt be as though thou layest in the myddest of the see, or sleptest vpon the toppe of the mast of a shippe.
They wouded me (shalt thou saye) but it hath not hurte me: they haue all to broken me, but I felt it not. Whan I am well wakened, I will go to the drincke againe.
Be not thou gelous ouer wycked men, and desyre not to be amonge them.
For ther herte ymagyneth to do hurte, and theyr lyppes talke of myschefe.
Thorow wysdome is an house buyled, and wyth vnderstandynge is it sett vp.
Thorow discrecion shalt the chambers be fylled with all costly and pleasaunt ryches.
A wyse man is euer stronge, yee, a man of vnderstanding encreaseth of strength.
For with discrecyon must warres be taken in hande, Ꟶ where as are many that can geue councell, there is the victory.
Wysdom is to hye a thinge for a fole, for he darre not open his mouth in the gate.
He that ymagyneth myschefe, maye welbe called an vngracious personne.
The thought of the foolysh is synne, Ꟶ the scornefull is an abhominacion vnto men.
If thou be ouersene and negligent in tyme of nede, then is thy strength but smal.
Deliuer them that go vnto death, Ꟶ are led awaye to be slayne, Ꟶ be not neglygent therin yf thou be able to do them good.
If thou wilt saye: I knewe not of it. Thinkest thou that he which made the hertes, doth not considre it? Ꟶ that he which regardeth thy soule, seeth it not? Shall not be recompence euery man according to his worckes?
My sonne, thou eatest hony Ꟶ the swete hony combe, because it is good Ꟶ swete in thy mouth.
Euen so shall the knowledge of wysdome be vnto thy soule, assone as thou hast gotten it. And thow shalt haue longe dayes, yee, thy hope shall not be in vayne.
Laye no preuy wayte (o wicked man) vpon the house of the ryghteous Ꟶ disquiete not his restyng place.
For a iust man falleth seuen tymes, Ꟶ ryseth vp agayne, but the vngodly fall into wyckednes.
Reioyce not thou at the fall of thyne enemye, Ꟶ lett not thyne herte be glad when he stombleth.
Lest the Lord (when seith it) be angrye, and turne hys wrath from hym vnto the.
Let not thy wrath Ꟶ gelousy moue the, to folowe the wycked Ꟶ vngodly.
And why? the wicked shall haue no posterite, and the candle of the vngodly shall be put out.
My sonne, feare thou the Lord Ꟶ the kynge, Ꟶ kepe no company wt them that slyde backe from his feare:
for theyr destruccion shall come sodenly, Ꟶ who knoweth the aduersyte that maye come from them both?
These are also the sayenges of the wyse. It is not good, to haue respecte of any persone in iudgement.
He that sayeth to the vngodly: thou arte ryghteous hym shall the people curse, yee, the comentie shall abhorre him.
But they that rebuke the vngodly, In them doth God delite, Ꟶ a ryche blessyng shall come vpon them.
Euery man shall kysse his lyppes, that geueth a good answere.
Fyrst make vp thy worck that is without, Ꟶ loke well vnto that which thou hast in the felde Ꟶ then buylde thyne house.
Be no false witnesse agaist thy neyghbour Ꟶ speake no falshode wt thy lyppes.
Saye not: I will handle him, euen as he hath dealte wt me, Ꟶ wyll rewarde euery man accordinge to his dedes.
I went by the felde of the slouthfull, Ꟶ by the vyneiarde of the foolysh man.
And lo, it was all couered wt nettels, Ꟶ stode full of thystles, Ꟶ the stone wall was broken downe.
Thys I sawe, Ꟶ considered it well: I loked vpon it, Ꟶ toke it for a warnyng.
Yee, slepe on styll a lytle, slombre a lytle, folde thy handes together yet a lytle:
so shall pouerte come vnto the as one that trauayleth by the waye, Ꟶ necessite lyke a weapened man.
These also are the parables of Salomon, which the men of Ezekiah Kynge of Iuda copied out.
It is the honour of God to kepe a thinge secrete, but the kynges honour is to search out a thyng.
The heauen is hye, the earth is depe, Ꟶ the kynges herte is vnsearcheable.
Take the drosse from the syluer, Ꟶ there shalbe a cleane vessell therof.
Take awaye vngodlynesse from the kinge, Ꟶ his seate shalbe stablished wt ryghteousnes.
Put not forth thy selfe in the presence of the king, Ꟶ preace not into the place of greate men.
Better is it that it be sayde vnto the: come vp hyther, then thou to be put lower in the presence of the prince whom thou seyst wt thyne eyes.
Be not hastie to go to the lawe, lest happlye thou do some offence after the strife be ended wherby thy neyghbour put the to shame.
Handle thy matter wt thy neyghbour him selfe, and discouer not another mans secrete:
lest when men heare therof, it turne to thy disshonoure, and least thyne euell name do not ceasse.
A worde spoken in due season, is lyke apples of golde in a graued worke of syluer.
The correccion of the wyse is to an obedient eare, a golden cheine Ꟶ a Iewell of golde.
Lyke as the winter coole in the haruest, so is a faythfull messaunger to them that send him: for he refressheth his masters mynde.
Whoso maketh greate boastes Ꟶ geueth nothyng, is lyke cloudes Ꟶ wynde without rayne.
With pacience is a prince pacified, Ꟶ wt a soft tong is rygorousnes broken.
If thou findest hony, eate so moch as is sufficient for the: lest thou be ouerfull, Ꟶ perbrake it out agayne.
Withdraw thy foote from thy neyghbours house least he be wery of the, Ꟶ so abhorre the.
Who so beareth false wytnesse against his neyghboure, he is a very clubb, a swearde, Ꟶ a sharpe arowe.
The hope that is put in a false man in tyme of neade, is lyke a rotten toth Ꟶ a slypperi foote.
who so taketh awaye a mans garment in the colde wether, is lyke vyneger vpon chalck, or lyke him that syngeth songes to an heuie hart.
If thyne enemye honger, feade him: yf he thryst, geue him drinke:
for so shalt thou heape coales of fyre vpon hys head, and the Lorde shall rewarde the.
The North winde dryueth awaye the rayne, euen so doth an earnest sober countenaunce a backbyters tonge,
It is better to syt in a corner vnder the rofe, then with a brauling woman in a wyde house:
A good reporte out of a farre countre, is lyke coulde water to a thyrstie soule.
A ryghteous man fallynge downe before the vngodly, is lyke a troubled well Ꟶ a springe that is destroyed.
Lyke as it is not good to eate to moch hony, euen so he that will search out hye thynges, it shall be to heuy for hym.
He that cannot rule hym selfe, is lyke a cyte which is broken downe, Ꟶ hath no walles.
Like as snowe is not mete in sommer, ner rayne in haruest, euen so is worshipe vnsemely for a foole.
Lyke as the byrde Ꟶ the swalowe take theyr flyght Ꟶ fle here Ꟶ there, so the curse that is geuen in vayne, shall not lyght vpon a man.
Unto the horse belongeth a whyppe, to the Asse a brydle, Ꟶ a rodde to the fooles backe.
Geue not the foole an answere after his foolyshnesse, lest thou become lyke vnto him:
but make the foole an answere to his foolyshnesse, lest he be wyse in his awne conceate.
He is lame of his fete, yee droncken is he in vanyte, that committeth eny message to a foole.
Lyke as in a lame man his legges ar not equall, euen so is a parable in the fooles mouth.
He that setteth a foole in hie dignite, that is euen as yf a man put a stone in a slynge.
A parable in a fooles mouth is lyke a thorne that prycketh a droncken man in the hande.
A man of experience discerneth all thinges wel: but he that putteth the fole to silence endeth the stryfe.
Lyke as the dogg turneth agayne to his vomyte, euen so a foole beginneth hys folyshnesse agayne a fresh.
If thou seest a man that is wyse in his awne conceate, there is more hope in a foole then in hym.
The slouthfull sayeth: there is a lyon in the waye, Ꟶ a lyon in the myddest of the stretes.
Lyke as the dore turneth aboute vpon the henges, euen so doth the slouthfull welter him selfe in his bedd.
The slouthfull body thrusteth his hande into hys bosome, and it greueth hym to put it agayne to his mouth.
The slogarde thinketh him selfe wyser, then seuen men that sytt Ꟶ teach.
Who so goeth by Ꟶ medleth wt other mens stryfe he is lyke one that taketh a dogge by the eares.
Lyke as a madd man that castith fyre brandes, and shoteth deadly arowes and dartes euen so doth a dissembler wt his neyghboure.
And then sayth he I dyd it but in sporte.
Where no wodd is, there the fyre goeth out: Euen so where the tale betrayer is taken awaye, there the strife ceaseth.
Coles kyndle heate, Ꟶ wodd the fyre: euen so doth a brauling felowe stere vp variaunce.
A taleberars wordes are lyke men that stryke with hammers, but they pearse the inwarde partes of the body.
Uenymous lyppes and a wycked herte, are lyke a potsherde couered with syluer drosse.
And enemye shalbe knowen by his talkyng, Ꟶ in the meane season he ymagyneth myschefe,
but when he speaketh fayre, beleue him not, for there are seuen abhominacions in his herte.
Who so kepeth euell will, secretly to do hurte, his malyce shalbe shewed before the whole congregacyon.
Who so dyggeth vp a pytt, shall fall therin: Ꟶ he that weltreth a stone, shall stomble vpon it him selfe.
A dyssemblinge tonge hateth one that rebuketh hym, and a flatterynge mouth worcketh myschefe.
Make not thy boost of to morowe for thou knowest not what maye happen to daye.
Let another man prayse the, and not thyne awne mouth: yee other folckes lyppes, and not thyne.
The stone is heuy and the sande weyghtye: but a fooles wrath is heuyer then them both.
Wrath is a cruell thinge and furiousnesse is a very tempest: but who is able to abyde enuye?
An open rebuke is better then a secrete loue.
Faythfull are the woundes of a louer, but the kysses of an enemye are cruell.
He that is full, abhoreth an hony combe: but vnto him that is hongrye, euery sowre thinge is swete.
He that oft tymes flytteth, is lyke a byrde that forsaketh her nest.
Balme and swete encense make the hert mery: so is the swete counsell of a mans frende that agreeth to his purpose.
Thyne awne frende and thy fathers frende se thou forsake not: but go not into thy brothers house in tyme of thy trouble. For better is a frende at hand then a brother farre of.
My sonne, be wyse, and thou shalt make me a glad herte so that I shall make answere vnto my rebukers.
A wyse man seynge the plage. wyll hyde hym selfe, as for fooles they go on styll, and suffer harme.
Take hys garment that is suertye for a straunger, and take a pledge of him for the vnknowen mans sake.
He that is to hastye to prayse hys neyghboure aboue measure, shalbe taken as one that geueth hym an euell reporte.
A braulynge woman and the rofe of the house droppynge in a raynye daye, maye well be compared together.
He that refrayneth her, refrayneth the wynde, Ꟶ holdeth oyle fast in hys hande.
Lyke as one yron whetteth another, so doth one man comforte another.
Who so kepeth hys fygge tre, shall enioye the frutes therof: euen so, he that wayteth vpon his master, shall come to honoure.
Lyke as in one water there apeare dyuerse faces, euen so diuerse men haue diuerse hertes.
Lyke as hell and destruccyon are neuer full, euen so the eyes of men can neuer be satisfyed.
Syluer is tryed in the moulde, and golde in the fornace, and so is a man, when he is openly praysed to hys face.
Though thou shuldest bray a foole wt a pestell in a morter lyke frumentye corne, yet will not hys foolyshnesse go from hym.
Se that thou knowe the nombre of thy catell thy selfe, Ꟶ loke well to thy flockes.
For ryches abyde not alwaye, Ꟶ the crowne endureth not for euer.
The heye groweth, the grasse commeth vp, Ꟶ herbes are gathered in the mountaynes.
The lambes shall clothe the and for the goates thou shalt haue money to thy husbandry.
Thou shalt haue goates mylck ynough to fede the, to vpholde thy housholde, and to susteyne thy maydens.
The vngodly flyeth whan no man chaseth hym, but the ryghteous standeth styf as a lyon.
Because of synne, the lande doth oft chaunge her prince: but thorow men of vnderstandynge and wysdome a realme endureth longe.
One poore man oppressynge another by violence, is lyke a continuall rayne that destroyeth the frute.
They that forsake the lawe, prayse the vngodly: but soch as kepe the lawe, abhorre them.
Wycked men discerne not the thynge that is ryght, but they that seke after the Lorde, discusse all thynges.
A poore man leadynge a godly lyfe, is better then the ryche that goeth in frowarde wayes.
Who so kepeth the lawe, is a chylde of vnderstandynge: but he that is a companyon of ryotous men, shameth his father.
He that by vsurye and vniuste gaynes gatherith ryches: he shall laye them in store for a man that will pytye the pore.
He that turneth awaye hys eare from hearing the lawe, hys prayer shalbe abhominable.
Who so ledeth the ryghteous into an euell waye, shall fall into hys awne pytt, but the iust shall haue the good in posession.
The rych man thyncketh him self to be wyse, but the poore that hath vnderstandynge, can perceaue him well ynough,
When ryghteous men are in prosperite, then doth honoure florysh but when the vngodly come vp, the state of men chaungeth.
He that hydeth his synnes, shall not prospere: but whoso knowledgeth them and forsaketh them, shall haue mercy.
Well is him that standeth alwaye in awe: as for him that hardeneth his herte, he shall fall in to myschefe.
Lyke as a roarynge lyon and an hongrye beare, euen so is an vngodly prynce ouer the poore people.
Where the prince is without vnderstandynge, there is greate oppressyon and wronge: but yf he be soch one as hateth couetousnesse, he shall longe raygne.
He that by vyolence sheddeth eny mans bloude, shall be a rennagate vnto hys graue, and no man shall be able to souccoure hym.
Who so leadeth a godly Ꟶ an innocent lyfe, shalbe saued: but he that goeth froward wayes, shall once haue a fal.
He that tylleth his land, shall haue plenteousnesse of bread: but he that foloweth ydylnesse, shall haue pouerte ynough.
A man that dealeth faythfully, shalbe fylled with blessynges: Ꟶ he that maketh to moch haste for to be ryche, shall not be vngyltye.
To haue respecte of personnes in iudgement is not good: And why? A man will do wronge, yee, euen for a pece of bread.
He that wyll be rych all to soone, hath an euelleye, and consydereth not, that pouerte shall come vpon hym.
He that folowynge my precepts rebuketh a man? shall fynde more fauoure at the last, then he that flatreth hym.
Whoso robbeth his father and mother, and sayeth it is no synne: the same is lyke vnto a destroyer.
He that is of a proude stomacke Ꟶ without feare, stereth vp stryfe: but he that putteth hys trust in the Lorde, shalbe well fedd.
He that trusteth in hys awne herte, is a foole: but he that dealeth wysely, shalbe safe.
He that geueth vnto the poore, shall not lacke: but he that turneth awaye hys eyes from soch as be in necessyte, shall suffre greate pouerte hymselfe.
When the vngodly are come vp, men are fayne to hyde them selues: but when they perysh, the ryghteous increase.
He that is styfnecked, Ꟶ wyll not be refourmed, shall sodenly be destroyed without eny help.
When the ryghteous haue the ouerhande, the people are in prosperite: but when the vngodly beareth rule, there the people mourne.
Who so loueth wysdome maketh his father a glad man: but he that kepeth company with harlottes, spendeth awaye that he hath.
With true iudgement the kynge setteth vp the lande, but yf he be a man that oppressith the people with gatheringes, he turneth it vp syde downe.
Who so flatreth hys neyghbour, layeth a nette for his fete.
The synne of the wicked is his awne snare, but the ryghteous doth syng Ꟶ reioyse.
The ryghteous considreth the cause of the poore: but the vngodly regardeth no vnderstandynge.
Wycked people bringe a cytie in decaye, but wyse men set it vp agayne.
If a wyse man go to lawe wt a foole (whether he deale wt him frendly or roughly) he getteth no rest.
The bloude thyrstie hate the ryghteous: but the iust seke his soule.
A foole powreth out hys sprete altogether but a wyse man kepeth it in tyll afterwarde.
If a prince delyte in lyes, all his seruauntes are vngodly.
The poore and the lender mete together, Ꟶ the Lord lyghteneth both theyr eyes.
The seate of the Kynge that faithfully iudgeth the poore, shall continue sure for euermore.
The rodde and correccyon ministre wysdome, but yf a chylde be not loked vnto, he bryngeth his mother to shame.
When the vngodly come vp, wyckednes increaseth: but the ryghteous shall se theyr fall.
Nurtoure thy sonne wt correccion, and thou shalt be at rest, yee, he shall do the good at thyne herte.
When the worde of god is not preached, the people peryshe, but well is hym that kepeth the lawe.
A seruaunt wyll not be the better for wordes, for though he vnderstande, yet wyll he not regarde them.
Yf thou seest a man that is hastye to speake vnaduysed, thou mayest trust a foole more then hym.
He that delycately bryngeth vp his seruaunt from a chylde, shall make him hys master at length.
An angry man stereth vp stryfe, and he that beareth euell wyll in his mynde, doth moch euell.
After pryde commeth a fall, but a lowely sprete bringeth greate worshyp.
Who so kepeth company wyth a thefe, hateth his awne soule: he heareth blasphemyes, and telleth it not forth.
He that feareth men, shal haue a fall: but who so putteth hys trust in the Lorde is with out daunger.
Many there be that seke the Princes fauoure, but euery mans iudgement commeth from the Lorde.
The ryghteous abhorreth the vngodly: but as for those that be in the ryght waye, the wycked hate them.
The wordes of Agur the sonne of Iakei, and the prophecie that the same man spake vnto Ithiel, euen vnto Ithiel, and Uchal:
I am more foolysh then any man, and haue no mans vnderstandyng
I neuer lerned wysdome, ner had knowledge of holy thynges.
Who hath clymed vp into heauen? Who hath come doune from thence? Who hath holden the wynd fast in his hand? Who hath comprehended the waters in a garment? Who hath sett all the endes of the worlde? What is hys name, or his sonnes name? Canst thou tell
all the wordes of God are pure and cleane, for he is a shylde vnto all them, that put theyr trust in hym.
Put thou nothyng vnto hys wordes, lest he reproue the, and thou be founde a lyar.
Two thynges haue I requyred of the, that thou wylt not denye me before I dye.
Remoue fro me vanite and lyes: geue me nether pouerte nor ryches, onely graunte me a necessary lyuynge.
Lest yf I be to full, I denye the, and saye: who is the Lorde? And lest I beinge constrayned thorow pouerte, fall vnto stealynge, and take the name of my God in vayne.
Accuse not a seruaunt vnto hys master, lest he speake euell of the, and thou be hurte.
There is a generacyon that curseth theyr father, and doth not blesse theyr mother.
There is a generacion that thynke them selues cleane, and yet is not clensed from theyr fylthynesse.
There is a generacyon that hath a proude loke, Ꟶ doth cast vp theyr eye lyddes.
There is a generacion whose teth are swerdes, Ꟶ with theyr chaw bones they consume Ꟶ deuoure the symple of the earth, and the poore from amonge men.
The horsleche hath two daughters cryeng: bryng hyther, bryng hyther.
There be thre thynges that are neuer satysfyed, yee, fowre thynges sayeth neuer hoo. The graue: a womans wombe closed: and the earth that hath neuer water ynough. As for fyre, it sayeth neuer hoo.
Who so laugheth hys father to scorne, and setteth hys mothers commaundement at naught: the rauens pycke out hys eyes in the valleye, and deuoured be he of the yonge Aegles.
There be thre thynges to hye for me, yea foure that passeth my knowledge.
The waye af an Aegle in the ayre, the waye of a serpent ouer a stone, the waye of a shyp in the see, and the waye of a man wyth a yonge woman.
Soch is the waye also of a wyfe that breaketh wedlocke, which wypeth her mouth lyke as when she hath eaten and sayeth: As for me. I haue done no harme.
Thorow thre thynges the earth is dysquieted, Ꟶ the fourth may it not beare:
Thorow a seruaunt that beareth rule. Thorow a foole that hath to moche breed,
thorow a wife worthy hatered when she is maryed, and thorow an hand mayden that is heyre to her mastres.
These be foure thynges in the earth, the which are very lytle: but in wysdome they exceade the wyse
The emmettes are but weake people yet gather they theyr meate together in the haruest.
The Conyes are but a feble folke, yet make they theyr couches amonge the rockes.
The greshoppers haue not a gyde, yet go they forth together by heapes.
The spyder laboureth with her handes, Ꟶ is in Kynges places.
There be thre thynges that go styfly, yea fowre ar comlye in goinge.
A Lyon, which is strongest among beastes, and geueth place to no man:
A grehounde stronge in the hynder partes: A ramme also Ꟶ a Kyng, agaynst whom no man aryseth vp.
Yf thou hast done foolyshly whan thou wast in hye estate, or yf thou hast taken euell councell: then laye thyne hande vpon thy mouth.
Who so chyrmeth mylcke, maketh butter: and he that rubbeth hys nose, maketh it blede: Euen so he that causeth wrath bringeth forth stryfe.
The wordes of Kyng Lamuel, Ꟶ the lesson that hys mother taught hym.
My sonne (why do ye so) thou sonne of my body: O my deare beloued sonne,
geue not ouer thi strength Ꟶ waies vnto wemen, which are the destruccion euen of kynges.
O Lamuel, yt is not for kynges, it is not (I saye) for kinges to drinke wyne, nor Princes stronge dryncke
lest they beynge droncken forgett the lawe, and paruerte the iudgement of all poore mens childerne.
Geue stronge drincke vnto soch as are condempned to death, and wyne vnto those that mourne:
that they maye drincke it, and forgett theyr mysery Ꟶ aduersytie.
Be thou an aduocate, for the dombe and stande in iudgement thy selfe, to speake for all soch as be socourles in this transitorye worlde.
Open thy mouth, defende the thynge that is lawfull and ryght, and the cause of the poore and helpelesse.
Who so fyndeth an honest faythfull woman, she is moch more worth then perles.
The hert of her husband maye safely trust in her, so that he shall fall in no pouertye.
She will do hym good and not euell, all the dayes of her lyfe.
She occupyeth woll and flaxe, Ꟶ laboureth gladly with her handes.
She is lyke a marchauntes shyppe, that bryngeth her vytayles from a farre.
She is vp in the nyght season, to prouyde meate for her housholde, and fode for her maydens.
She consydreth lande, Ꟶ byeth it, and with the frute of her handes she planteth a vyneyarde.
She gyrdeth her loynes with strength, Ꟶ courageth her armes.
And yf the perceaue that her houswyferye doth good, her candle goeth not out by nyght.
She layeth her fyngers to the spyndell: and her hande taketh holde of the distaffe.
She openeth her hande to the poore, yee she stretcheth forth her handes to soche as haue nede.
She feareth not that the colde of wynter shall hurte her house, for all her housholde folkes are clothed with skarlett.
She maketh her selfe fayre ornamentes, her clothynge is whyte sylke Ꟶ purple.
Her husband is moch set by in the gates, when he sytteth amonge the rulers of the land.
She maketh cloth of sylke and selleth it, Ꟶ delyuereth gyrdles vnto the marchaunt.
Strength and honoure is her clothynge, Ꟶ in the latter daye she shall reioyse.
She openeth her mouth with wysdome, and in her tonge is the lawe of grace.
She loketh well to the wayes of her housholde: Ꟶ eateth not her bred with ydylnes.
Her children shall aryse, and call her blessed: Ꟶ her housband shall make moch of her.
Many daughters there be that gather riches together, but thou goest aboue them all.
As for fauoure, it is disceatfull, and beutie is a vayne thynge: but a woman that feareth the Lorde, she is worthy to be praysed.
Geue her of the frute of her handes and let her awne worckes prayse her in the gates.
These are the wordes of the Preather, the sonne of Dauid, kynge of Ierusalem.
All is but moste vayne vanite (sayeth the Preacher) Ꟶ al is moste vayne (I say) Ꟶ but plaine vanite.
For what els hath a man, of all the labour that he taketh vnder the Sunne?
One generacyon passeth awaye, another commeth, but the earth abydeth styll.
The Sunne aryseth, the sunne goeth downe, Ꟶ returneth to hys place, that he maye there rise vp againe.
The winde goeth toward the South, Ꟶ turneth vnto the northe, fetchith his compasse, whirleth aboute, Ꟶ goth forth, Ꟶ his circuite returneth agayne to him selfe.
All floudes runne into the see, Ꟶ yet the see yt selfe is not fylled: for loke vnto what place the waters runne, thence they come to flowe agayne.
All thinges are so harde to be knowen, that no man can expresse them. The eye is not satisfyed wt syght, the eare is not fylled wt hearinge.
The thing that hath bene, commeth to passe agayne: Ꟶ the thinge that hath bene done, shall be done agayne, there is no new thing vnder the sunne.
Is there eny thing wherof it maye be sayde: lo, this is new? For it was longe agoo in the times that haue bene before vs.
The thing that is past, is out of remembraunce: Euen so the thinges that are for to come, shal no more be thought vpon amonge them that come after.
I my selfe the Preacher, was kyng of Israel at Ierusalem,
Ꟶ dyd applie my mynde to seke out Ꟶ search for the knowledge of all thinges that are done vnder heauen. Soch trauayle and labour hath God geuen vnto the children of men, to excercyse them selues therin.
Thus I haue consydred all the thinges that come to passe vnder the Sunne, and lo, they are all but vanite, Ꟶ vexacion of minde.
The croked cannot be made strayght, nor the thinge that is vnperfecte, cannot be acompted wt thinges that are perfecte.
I commoned wt mine awne herte, sayinge: lo, I am come to a great estate, Ꟶ haue gotten more wysdome, then all they that haue bene before me in Ierusalem. Yee my herte had greate experience of wisdome Ꟶ knowledge,
for there vnto I applied my mynde: that I myght knowe what were wisdome Ꟶ vnderstanding, what were errour Ꟶ folishnes: Ꟶ I perceaued, that this also was but a vexacyon of minde:
for where moch wisdome is, there is also greate trauaile Ꟶ disquietnes: Ꟶ the more knowledge a man hath, the more is hys care.
Then sayd I thus in my herte: Now go to, I wil take mine ease Ꟶ haue good dayes. But lo, that is vanite:
also in so moch that I sayd vnto the man gyuen to laughter: thou arte madd, Ꟶ to myrth: what doest thou?
So I thought in my hert, to gyue my flesh vnto wyne and agayne to applie my mynde vnto wysdome, and to comprehende folyshnes vntyll the tyme that (amonge all the thinges whych are vnder the Sunne) I myght se what were best for men to do, so longe as they lyue vnder heauen.
I made gorgious fayre worckes. I buylded me houses, and planted vyneyardes.
I made me ortchardes and gardens of pleasure, and planted trees in them of al maner frutes.
I made poles of water, to water the grene and fruteful trees withall.
I bought seruauntes and maydens, and had a greate housholde. As for catell and shepe, I had more substaunce of them, then all they that were before me in Ierusalem.
I gathered syluer Ꟶ golde together, euen a treasure of kynges and landes. I prouyded me syngers Ꟶ wemen, which coulde playe of instrumentes, to make men myrth and pastime. I gat me psalteries Ꟶ songes of musicke.
And I was greater and in more worshipe, then all my predecessours in Ierusalem. For wisdome remained with me:
Ꟶ loke whatsoeuer myne eyes desyred, I let them haue it: and wherin soeuer my hert delyted, or had eny pleasure, I with helde it not from it. Thus my herte reioysed in all that I dyd, and this was my porcion of all my trauayle.
But when I consydred all the workes that my handes had wrought, and all the laboure that I had taken therin: lo, all was but vanite and vexacion of mynd, and nothing of eny value vnder the Sunne.
Then turned I me to considre wysdome, erroure, and folyshnesse (for what is he among men that myght be compared to me the kyng in soch worckes?)
and I sawe: that wysdome excelleth foolishnesse, as farre as light doth darcknesse.
For a wyse man hath his eyes in his head, but the foole goeth in the darkenesse: I perceaued also, that they both had one ende.
Then thought I in my mynde, If it happen vnto the foole as it doth vnto me, what nedeth me then to labour eny more for wisdome? So I confessed within my hert, that this also was but vanite.
For the wyse are euer as lytle in remembraunce as the folish, for the dayes shal come when all shal be forgotten, yee the wise man dieth as well as the foole.
Thus beganne I to be weery of my lyfe, in so moch that I coulde awaye with nothing that is done vnder the Sunne, for all was but vanite Ꟶ vexacion of minde:
Yee I was weery of all my labour, whych I had taken vnder the Sunne, because I shulde be fayne to leaue them vnto another man that commeth after me:
And who knoweth, whether he shalbe a wyse man or a fole? And yet shall he be lord of all my labours, which I with soch wysdome haue taken vnder the Sunne Thys is also a vayne thyng.
So I turned me to refrayne my mynde from all soch trauayle, as I toke vnder the Sunne:
for so moch as a man shulde weery hym selfe with wysdome, with vnderstanding and oportunite, Ꟶ yet be fayne to leaue his labours vnto another that neuer swett for them. This is also a vayne thing Ꟶ greate misery.
For what getteth a man of all the laboure and trauayle of his mynde, that he taketh vnder the Sunne,
but heuynesse, sorowe and desquyetnes all the dayes of hys lyfe? In so moch that his hert cannot rest in the nyght, this is also a vayne thing?
Is it not better then for a man to eate Ꟶ drynche, Ꟶ his soule to be mery in his labour? Yee I sawe that thys also was a gyfte of God:
For who will eat or go more lustely to hys worcke then I? And why?
God gyueth to the man that is good before him, wysdome, vnderstandyng, Ꟶ gladnesse. But vnto the synner he geueth weerynes that he maye gather and heape together the thynge, that afterwarde shalbe geuen vnto him, whom it pleaseth God. This is now a vayne thinge, yee a very disquietnesse and vexacyon of mynde.
Euery thinge hath a tyme, yee all that is vnder the heauen, hath his conuenient season.
There is a tyme to be borne, and a tyme to dye. There is a tyme to plante and a tyme to pleke vp the thing, that is planted.
A time to slaye, and a time to make whole. A tyme to breake downe, Ꟶ a tyme to build vp.
A tyme to wepe, and a tyme to laugh: A tyme to mourne, and a tyme to daunse.
A time to cast awaye stones, and a tyme to gather stones together. A tyme to embrace, and a tyme to refrayne from embracing.
A tyme to wynne, and a tyme to lese. A tyme to spare, and a tyme to spende.
A tyme to cut in peces, and a tyme to sowe together.
A tyme to loue, and a tyme to hate.
What hath a man els (that doth any thing) but werynesse Ꟶ labour?
For as touchinge the trauayle and carefulnesse whych God hath geuen vnto men, I se that he hath geuen it them, to be excercised in it.
All thys hath he ordened maruelous goodly, to euery thing his due tyme. He hath planted ignoraunce also in the hertes of men, that they shuld not comprehende the ground of hys worckes, which he doth from the begynning to the ende.
So I perceaued, that in these thinges there is nothing better for a man, then to be mery and to do well so longe as he lyueth.
For all that a man eateth Ꟶ dryncketh, yee whatsoeuer a man enioyeth of all his labour, that same is a gyfte of God.
I consydered also that whatsoeuer God doth, it continueth for euer and that nothing can be put vnto it, nor taken from it, and that God doth it to the intent, that men shuld feare hym.
The thing that hath bene is nowe: and the thyng that is for to come, hath bene afore time, for God restoreth agayne the thynge that was past
Moreouer, I sawe vnder the Sunne vngodlynesse in the steade of iudgement, and iniquyte in steade of ryghteousnesse.
Then thought I in my minde: God shal separate the ryghteous from the vngodly, and then shalbe the tyme and iudgement of all councels and worckes.
I commened with myne awne hert also, concernynge the children of men: how God hath chosen them, Ꟶ yet letteth them apeare: as though they were beastes:
for it happeneth vnto men as it doth vnto beastes, and as the one dyeth, so dyeth the other: yee they haue both one maner of breth: so that (in this) a man hath no preemynence aboue a beast, but all are subdued vnto vanytie.
They go all vnto one place, for as they be all of dust, so shall they all turne vnto dust agayne.
Who knoweth the sprete of man that goeth vpwarde, and the breth of the beast that goeth downe into the earth?
Wherfore I perceaue, that there is nothing better for a man, then to be ioyfull in hys laboure, for that is hys porcyon. But who wyll brynge him to se the thinge that shall come after hym?
So I turned me, Ꟶ considred all the violent wrong that is done vnder the sunne, Ꟶ beholde, the teares of soch as were oppressed, Ꟶ there was no man to conforte them, or that wolde delyuer Ꟶ defende them from the violence of their oppressours.
Wherfore I iudged those that are deed, to be more happye then soch as be alyue:
yee, him that is yet vnborne to be better at ease then they both, because he seyth not the miserable worckes that are done vnder the sunne.
Agayne, I sawe that all trauayle, Ꟶ dilygence of labour, that euery man taketh in hande, was done of enuy agaynst his neyboure This is also a vaine thinge, and a vexacion of mynde.
The foole foldeth his handes together, and eateth vp hys awne fleshe.
One hande full (sayeth he) is better with rest, then both the handes full with laboure Ꟶ trauayle of minde.
Moreouer, I turned me, Ꟶ beholde yet another vanyte vnder the Sunne.
There is one man, no mo but hym selfe alone, hauyng nether chylde ner brother: yet is there no ende of his carefull trauayle, his eyes can not be satysfyed with riches, For whom do I take soch trauayle? For whose pleasure do I thus consume awaye my lyfe? This is also a vayne Ꟶ myserable thinge?
Therfore, two are better then one, for they maye well enioye the profyt of theyr laboure.
For If one of them fall, his companyon helpeth him vp agayne: But wo is him that is alone, for yf he fall, he hath not another to helpe him vp.
Agayne, when two slepe together, they are warme: but how can a body be warme alone?
One maye be ouercome, but two maye make resistaunce: A threfold cable is not lyghtly broken.
A poore childe beynge wyse, is better then an olde kynge, that doteth, and cannot beware in tyme to come.
Some one commeth out of preson, and is made a kynge: and another which is borne in the kyngdome, commeth vnto pouerte.
And I perceaued, that all men lyuynge vnder the sonne, go with the seconde childe, that shall stonde vp in the steade of the other.
As for the people that haue bene before him, and that come after hym, they are innumerable: And they that come after him shall not reioyse of him. This is also a vayne thynge Ꟶ a vexacyon of mynde.
When thou commest into the house of God, kepe thy fote Ꟶ draw nye that God which is at hande may heare: that thou gyue not the offeringes of fooles, for they knowe nowght, but to do euell.
Be not hastye with thy mouth, and let not thine hert speake eny thing rashly before God. For God is in heauen, and thou vpon earth, therfore let thy wordes be few.
For where moch carefulnesse is, there are many dreames: and where many wordes are, there men maye heare fooles.
If thou make a vowe vnto God, be not slacke to perfourme it. As for folysh vowes, he hath no pleasure in them:
If thou promyse eny thinge, paye it: for better it is that thou make no vowe, then that thou shuldest promyse, and not paye.
Suffre not thy mouth to cause thy flesh for to synne, nether saye thou before the angell, that it is thy ignoraunce. For then God wilbe angrie at thy voyce, Ꟶ destroye all the worckes of thyne handes.
And why? where as are many dreames and many wordes, there are also diuerse vanytes: but loke that thou feare God.
If thou seyst the poore to be oppressed and wrongeously dealt withall, so that equite Ꟶ the ryght of the lawe is wrasted in the lande: maruell not thou at soch a thyng, for one greate man kepeth touch with another, Ꟶ the myghtie men are in auctorite ouer the pore.
The encrease of the erth vpholdeth all thinge, yea the kynge himselfe is mayntened by husbandrye.
He that loueth money, wyll neuer be satisfyed wt money: Ꟶ who so deliteth in riches, shal haue no profyt therof. This is also a vayne thinge.
Where as moche ryches is, there are many also that spende them awaye. And what pleasure more hath he that possesseth them, sauynge that he maye loke vpon them with his eyes?
A labouringe man slepeth swetely, whether it be lytle or moch that he eateth: but the aboundaunce of the ryche will not suffre him to slepe.
Yet is there a sore plage, which I haue sene vnder the sunne (namely) ryches kepte to the hurte of him that hath them in possession.
For oft tymes they perysh with his greate misery Ꟶ trouble: Ꟶ yf he haue a chylde, it getteth nothynge.
Lyke as he came naked out of hys mothers wombe, so goeth he thither agayne, Ꟶ carieth nothing awaye with hym of all his laboure.
This is a miserable plage, that he shall go awaye euen as he came. What helpeth it hym then, that he hath laboured in the wynde?
All the dayes of his lyfe also he dyd eate in the darcke, with greate carefulnesse, sycknesse and sorow.
Therfore me thincke it a better Ꟶ as fayrer thyng, a man to eate and dryncke, and to be refreshed of all hys laboure, that he taketh vnder the Sunne all the dayes of his lyfe which God geueth hym, for this is hys porcyon.
For vnto whomsoeuer God geueth riches goodes and power, he geueth it hym to enioye it, to take it for hys porcyon, and to be refreshed of hys laboure: thys is the gyfte of God.
For he thincketh not moch howe longe he shall lyue, for so moch as God fylleth his herte with gladnesse.
There is yet a plage vnder the sunne, Ꟶ it is a generall thing among men:
when God geueth a man ryches, goodes and honoure, so that he wanteth nothynge of all that hys herre can desyre: and yet God geueth him not leaue to enioye the same, but another man spendeth them. This is a vayne thinge Ꟶ a miserable plage.
If a man begett an hundred children, Ꟶ lyue many yeares, so that his dayes are many in nombre, and yet can not enioye his good, nether be buryed: as for him I saye, that an vntymely byrth is better then he.
For he commeth to naught, Ꟶ spendeth his tyme in darrknes, Ꟶ his name is forgotten.
Moreouer, he seeth not the sonne, Ꟶ knoweth not of it: Ꟶ yet hath he more rest then the other.
Yee though he lyued two thousande yeares, yet hath he no good lyfe. Come not all to one place?
All the labour that a man taketh, is for him selfe, Ꟶ yet his desire is neuer fylled after his minde.
For what hath the wyse more then the foole? What helpeth it the poore, that he knoweth to walke wt fooles before the lyuing?
The cleare syght of the eyes is better, then that the soule shulde walke after desires of the luste. Howbeit, this is also a vayne thinge Ꟶ a dysquietnesse of mynde.
The thinge that hath bene: is named allready, Ꟶ knowen that it is euen man him selfe: nether maye he go to lawe wt hym that is myghtier then he.
Many thinges ther be that increace vanite, Ꟶ what hath a man els.
For who knoweth what is good for man lyuinge, in the dayes of hys vayne lyfe, which is but a shadowe? Or who wyl tell a man, what shal happen after him vnder the Sunne?
A Good name is more worth then a precyous oyntment, and the daye of death is better then the daye of byrth.
It is better to go into an house of mourninge, then into a bancketinge house. For there is the ende of all men, Ꟶ he that is liuing, taketh it to hert:
grauytie is better then to laugh: for when the countenaunce is heuy, the herte is refourmed.
The hert of the wyse is in the mournyng house, but the hert of the folysh is in the house of myrth.
It is better to geue care to the chastenynge of a wyse man then to heare the songe of fooles.
For the laughinge of foles is lyke the crackynge of thornes vnder a pot. And that is but a vayne thynge.
The wyse man hateth wronge delynge: Ꟶ abhorreth the harte that couetith rewardes.
Better it is to consydre, the ende of a thinge then the begynnynge. The pacient of sprete is better then the hye mynded.
Be not hastely angrie in thy mynde, for wrath resteth in the bosome of fooles.
Saye not thou: What is the cause, that the dayes of the olde tyme were better, then they that be nowe? for that were no wyse question.
Wysdome wt enheritaunce is good yet better is it wt them that without care may beholde the sonne.
For wysdome defendeth as well as moneye, Ꟶ the excellent knowledge Ꟶ wysdome geueth lyfe vnto him that hath it in possession.
Considre the worke of God how that no man can make the thing straight which he maketh croked.
Use wel the tyme of prosperite, Ꟶ remembre the tyme of mysfortune: for God maketh the one by the other, so that a man can fynde nothing els.
All thinges haue I considred in the tyme of my vanite: that the iust man perisheth for his righteousnes sake, Ꟶ the vngodly lyueth in hys wyckednesse.
Therfore be thou nether to ryghteous ner ouer wyse, that thou perishe not:
be nether to vnryghteous also ner to folysh, lest thou dye before thy tyme.
It is good for the to take holde of this, Ꟶ not to let that go out of thy hand. For he that feareth God, commeth forth with them all.
Wysdome geueth more corage vnto the wyse, then ten myghtie men of the citye:
for there is not one iust vpon earth, that doth good, and synneth not.
Take not hede vnto euery worde that is spoken, lest thou heare thy seruaunt curse the:
for thine awne hert knoweth that thou thy selfe also hast oft tymes spoken euell by other men.
All these thinges haue I proued in wysdome: for I thought to be wyse but she went farther fro me then she was before,
yee Ꟶ so depe that I might not reach vnto her.
I applyed my mynde also vnto knowledge, Ꟶ to seke Ꟶ searche oute science, wysdome Ꟶ vnderstanding: to knowe the foolyshnesse of the vngodly, Ꟶ the errour of dotinge fooles.
And I founde, that a woman is bytterer then death: for she hath cast abrode, her herte as a nett that men fishe with, and her handes are cheynes. Who so pleaseth God, shall escape from her: but the synner will be taken with her.
Beholde (sayeth the preacher) thys haue I diligently searched oute Ꟶ proued. One thinge must be considred with another, that a man may come by knowledge: whych as yet I seke, Ꟶ fynde it not.
Among a thousande men I haue founde one, but not one woman amonge all.
Lo, this onely haue I founde, that God made man iust and ryght, but they sought many inuencions.
Who is wyse? Who hath knowledge to make answere? A mans wysdome maketh hys face to shine: but vnshamefastnes putteth it out of fauoure.
I must kepe the kynges commaundement, and the oth that I haue made vnto God.
Be not hastye to go out of hys syght, and se thou continue in no euell thinge: for whatsoeuer it pleaseth hym, that doeth he.
Lyke as when a kynge geueth a charge, his commaundement is myghtye: Euen so who maye saye vnto him: what doest thou?
Who so kepeth the commaundement: shall fele no harme: but a wyse mans herte discerneth the tyme Ꟶ iudgement:
For euery thing will haue oportunite Ꟶ iudgement, and this is the thynge that maketh men full of carefulnes and sorowe.
And why? a man knoweth not what is for to come: for who wyll tell him?
Nether is there eny man that hath power ouer the sprete, to kepe styll the sprete, ner to haue eny power in the tyme of death: is it not he also that can make an ende of the battayle, nether maye vngodlynes deliuer them that medle with all.
All these thinges haue I considered, and applied my mynde vnto euery worcke that is vnder the sonne: howe one man hath lordshype vpon another to his awne harme.
For I haue seane often the vngodly brought to ther graues: and yet they haue retorned into the citye ageyne, and came from the place of holy men, which in the citye were growen out of memory as were those also that lyued well. Thys is also a vayne thynge.
Because now that euell worckes are not hastely punysshed, the hert of man geueth hym selfe ouer vnto wyckednesse.
But though an euell persone offende an hundred tymes, Ꟶ God differ gyuinge him longe lyfe: yet am I sure, that it shal go well wt them that feare God, because they haue him before their eyes.
Agayne, as for the vngodly it shall not be well wt him, nether shall he prolonge his dayes: but euen as a shadowe, so shall he be that feareth not God.
Yet is there a vanyte vpon earth: There be iust men, vnto whom it happeneth, as though they had the worckes of the vngodly: Agayne, there be vngodly, with whom it goeth as though they had the workes of the ryghteous. Thys haue I called also a vayne thyng.
Therfore I commende gladnesse, because a man hath no better thing vnder the Sunne, then to eate and dryncke, Ꟶ to be mery: for that shall he haue of his labour all the dayes of his lyfe, which God geueth him vnder the sunne.
And so I applied my mynde to learne wysdome, Ꟶ to knowe the trauayle that is in the worlde (and that of soch a fassyon, that I suffred not myne eyes to slepe nether daye ner nyght)
I vnderstode of all the workes of God, but it is not possible for a man, to attayne vnto the workes that are done vnder the Sunne: and though he bestowe his laboure to seke them out, yet can he not reach vnto them: yee though a wyse man wolde vntertake to knowe them, yet shall he not fynde them.
For all these thinges purposed, I in my mynde to seke out. The ryghteous and wyse, yee and theyr seruauntes also, are in the hande of God: and there is no man that knoweth ether loue or hate, but all thynges are before them.
It happeneth vnto one as vnto another: it goeth with the ryghteous as with that the vngodly: with the good and cleane as wyth the vncleane: wyth hym that offereth as with him that offereth not: lyke as it goeth wyth the vertuous, so goeth it also with the synner: As it happeneth vnto the periured, so happeneth it also vnto him that is afrayed to be forsworne.
Amonge all thynges that come to passe vnder the Sunne, thys is a misery that it happeneth vnto all a lyke. This is the cause also that the hertes of men are full of wyckednesse, Ꟶ madd foolishnesse is in their hertes as longe as they lyue, vntyll they dye.
And why? As longe as a man lyueth, he hath a hope: for a quyck dogg (saye they) is better then a deed lion:
for they that be lyuing, knowe that they shall dye: but they that be deed: knowe nothing, nether deserue they eny more. For their memorial is forgotten,
so that they be nether loued, hated ner enuyed: nether haue they enymore parte in the world, in all that is done vnder the Sunne.
Go thou thy waye then, eate thy bred wyth ioye, and dryncke thy wyne with a glad hart, for thy workes please God.
Let thy garmentes be allwaye whyte, Ꟶ let thy head lack none oyntment.
Use thy self to liue ioyfully with thy wife whom thou louest, all the dayes of thy lyfe which is but vayne, that God geueth the vnder the Sunne, all the dayes of thy vanite: for that is thy porcion in this lyfe, of al thy laboure and trauyle that thou takest vnder the Sunne.
Whatsoeuer thou takest in hande to do, that do with all thy power, for in the graue that thou goest vnto, there is nether worcke, councell, knowledge ner wysdome.
So I turned me vnto other thinges vnder the Sunne, Ꟶ I sawe, that in runnyng, it helpeth not to be swyft: in batayle, it helpeth not to be stronge: to fedynge, it helpeth not to be wyse, so riches, it helpeth not to be suttell: to be had in fauoure, it helpeth not to be connyng: but that all lyeth in tyme Ꟶ fortune.
For a man knoweth not hys tyme, but lyke as the fyshe are taken with the angle, and as the byrdes are catched with the snare: Euen so are men taken in the perlous tyme, when it commeth sodenly vpon them.
Thys wysdome haue I sene also vnder the Sunne, Ꟶ me thought it a greate thing.
There was a lytle citie, Ꟶ a fewe men within it: so there came a greate kyng and beseged it, and made greate bulwarkes agaynst it.
And in the citie there was founde a poore man, (but he was wyse) which with hys wysdome delyuered the citye: yet was there no body, that had eny respect vnto soch a simple man.
Then sayde I: wysdome is better then strength. Neuertheles, a symple mans wysdome is despised, Ꟶ hys wordes are not herde.
A wyse mans councell that is folowed in sylence, is farre aboue the cryenge of a captayne amonge fooles.
For wysdome is better then harnesse: but one vnthryst alone destroyeth moch good.
A Deed flye doth corrupt swete oyntement Ꟶ maketh it to stynk: Euen so oft tymes he that is made for wysdome Ꟶ honour, is abhorred because of a lytle foolishnes.
A wyse mans herte is vpon the ryght hande, but a fooles herte vpon the left.
A foole will shewe him self when he goeth by the way, yet thinkethe he that euery man doth as foolyshly as him selfe.
If a principal sprete be geuen the to beare rule, be not necgligent then in thine office: for he that can take cure of him selfe, auoydeth great offences.
Another plage is there, which I haue sene vnder the sonne: namely, the ignoraunce that is commenly amonge princes:
in that a foole sytteth in greate dignite, Ꟶ the rych are sett downe beneth:
I haue sene seruauntes ryde vpon horses, and princes goyng vpon their fete as it were seruauntes.
But he that dyggeth vp a pyt, shal fall therin him selfe: and who so breaketh downe the hedge, a serpent shall byte hym.
Who so remoueth stones, shall haue trauayle withall: Ꟶ he that heweth wood, shalbe hurt therwith.
When an yron is blont, and the poynt not sharpened, it must be whet agayne, and that wt myght: Euen so doth wysdome folowe diligence.
A babler of hys tonge is no better, then a serpent that styngeth wythout hyssynge.
The wordes out of a wyse mans mouth are gracious, but the lyppes of a foole wyll destroye him selfe.
The beginnyng of his talkynge is foolyshnes, Ꟶ the last worde of his mouth is starke madnesse.
A foole is full of wordes, Ꟶ a man cannot tell what shall come to passe: who wyll then warne him of it that shall folow after him?
The laboure of the folysh is greuous vnto them, whyle they knowe not howe to go into the citye.
Wo be vnto the (O thou lande) whose kynge is but a child, and whose princes are early at their banckettes.
But well is the (O thou lande) whose kynge is come of nobles, Ꟶ whose princes eate in due season, for necessyte Ꟶ not for lust.
Thorow slouthfulnesse the balckes fall downe, Ꟶ thorow ydle handes it rayneth in at the house.
Meat maketh men to laugh, and wyne maketh them mery: but vnto money are all thinges obedient.
Wish the kyng no euell in thy thought Ꟶ speake no hurte of the ryche in thy preuy chambre: for a byrd of the ayre shall betraye thy voyce, and with hir fethers shal she bewraye thy wordes.
Lay thy brede vpon weate faces, Ꟶ so shalt thou fynde after many dayes.
Geue parte .vii. dayes, and also vpon the eyght, for thou knowest not what misery shall come vpon earth.
When the cloudes are full, they powre out rayne vpon the earth. And when the tre falleth (whether it be toward the South or North) in what place soeuer it fall, there it lyeth.
He that regardeth the winde, shall not sowe and he that hath respecte vnto the cloudes, shal not reape.
Now lyke as thou knowest not the waye of the spirite howe he entred into the body beinge yet in a mothers wombe: Euen so thou knowest not the worckes of God, whych is the worckemaster of all.
Cease not thou therfore with thy handes to sowe thy sede, whether it be in the morninge or in the euenynge: for thou knowest not whether this or that shal prospere, and yf they both take, it is the better.
The lyght is swete, Ꟶ a pleasaunt thynge is it for the eyes to loke vpon the Sunne.
If a man lyue many yeares, and be glad in them all, let him remembre the dayes of darckenesse, whych shalbe many: and that foloweth, all thinges shall be but vanyte.
Be glad then (O thou yonge man) in thy youth, and let thyne hert be mery in thy yong dayes, folowe the wayes of thyne awne herte, Ꟶ the lust of thine eyes but be thou sure, that God shall brynge the into iudgement for all these thynges.
PUt a waye displeasure out of thyne herte, Ꟶ remoue euell from thy body: for chyldehode Ꟶ youth is but vanyte.
Remembre thy maker the soner in thy youth, or euer the dayes of aduersytie come Ꟶ or the yeares drawe nye, when thou shalt saye: I haue not pleasure in them:
before the sunne the lyght, the moone Ꟶ starres be darckned, Ꟶ or the cloudes turne agayne after the rayne,
when the kepers of the house shall tremble, Ꟶ when the stronge men shall bowe them selues: when the myllers stande styll, because they be so fewe, Ꟶ when the syght of the wyndowes shall waxedymme,
when the dores in the stretes shalbe shutt, and when the voyce of the myller shalbe layed downe: when men shall ryse vp at the voyce of the byrde, and when all the daughters of musyke shalbe brought lowe:
when men shall feare in hye places, and be afrayed in the stretes: when the Almonde tree shall florishe and be laden with the greshopper, and when all lust shall passe (because man goeth to his longe home, and the mourners go aboute the stretes.)
Or euer the syluer lace be taken awaye, and or the golden well be broken. Or the pot be broken at the well, and the whele vpon the cysterne:
Then shall the dust be turned agayne vnto earth from whence it came, and the sprete shall returne vnto God, which gaue it.
All is but vanite (sayth the Preacher) all is but playne vanyte.
The Preacher was yet more wyse, and taught the people knowledge: he gaue good hede, sought out the grounde, and set forth many parables.
Hys diligence was to fynde out acceptable wordes, ryght scripture, and the wordes of trueth.
For the wordes of the wyse are lyke pryckes and nayles that goo thorow, wherwith the stuffe gathered is holden vp: for they are geuen of one shepherde onely.
Therfore beware (my sonne) of that doctrine that is besyde thys: for to make many bokes it is an endles worke: and to loude cryinge weryeth the bodye.
Let vs heare the conclusyon of all thynges: Feare God, and kepe hys commaundementes: For that toucheth all men.
For God shall iudge all worckes and secrete thynges, whether they be good or euell.
O that he wold kysse me with the kysses of his mouth: for thy loue is more pleasaunt then wyne,
Ꟶ that, because of the good Ꟶ pleasaunt sauoure of thy most preciouse balmes. Thy name is a swete smellynge oyntment when it is shed forthe, therfore do the maydens loue the:
drawe thou me vnto the: we wyll runne after the. The kynge hath brought me into hys preuy chambres. We wyll be glad Ꟶ reioyce in the, we thynke more of thy loue then of wyne. They that be ryghteous loue the.
I am black (O ye daughters of Ierusalem) lyke as the tentes of the Cedarenes, Ꟶ as the hangynges of Salomon:
but yet am I fayre Ꟶ well fauoured withall. Maruell not at me that I am so black: for why? the sunne hath shyned vpon me. My mothers chyldren had euell wyll at me, they made me the keper of the vyneyeardes: but myne owne vyneyarde haue I not kept.
Tell me of him whom my soule louethe where thou fedest the shepe, where thou makest them rest at the noone daye: for why shall I belyke him, that goeth wronge aboute the flockes of thy companyons?
Yf thou knowe not thy selfe (O thou fayrest amonge wemen) then go thy waye forth after the fotesteppes of the shepe, and fede thy goates besyde the shepeherdes tentes.
Unto the hoost of Pharaos charettes haue I compared the, O my loue.
Thy chekes and thy neck is beawtyfull as the turtyls, and hanged with spanges and goodly Iewels:
a neck bande of golde wyll we make the with syluer buttons.
When the kynge sytteth at the table, he shall smell my Nardus:
a bondell of Myrre is my loue vnto me: he wyll lye betwixte my breastes.
A cluster of Camphore in the vyneardes of Engaddi is my loue vnto me.
O howe fayre art thou (my loue) Oh howe fayre art thou? thou hast doues eyes.
O how fayre art thou (my beloued) howe well fauored art thou? Oure bed is decte with floures,
the sylynges of oure house are of Cedre tree, and oure crosse ioyntes of Cypresse.
I Am the lylie of the felde, and rose of the valleyes:
as the rose amonge the thornes, so is my loue amonge the daughters.
Lyke as the apple tree amonge the trees of the wodd, so is my beloued among the sonnes. My delyte is to syt vnder hys shadowe, for hys frute is swete vnto my throwte.
He bringeth me into hys wyne seller, hys banner spred ouer me, is loue.
Set aboute me cuppes of wyne, comforte me with apples, for I am sycke of loue:
His left hande lyeth vnder my heade, Ꟶ hys ryght hande shall embrace me.
I charge you, (O ye daughters of Ierusalem) by the Roes and hyndes of the felde, that ye wake not vp my loue nor touche her, tyll she be content her selfe.
Me thinke I heare the voyce of my beloued: lo, there commeth he hoppynge vpon the mountaynes, Ꟶ leapynge ouer the lytle hylles.
My beloued, is lyke a Roo or a yonge hart. Beholde, he standeth behynde our wall, he loketh in at the wyndowe, and pepeth thorowe the grate.
My beloued answered and sayde vnto me. O stande vp my loue, my beutyfull, and go to thyne awne:
for that, the wynter is now past the rayne is awaye and gone.
The floures are come vp in the felde, the tyme of the byrdes syngynge is come, and the voyce of the turtle doue is hearde in oure lande.
The fygge tree bringeth forth her fygges, and the vynes beare blossoms. Ꟶ haue a good smel. O stande vp then Ꟶ come my loue, my beutyfull, Ꟶ come I saye
(O my doue) out of the caues of the rockes, out of the holes of the wall: O let me se thy countenaunce and heare thy voyce for swete is thy voyce, and fayre is thy face.
Get vs the foxes, yee the lytle foxes, that hurt the vynes, for oure vynes beare blosoms.
My loue is myne, and I am hys, which fedeth amonge the roses,
vntyll the daye breake, and tyll the shadowes be gone. Come agayne (O my beloued) and be lyke as a Roo or a yonge hart vpon the wyde mountaynes.
By nyght in my beed I sought him, whom my soule loueth: ye diligently sought I him, but I founde him not.
I wyll get vp (thought I) and go aboute the cytie, in the wayes in all the stretes wyll I seke him whom my soule loueth: but when I sought hym, I founde hym not.
The watchmen also that go aboute the cytie, founde me. Sawe ye not him whom my soule loueth?
So when I was a lytle past them, I founde him whom my soule loueth. I haue gotten holde vpon hym, and wyll not let him go vntyll I bringe hym into my mothers house, and into her chambre that bare me.
I charge you, O ye daughters of Ierusalem, by the Roes and Hyndes of the felde, that ye wake not vp my loue ner touche her, tyll she be content herselfe.
Who is thys, that commeth vp out of the wyldernesse like vapours of smoke, as it were a smell of Myrre, franckencense, and all maner spyces of the Apotecary?
Beholde, aboute Salomons bedstede ther stande .lx. valeaunt men of the most myghtie in Israel.
They holde swerdes euery one, and are expert in warre. Euery man also hath hys swerde vpon hys thygh, because of feare in the nyght:
Kynge Salomon had made him selfe a palace of the wod of Libanus,
the pilers are of syluer, the couerynge of golde, the seate of purple, the grounde is pleasauntly paued with loue for the daughters of Ierusalem.
Go forth (O ye daughters of Syon) and beholde Kynge Salomon in the crowne: wherwith his mother crowned him in the daye of hys mariage, and in the daye of the gladnesse of his hert.
O How fayre art thou, my loue, howe fayre art thou? thou hast doues eyes, besyde that which lyeth hyd within.
Thy hearye lockes are like the woll of a flocke of gotes that be shorne vpon mount Gilead: Thy teth are like shepe of the same bignesse, which went vp from the washinge place: where euery one beareth two twyns, and not one vnfrutefull amonge them.
Thy lippes are like a rose coloured rybonde, thy wordes are louely, thy chekes are like a pece of a pomgranat within thyne heares.
Thy neck is lyke the tower of Dauid builded with costly stones lyinge out on the sides wher vpon there hang a thousande shyldes, yee all the weapens of the geauntes.
Thy two brestes are lyke two twyns of younge roes, which fede amonge roses.
O that I myght go to the mountayne of Myrre, Ꟶ to the hyll of franckencense: tyll the daye breake Ꟶ tyll the shadowes be past awaye.
Thou art all fayre, O my loue, Ꟶ no spott is there in the.
Come to me from Libanus (O my spouse) come to me from Libanus loke from the toppe of Amana, from the toppe of Sanir Ꟶ Hermon, from the lyons dennes and from the mountaynes of the leopardes.
Thou hast with loue bewitched my hert, O my syster, my spouse, thou hast be witched my herte, with one of thyne eyes, and wt one cheyne of thy neck.
O howe fayre are thy brestes, my syster, my spouse? Thy brestes are more pleasaunt then wyne, and the smel of thyne oyntmentes passeth all spyces.
Thy lippes, O my spouse, droppe as the hony combe, yee mylcke and hony is vnder thy tong, and the smell of thy garmentes is lyke the smell of Libanus.
A garden well locked is my syster, my spouse, a garden well locked, and a sealed well.
The frutes that are planted in the, are lyke a very Paradyse of pomgranates with swete frutes:
as Camphore, Nardus, and Saffron, Calamus, Ꟶ Synamom with all swete smellynge trees: Myrre. Aloes and all the best spyces:
a well of gardens, a well of lyuinge waters, which renne downe from Libanus.
Up thou north wynde, come thou south wynde, and blowe vpon my garden, that the smell therof maybe caryed on euery syde: yee that my beloued maye come into hys garden, Ꟶ eate of the swete frutes that growe therin.
I Am come into my garden, O my sister, my spouse: I haue gathered my Myrre with my spyce. I haue eaten hony with my hony combe, I haue dronke my wyne with my mylke. Eate, O ye frendes, dryncke and be mery, O ye beloued.
As I am aslepe, and my hert is waking I heare voyce of my beloued, when he knocketh. Open to me, O my sister, my loue, my doue, my derlynge: for my heade is full of dewe, Ꟶ the lockes of my hearre are full of the nyght droppes.
I haue put of my cote, how can I do it on agayne? I haue washed my fete, how shall I fyle them agayne?
My loue put in his hand at the hole, and my herte was moued within me.
I stode vp to open vnto my beloued, Ꟶ my handes dropped with Myrre, Ꟶ the Myrre ranne downe my fyngers vpon the locke.
I opened vnto my beloued, but he was departed and gone his waye. Now when he spake, my hert was gone: I sought hym, but I coulde not fynde hym: I cryed vpon him, neuerthelesse, he gaue me no answere.
So the watchmen that wente about the cytie, founde me, smote me, Ꟶ wounded me: Yee, they that kepte the walles, toke awaye my kercheafe fro me.
I charge you therfore, O ye daughters of Ierusalem, yf ye fynde my beloued, that ye tell hym, how that I am syck for loue.
What maner of man is thy loue aboue other louers? O thou fayrest amonge wemen? Or what can thy loue do, more then other louers, that thou chargest vs so straytely?
As for my loue, he is white and redde coloured, a goodlye personne amonge ten thousande:
his heade is as the most fyne golde, the lockes of hys hearre are busshed, and black as a crowe.
His eyes are as the eyes of doues by the water brokes, as though they were wasshed with mylk, Ꟶ are sett lyke perles in golde.
Hys chekes are lyke a garden bedd, where in the Apotecaries plante all maner of swete thynges: Hys lyppes are lyke roses that droppe swete smelling Myrre.
His handes are lyke gold rynges hauinge enclosed the precyous stone of Tharsis. His body is as the pure yuery, decte ouer with Saphires:
His legges are as the pylers of Marbell, set vpon sokettes of golde. His face is as Libanus, and as the bewty of the Cedre trees.
The wordes of his mouthe are swete, yee, he is altogether louely. Soche one is my loue. O ye daughters of Ierusalem, soch one is my loue.
Whither is thy loue gone then (O thou fayrest amonge wemen) whither is is thy loue departed? we will seke him with the:
My loue is gone downe into hys garden, vnto the swete smellyng beddes, that he may refresh hym self in the garden, and gather roses.
My loue is myne Ꟶ I am his, which fedeth amonge the roses.
Thou art beautyfull, o my loue, as is the place of Thirza, thou art fayre as Ierusalem, fearfull as an armye of men, wt theyr banners.
Turne awaye thyne eyes fro me, for they haue set me on fyre. Thy hearrye lockes are lyke a flocke of goates shorne vpon the mount of Gilead.
Thy teth are lyke a flock of shorne shepe, which go out of the washyng place: where euery one beareth twyns, Ꟶ not one vnfrutefull among them.
Thy chekes are lyke a pece of a pomgranate, With in thy volupers.
There are .lx. Quenes .lxxx. wyues, and dameselles without nombre.
One is my doue, one is my derlynge. She is the onely beloued of her mother, Ꟶ deare vnto her that bare her. When the daughters sawe her, they sayde, she was blessed. Yee the Quenes and wyues praysed her.
What is she this, that loketh forth as the mornynge? fayre as the moone, cleare as the sunne, and fearful as an armye of men wt their baners.
I wente downe into the nutt garden, to se what grewe by the brokes, Ꟶ to loke yf the vyneyarde florished, or yf the pomgranates were shot forth.
I knewe not that my soule had made me the charyote of the people that be vnder tribute.
Turne againe, turne agayne. O thou perfecte one turne ageyne, turne agayne, Ꟶ we will loke vpon the. What wil ye se in the Sulamyte? She is lyke men of warre singynge in a companye.
O how pleasaunt are thy treadynges with the shoes, thou princes daughter? Thy thighes are like a fayre iewell, which is wrought by a connyng worcke master.
Thy nauell is lyke a rounde goblet, which is neuer without drinke. Thy wombe is lyke a hepe of wheat that is sett aboute wt roses
Thy two brestes are lyke two twyns of yonge roes.
Thy neck is as it were a tower of yuery: thine eyes also are lyke the water poles that are in Hesebon, besyde the porte of Bathrabbim: thy nose is lyke the tower of Libanus, which loketh toward Damascus.
That head that standeth vpon the, is lyke Carmel Ꟶ the hearre of thy heade is lyke purple and lyke a kynge goynge forth wt his garde aboute hym.
O how fayre Ꟶ louely art thou my dearlynge, in pleasures?
Thy stature is lyke a Palme tree Ꟶ thy brestes lyke the grapes.
I sayde I will clyme vp into the Palme tree, Ꟶ take holde of his hye braunches. Thy brestes also shalbe as the vyne clustres the smell of thy nostrels lyke is the smell of apples,
and thy iawes lyke the beste wyne. Whiche goeth strayte vnto my beloued and brusteth forth by the lyppes of the Auncyent eldres.
There wyl I turne me vnto my loue Ꟶ he shall turne hym vnto me.
O come on my loue, we will go forth into the felde, Ꟶ take oure lodgynge in the villages.
In the mornynge wyll we go se the vyneyarde: we will se yf the vyne be spronge forth, yf the grapes be growne, and yf the pomgranates be shot out. There will I geue the my brestes:
the Mandragoras geue theyr sweate smell: and besyde oure dores are all maner of pleasaunt frutes: both newe, Ꟶ olde: whych I haue kepte for the, o my beloued.
O that I myght fynde the wythout, and kysse the, whom I loue as my brother whych suckte my mothers brestes: and that thou shalt not be despised
I will leade the, and brynge the in to my mothers house: that thou myghtest teach me, Ꟶ that I myght geue the drynke of spiced wyne, Ꟶ of the swete sappe of my pongranates.
His left hande shalbe vnder my head Ꟶ hys ryght hande shall embrace me.
I charge you, O ye daughters of Ierusalem, that ye wake not vp my loue, ner touch her, tyll she be content her selfe.
What is she this, that commeth vp from the wildernes, and leaneth vpon her loue? I waked the vp amonge the apple trees, where thy mother conceyued the, where thy mother (I saye) brought the into the worlde.
O set me as a seale vpon thine herte, and as a seale vpon thyne arme: for loue is myghtie as the death, Ꟶ gelousy as the hel. Her coales are of fyre, Ꟶ a very flamme of the Lorde:
so that many waters are not able to quenche loue, nether maye the streames droune it. Yee, yf a man wolde geue all the good of his house for loue, he shuld counte it nothyng,
Our syster is but yonge, Ꟶ hath no brestes: What shall we do for our syster, whan she shall be spoken for?
Yf she be a wall, we shal buylde a syluer bolwercke ther vpon: yf she be an open dore, we shall fasten her with borders of Cedre tree.
I am a wall, and my brestes lyke towres, then was I as one that hath founde fauoure in his syght.
Salomon hath a vyneyarde at Baal Hamon, Ꟶ this vyneyarde delyuered he vnto the kepers: that euery one for the frute therof shulde geue hym a thousande peces of syluer.
My vyneyard is in my sight: thou (O Salomon) must haue a thousande, and the kepers two hundred with the frute.
Thou that dwellest in the gardens, O let me heare thy voyce, that my companyons maye herken to the same.
O get the awaye, my loue, and be as a roo or a yong hert vpon the swete smellynge mountaynes.
The vision of Esay the sonne of Amos which he sawe vpon Iuda and Ierusalem: in the dayes of Uzia and Ioatham, Ahaz Ꟶ Iehezikiah kynges of Iuda.
Heare, O heauen, Ꟶ Herken O earth: For the Lorde hath spoken: I haue norished and promoted children, but they haue done wyckedly against me.
The oxe hath knowne his owner Ꟶ the asse his masters cribb: but Israel hath receaued no knowledge, my people hath no vnderstandyng.
Alas for thys synfull nacion, a people of great iniquitie: a seed of vngracious people corruptinge ther wayes. They haue forsaken the Lorde, they haue prouoked the holy one of Israel vnto anger, and are gone backward.
Wherby shulde ye be plaged any more for ye are euer fallinge awaye. The whole head is syck, Ꟶ the hert is heuy.
From the sole of the fote vnto the head, there is no whole parte in all your body: but all are woundes, botches, sores, Ꟶ strypes, whych can nether be helped, bounde vp, molifyed, ner eased wt any oyntment.
Your land lyeth waste, your cyties are brent vp, your enemyes deuoure youre lande, Ꟶ ye must be fayne to stande, Ꟶ loke vpon it: Ꟶ it is desolate, as they were subuerted that were alienate from the Lorde.
Moreouer, the daughter of Syon ys left alone lyke a cotage in a vineyard, lyke a lodge in a garden of cucumbers, lyke a wasted cytie.
And excepte the Lorde of Hostes had left vs a fewe alyue: we shuld haue bene as Sodoma, and lyke vnto Gomorra.
Heare the worde of the lorde ye Lordes of Sodoma: Ꟶ herken vnto the lawe of our God, thou people of Gomorra.
Why offre ye so many sacrifices vnto me saith Lorde? I am full of the brentoffrynges of wethers, and of the fatnesse of fedbeastes. I haue no pleasure in the bloud of bullokes, lambes and goates.
When ye come to apeare before me, who requireth this of you to treade within my porches?
Therfore offre me no mo oblacions, for it is but lost laboure. Incense is an abhominable thinge vnto me. I Maye not awaye with youre newe moones, your Sabbathes Ꟶ gatheringe togyther at the solempne dayes.
I hate your newe mone dayes Ꟶ solempne feastes, euen fro my very hert. I can not awaye wt suche vanitie Ꟶ holdinge in of the people.
They lye vpon me as a burthen, and I am wery of beringe them. Whan ye holde out your handes, I will turne myne eyes from you. And though ye make many prayers, yet wil I heare nothynge at all, seyng your handes are ful of bloude.
Wash you therfore, and make you cleane, put awaye your euell ententes out of my syght, cease from doynge of euell.
Lerne to do ryght, applye your selues to equite, delyuer the oppressed, helpe the fatherles to his ryght, let the widowes complainte come before you.
Come I praye ye (sayeth the Lorde) let vs reason oure matter together. Though youre sinnes be as read as scarlet, thei shalbe as white as snowe. And though they were lyke purple, they shalbe as whit as wolle.
If ye be louynge Ꟶ obedient, ye shal enioye the best thyng that groweth in the land.
But yf ye be obstinate Ꟶ rebellyous, ye shalbe deuoured wt the swerde: for thus the Lorde hath promised wt his awne mouth.
How happepeneth it then that the ryghteous cytie (which was full of equite) is become vnfaythfull as an whore? ryghtuousnes dwelt in it, but now murtherers.
Thy syluer is turned to drosse, Ꟶ thy wyne myxte with water.
Thy prices are wicked Ꟶ companyons of theues. They loue gyftes altogether, and gape for rewardes. As for the fatherles, they helpe him not to his ryght, nether wyll they lett the wydowes causes come before them.
Therfore, sayeth the lorde God of Hostes, the myghty gouerner of Israel, Oute vpon ye, I wyll ease me of myne enemyes, Ꟶ I will auenge me of myne aduersaryes,
I shall laye my hand vpon the, Ꟶ burne out thy drosse from the fynest Ꟶ purest, Ꟶ put out all thy tynne,
Ꟶ set thy iudges agayne as they were somtyme Ꟶ thy Senatours as they were from the beginynge. Then shalt thou be called the ryghteous cytie, the faythfull cytie.
Sion shalbe redemed wt equite, Ꟶ they shal turne againe vnto her in ryghteousnesse.
For the transgressours Ꟶ vngodly, and soch as are be come vnfaythfull vnto the Lord, must altogether be vtterly destroyed.
For they shall be ashamed of the goddes that you longed for. And ye shall be put to shame for the Idols grouegardens that ye haue chosen:
ye shalbe as a tree whose leaues are fallen awaye, Ꟶ as a garden that hath no moystnesse.
And as for the glory of your graued Images, it shalbe turned to drye strawe, and he that made them to a sparke. And they shal both burne together, so that no man shalbe able to quench them.
Thys is the worde that was opened vnto Esay the sonne of Amos, vpon Iuda Ꟶ Ierusalem.
It wilbe also in the last dayes that the hyll where the house of the Lorde is builded, shall be the chefe amonge hylles, and exalted aboue all lytle hylles. And all nacyons shall preace vnto hym, and the multytude of people shal go
speaking thus one to another: vp, let vs go to the hyll of the Lord, Ꟶ to the house of the God of Iacob: that he maye shewe vs his waye, and that we maye walcke in his pathes. For the lawe shall come out of Sion, and the word of the Lorde from Ierusalem,
and shall geue sentence amonge the Heathen, and shall reforme the multitude of people: They shall breake theyr swerdes also in to mattockes, and theyr speares to make sythes. And one people shall not lyft vp weapen against another, nether shal they learne to fyght from thens forth.
Come ye (O house of Iacob) let vs walcke in the lyght of the Lorde.
But thou hast forsaken thy people the house of Iacob, because they go farre beyonde the east contreys in Sorceryes (whom they haue as the Philistines had) and in straunge chyldren they thinke them selues to haue ynough.
Theyr land is full of siluer and gold, nether is there any ende of theyr treasure: Theyr land is also full of horses, Ꟶ no ende is there of theyr charets.
Theyr lande is also full of vayne goddes, and before the worcke of theyr awne handes haue they bowed them selues, yee, euen before the thinge that theyr awne fyngers haue made.
There kneleth the man, there falleth the man downe before them, but thou (o Lorde) wilt not leaue them vnpunished.
And therfore get the in to some rock, and hyde the in the grounde for feare of the Lord, and for the glory of his magestye:
Which casteth downe the high lookes of presumptuous personnes, and bringeth lowe the pryde of man, and the Lorde only shall be exalted in that daye.
For the daye of the Lord of Hostes shall go ouer al pride and presumption, vpon all them that exalte them selues, and shall brynge them all downe:
vpon all the hygh and stoute Cedre trees of Libanus, Ꟶ vpon all the okes of Basan,
vpon all hygh hylles, and vpon all stoute mountaynes,
vpon all costly towres, Ꟶ vpon all stronge walles,
vpon all shyppes of Tharsis, and vpon euery thyng that is glorious and pleasaunt to loke vpon.
And it shall brynge downe the pryde of man, and laye mans presumptuousnesse full lowe, and the Lorde shall only haue the vyctory in that daye.
But the Idols shall vtterly be roted out.
Men shall crepe in to holes of stone, and into caues of the earth, for feare of the Lorde, and for the glory of hys magesty: what tyme as he shall aryse vp to condemne the earth.
Then shall man cast awaye hys goddes of syluer, and hys goddes of gold (which he neuertheles had made to honour them) vnto Molles Ꟶ Backes:
And they shall crepe in to the caues and rockes, Ꟶ into the clyftes of hard stones, for feare of God, and for the glory of hys magestye, whan he ryseth to condemne the earth.
Feare not ye then any man, whose breth is in hys nostrels. For what is he of reputacion?
For lo, the Lorde God of Hostes doth take awaye from Ierusalem and Iuda, all possessions Ꟶ power al meat and dryncke,
the captayne and the soudyar, the iudge and prophete, the wyse and the aged man,
the prince of fyftie yeare olde, and the honorable: the Senatours, and men of vnderstandynge: the master of craftes and oratours.
And I shall geue them children to be theyr princes, Ꟶ babes shall haue the rule of you.
The people also shalbe pylled and polled, and one shall euer be doynge violence and wronge to another. The boye shall presume agaynst the elder, and the vyle persone agaynst the honorable.
Yee, one shall take a frende of hys awne kynred by the bosome, and saye: thou hast clothynge, thou shalt be our head, for thou mayest kepe vs from thys fall Ꟶ parell.
Then shall he sweare Ꟶ saye I cannot helpe you. Moreouer, there is nether meate ner clothyng in my house, make me no ruler of the people.
For Ierusalem is ouerthrowne Ꟶ Iuda must fall to the grownde, because that both theyr wordes Ꟶ councels are agaynst the Lorde, to prouoke the presence of hys magesty vnto anger.
The chaungynge of theyr countenaunce bewrayeth them, yee, they declare theyr awne synnes, them selues, as the Sodomites, Ꟶ hyde them not. Wo be vnto theyr soules for they haue retourned euyll vnto them selues.
Byd the ryghteous do well, for they shall enioye the frutes of theyr studies.
But wo be to the vngodly and vnryghteous, for they shalbe rewarded after theyr worckes.
Children are extorcioners of my people, and wemen haue rule of them. O my people, those that call the blessed deceaue the, and depraue the waye of thy fotesteppes.
The Lorde is rysen vp to commen of the matter, and standeth vp (I saye) to geue iudgement of the people.
The Lorde shall come forth to reason with the Senatours and prynces of hys people. It is ye that haue burnt vp my vyneyarde, the extorcyon done to the poore is in your houses.
Wherfore do ye oppresse my people, Ꟶ marre the faces of the poore? sayeth the Lorde God of hostes.
Moreouer, thus sayth the lord: Seing the daughters of Sion are be come so proude, and come in wt stretched out neckes and with vayne wanton eyes: seynge they come in tryppyng so nycely with theyr fete:
Therfore shall the Lorde shaue the heades of the daughters of Sion, and shal discouer theyr shame.
In that daye shall the Lord take awaye the gorgiousnes of theyr apparell, and spanges, cheynes, partelettes,
and colarres, bracelettes and hooues,
the goodly floured, wyde and brodered rayment, brooches, and headbandes,
rynges and garlandes,
holy daye clothes and vales, kerchefes and pinnes,
glasses and cypresses, bonettes and taches.
And in steade of good smell, there shalbe stynck amonge them. And for theyr gyrdles there shalbe lowse bandes. And for well sett heare there shalbe baldenesse. In steade of a stomacher, a sack cloth, and for theyr bewty witherdnesse, and sonne burnyng.
Youre housbandes and myghtie men shall perysh with the swerde in batayle.
At that tyme shal theyr gates mourne and complayne, and they shall sytt as desolate folck vpon the earth.
Then shall seuen wyues take holde of one man, and saye: we wyll laye all our meate and clothynge together in comen, only that we may be called thy wyues, Ꟶ that thys shamefull reprofe maye be taken from vs.
After that tyme shall the braunche of the Lorde be bewtyfull and myghtye, and the frute of the earth shalbe fayre and pleasaunt for those Israelytes that shal spring therof.
Then shall the remnaunt in Sion Ꟶ the remnaunt at Ierusalem be called holy: Namely all soch as are wrytten among the lyuynge at Ierusalem:
What tyme as the Lorde shall wasth awaye the fylthynes of the daughters of Sion, and pourge the bloude out from Ierusalem with the wynde of hys iudgmente and with fyre.
Moreouer, vpon all the dwellynges of the hyll of Sion and vpon theyr whole congregacion, shall the Lorde prouyde a cloude and smoke by daye, Ꟶ the shynynge of a flammynge fyre by nyght: for all theyr glory shalbe preserued.
And Ierusalem shall be a tabernacle for a shadowne because of hete in the daye tyme a place and refuge where a man maye kepe hym from wether Ꟶ rayne.
Now will I syng my beloued frende a songe of my frendes, because of hys vyneyarde. My beloued frende hath a vyneyarde in a very frutefull plenteous grounde.
This he hedged, thys he walled rounde aboute, and planted it with goodly grapes. In the myddest of it buylded he a towre, and made a wyne presse therin. And afterwarde when he loked that it shulde brynge him grapes, it brought forth thornes.
Now therfore (O ye Cytysens of Ierusalem and whole Iuda:) Iudge I praye you betwixte me, and my vyneyard.
What more could haue bene done for it that I haue not done? Wherfore then hath it geuen thornes, where I loked to haue had grapes of it?
Well, now I shall tell you how I wyll do with my vyneyarde: I will take the hedge from it, that it maye perysh, and breake downe the wall, that it maye be troden vnder fote.
I will laye it waste, that it shall nether be digged nor cut, but beare thornes and brears. I will also forbyd the cloudes that they shall not rayne vpon it.
As for the vyneyarde of the Lord of hostes it is the house of Israel, and whole Iuda hys fayre planting. Of these he loked for equite, but se there is wrong: for ryghteousnesse, lo, It is but mysery.
Wo vnto them that ioyne one house to another, Ꟶ bring one lande so nygh vnto another, that the poore can get no more grounde, Ꟶ that ye maye dwel vpon the earth alone.
These thynges are in the ears of the Lorde of Hostes: shall not many greater Ꟶ more gorgyous houses be so waste, that no man shall dwell in them?
And ten akers of vynes shal geue but a Quarte, and .xxx. bushels of sede shall geue but an Epha.
Wo be vnto them, that ryse vp early to folowe dronckennes, and to them that continue so, vntyll nyght, Ꟶ tyl they be sett on fyre with wyne.
In those companyes are harpes and lutes, tabrettes Ꟶ pipes, and wyne. But they regarde not the worcke of the Lord, and consydre not the operacyon of his handes.
Therfore commeth my folk also into captyuite, because they haue no vnderstandynge. Theyr glory is fameshed with hunger, and theyr pryde is marred for thyrste.
Therfore gapeth hell, and openeth her mouth maruelous wyde: that theyr pryde, boastinge and welth, with soch as reioyse therin, maye descende into it.
Thus hath man a fall, and is brought lowe, and the hygh loke of the proude shalbe layde downe.
But the Lord of hostes is exalted in iudgement, and God that is holy, is praysed in ryghteousnes:
Then shall the shepe eate in ordre, and the rych mens landes that were layde waist, shall straungers deuoure.
Wo be vnto them, that drawe wyckednes vnto them with coardes of vanite and synne, as it were with a cart rope.
Which vse to speake on thys maner: let hym make haste nowe, Ꟶ go forth with hys worcke, that we maye se it. Lett the councell of the holy one of Israel come, and drawe nye, that we maye knowe it.
Wo be vnto them that call euell good, and good euell, which make darcknesse lyght, Ꟶ lyght darcknesse, that make sowre swete, Ꟶ swete sowre.
Wo be vnto them that are wyse in theyr awne syght, and thynke them selues to haue vnderstandynge.
Wo be vnto them, that are strong to suppe out wyne and experte men to sett vp dronckenesse.
These geue sentence with the vngodly for rewardes, but comdempne the iust cause of the ryghteous.
Therfore, lyke as fyre lycketh vp the strawe, and as the flame consumeth the stubble: Euen so theyr rote shalbe as corrupcion: and theyr blossome shall vanysh awaye lyke dust: for they haue cast awaye the lawe of the Lord of Hostes, Ꟶ blasphemed the word of the holy maker of Israel.
Therfore is the wrath of the Lord kindled also agaynst hys people, and he shaketh his hande at them: yee, he hath smyten, so that the hylles dyd tremble. And theyr karcases dyd lye in the open streates, lyke myre. And in all thys, the wrath of God hath not ceassed, but hys hande is stretched out styl.
And he shall gyue a token vnto a straunge people: and call vnto them in a farre countre: and beholde, they shall come hastely with spede.
There shall not be one faynt nor feble amonge them, no not a slogysh nor slepery persone. There shall not one of them put of the gyrdle from his loynes, ner lowse theyr lachet of his shooe.
Hys arowes are sharpe, Ꟶ al his bowes bent. His horse hoofes are lyke flynt, Ꟶ his cartwheles lyke a stormy wynde.
His crye is as it were of a lyon, and he roareth lyke lyons whelpes. They shall roare, Ꟶ hantch vp the praye, Ꟶ no man shall recouer it or get it from them.
In that daye they shalbe so fearce vpon them, as the see. And yf we looke vnto the lande, beholde, it shalbe all darcknesse Ꟶ sorowe. If we loke toward heauen: beholde, it shalbe darcke.
In the same yeare that kinge Oziah dyed, I sawe the Lorde syttynge vpon an hygh and glorious seate, Ꟶ his trayne fylled the temple.
And aboute him stode the Seraphins, wherof euery one had sixe winges. With twayne eche couered his face, wt twayne hys fete, and with twayne dyd he flye,
They cried also eche one to ather on thys maner: holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hostes. The whole worlde is full of his glory.
Yee, the geastes and dorechekes moued at his cryeng, and the house was full of smoke.
Then I sayde, O wo is me For I am lost in asmoch as I am a man of vncleane lyppes, Ꟶ dwell amonge people that hath vncleane lyppes also: for myne eyes haue sene the Kynge and Lorde of Hoostes.
Then flewe one of the Seraphins vnto me, hauynge a hote cole in his hande, which he had taken from the aulter with the tonges,
and touched my mouth, and sayde, lo: this hath touched thy lyppes, Ꟶ thyne vnryghteousnes is taken awaye, Ꟶ thy synne forgeuen.
Also, I herd the voyce of the Lord sayenge on this maner: Whom shall I send, and who wylbe oure messaunger? Then I sayde: here am I, sende me.
And he sayde, go, and tell this people: ye shall heare in dede, but ye shall not vnderstande: ye shall playnely se, and not perceaue.
Harden the harte of this people, stoppe theyr eares, and shut theyr eyes, that they se not with theyr eyes, heare not with theyr eares, and vnderstand not with theyr hertes, and conuerte and be healed.
Then spake I: Lorde, how longe? he answered: vntill the cyties be vtterly wasted without inhabitours, Ꟶ the houses without men, tyll the lande be also desolate, and lye vnbuylded.
For the Lorde shall take the men farre awaye, so that the lande shal lye waste a longe season,
yet in yt shall succeade .x. kinges, and the lande shall retorne and be layde waste. And as The terebint tre and oke in winter cast ther leaues, and yet haue ther sappe in them so shall the holy sead contynue in theyr substance.
It happened in the tyme of Ahaz the sonne of Iotham, which was the sonne of Uziah Kynge of Iuda: that Razin the Kynge of Syria, and Pechah the sonne of Romelyah, kynge of Israel: went vp toward Ierusalem to besege it, but Razin was not able to winne ye.
Now when the house of Dauid (that is Ahaz) herde worde therof, that Syria Ꟶ Ephraim were confederate together: his herte quaked (yee and the hertes also of his people) lyke as whan a tree in the felde is moued with the wynde.
Then sayde God vnto Esay: go mete Ahaz (thou and thy sonne Sear Iasub) at the head of the ouer pole, in the fote path by the fullers grounde,
Ꟶ saye vnto hym, take hede to thy selfe Ꟶ be styll, but feare not, nether be faynt harted, for these two tayles: that is: for these two smokyng fyre brandes, the wrath and furiousnes of Razin the Syrian and Romelies sonne:
because that the kynge of Syria Ephraim and Romelies sonne haue wickedly conspyred agaynst the saying:
We wyll goo vp agaynst Iuda, vexe them, and brynge them vnder vs, and set a kynge there, euen the sonne of Tabeel
For thus sayeth the Lorde God therto, It shal not so goo forth, nether come so to passe:
for the head cytie of the Sirians is Damascus, but the head of Damascus is Rayzin. And after fyue Ꟶ threscore yeare, shall Ephraim be no more a people.
And the chefe cytie of Ephraim is Samaria, but the head of Samaria is Romelies sonne. Yf ye beleue not: it commeth of thys: that ye are vnfaithfull to God.
Moreouer, God spake once agayne vnto Ahaz, sayinge,
requyre a token of the Lorde thy God, whether it be toward the depth beneth, or towarde the heygth aboue.
Then sayd Ahaz: I will requyre none, nether wyll I tempte the Lorde
The Lorde answered: Then heare to, ye of the house of Dauid: Is it not ynough for you that ye be greuous vnto men, but ye must greue my God also.
And therfore the Lord shall geue you a token: Behold, a vyrgin shall conceaue and beare a sonne, and (thou hys mother) shalt cal his name Emanuel.
Butter and hony shall he eate, that he maye knowe to refuse the euell, and chose the good.
For or euer the chyld come to knowledge, to eschue the euel and chose the good. The lande (that thou so Abhorrest) shalbe desolate of both her kynges.
The Lorde also shall sende a tyme vpon the, vpon thy people, Ꟶ vpon thy fathers house (soch as neuer came sence the tyme that Ephraim departed from Iuda) thorowe the kynge of the Assirians.
For at the same tyme shall the Lord whystle for the flyes that are aboute the water of Egypt, and for the Bees in the Assirians lande.
These shall come, and shall lyght all in the desolate valeyes, in the holes of stones, vpon all thornye and bushye places.
At the same tyme shall the Lord shaue the heare of the head and the fete and the beerd cleane of, with the rasoure that he shall hyer beyonde the water: namely, with the kynge of the Assirians.
At the same tyme shall a man lyue with a kowe, and two shepe.
Then, because of the aboundaunce of mylck, he shall make butter Ꟶ eate it. So that euery one which remayneth in the lande, shall eate butter and hony.
At the same tyme all vyneyardes (though there be a thousande vynes in one, Ꟶ were solde for a thousande syluerlynges) shalbe turned to brears Ꟶ thornes.
Lyke as they shall come in to the lande wt arowes Ꟶ bowes, so shall all the lande be come brears and thornes.
And as for al hylles that are hewen downe, ther shall not come vpon them anye feare of brears Ꟶ thornes. But the catell shal be dryuen thyther, and the shepe shall fede there.
Moreouer, the lord sayd vnto me: Take the a greate leaf, Ꟶ write in it, as men do wt a penne, make hastye spede to robbe, Ꟶ haste to the spoyle.
And I called vnto me faythfull witnesses to recorde. Uryah the prest, Ꟶ zachariah the sonne of Barachiah.
After that went I vnto the Prophetisse, that had conceaued Ꟶ borne a sonne. Then sayde the Lorde to me: geue him this name: a spedie robber: an hastie spoiler.
For why, or ouer the chylde shal haue knowledge to crye father, Ꟶ mother: shall the ryches of Damascus Ꟶ the substaunce of Samaria be taken awaye by the spoyler, before the kyng of the Assirians.
The Lorde spake also vnto me, sayinge:
for so moch as thys people refuseth the still rennynge water of Sylo, and put theyr delyte in Razin Ꟶ Romelies sonne:
Behold, the Lorde shall brynge myghtie Ꟶ greate floudes of water vpon them: namely, the kynge of the Assirians with all his power: Which shall clyme vp vpon all his floudes, and renne ouer all theyr banckes.
And shal breake in vpon Iuda, flowinge Ꟶ increasing in power, tyll he gett him by the neck. He shall fyll also the widenesse of thy lande with hys brode winges, O Emanuel.
Breake downe (o ye peple of Assur) and ye shall be, broken downe: herken to all ye of farre countrees. Muster you, and you shalbe broken downe, prepare you to batell and you shall be torne in peces:
take your councell together, yet must your councel come to naught: go in hande withall, yet shall it not prospere: for God is with vs.
For the Lord spake thus to me in the powre of his hande, Ꟶ warned me, sayinge vnto me: that I shulde not walcke in the waye of this people. He sayde moreouer:
rounde with none of them, whosoeuer saye: yonder people are bounde together: feare them not, nether be afrayd of them,
but sanctifie the Lord of Hostes, lett hym be youre feare and drede.
For he shall be the holy place to flye to, and stone to stomble at: the rock to fall vpon: a snare and net to both the houses of Israel, and the inhabitours of Ierusalem.
And many shall stomble, fall, and be broken vpon hym: yee, they shalbe snared Ꟶ taken.
Now laye the witnesses together Ꟶ seale the lawe wt my disciples.
Thus wil I wayte vpon the Lorde that hath turned his face from the house of Iacob, and I will loke for him.
But lo, as for me, and the children which the lord hath geuen me: we are a token and a wondre in Israel, for the Lord of Hostes sake, which dwelleth vpon the hyll of Sion.
And yf they saye vnto you: aske councell at the sothesayers, witches, charmers and coniurers, then make them thys answere. Is there a people eny where, that asketh not councell at his God? Shulde men renne vnto the dead for the lyuynge?
If eny man want lyght, leet hym loke vpon the lawe, and the testimony, whether they speake not after this meaning.
If he do not thys, he stombleth and suffreth hunger. And yf he suffre hunger he is out of pacience, and blasphemeth his kyng Ꟶ his God. Then loketh he vp warde, Ꟶ downe warde to the earth,
Ꟶ beholde, there is trouble and darckenesse, vexacion is rounde aboute hym, and the cloude of erroure. And out of soch aduersite, shal he not escape.
Euen lyke as in tyme past, it hath bene well sene, that the lande of zabulon and the lande of Nephtaly (where thorow the see waye goeth ouer Iordane into the lande of Galilee) was at the fyrst in lytle trouble: but afterwarde sore vexed.
The people that walke in darckenes haue sene a greate lyght. As for them that dwell in the lande of the Shadowe of death, vpon them hath the lyght shyned.
Thou hast multyplyed the people, Ꟶ not increased theyr ioye. They reioyse before the, euen as men make mery in haruest, and as men that haue gotten the victory, when they deale the spoyle.
For thou hast broken the yocke of the peoples burthen: the staff of hys shoulder and the rod of hys oppressoure, as in the dayes of Madian.
And trulie euery batayll that the warryoure accomplissheth, is done wt confused noyse Ꟶ defylinge ther garmentes wt bloude: But this batayle shall be wt burnynge Ꟶ consumynge of fyre.
For vnto vs a chylde is borne, Ꟶ vnto vs a sonne is geuen. Upon hys shoulder doth the kyngdome lye, and he is called wt hys awne name: wonderfull. The geuer of councell, the myghtye God, the euerlasting father, the prince of peace,
he shall make no ende to encrease the kyngdome Ꟶ peace, Ꟶ shall syt vpon the seate of Dauid Ꟶ in his kyngdome, to set vp the same, Ꟶ to stablish it wt equyte and ryghteousnesse, from hence forth for euermore. Thys shall the gelousy of the Lorde of Hostes brynge to passe.
The Lorde sent a worde into Iacob, the same is come into Israel.
And all the people of Ephraim shall knowe, and they that dwell in Samaria, that can saye with pryde and hye stomackes, on this maner.
The tyle worcke is fallen downe, but we will buylde it wt squared stones. The Molbery tymbre is broken, but we shall sett it vp agayne with Cedre.
Neuertheles, the Lord shall prepare Razin the enemye agaynst them, and so ordre theyr aduersaryes,
that the Sirians shall laye holde vpon them before, and the Philistynes behynde, and so deuoure Israel with open mouth. After all thys is not the wrath of the Lorde ceassed, but yet hys hande stretched oute styll.
For the people turneth not vnto hym that chastyseth them, nether do they seke the Lorde of Hostes.
Therfore hath the Lorde roted oute of Israel both head and tayle, braunche and twigge in one daye.
By the head, is vnderstande the Senatoure and honorable man, and by the tayle the Prophet that preached lyes.
For all they which enfourme the people that they be in a ryght case, soch be disceauers. Soch as men thyncke also to be perfecte among these, are but cast awayes.
Therfore shall the Lorde haue no pleasure in theyr yonge men, nether fauoure theyr fatherlesse Ꟶ wydowes. For they are all together ypocrytes and wycked, and all theyr mouthes speake foly. After all thys is not the Lordes wrath ceassed, but yet hys hande is stretched out styll.
For vngodlynesse burneth, as a fyre in the bryers and thornes. And as it were out of a fyre in a wood or a rede bush, so ascendeth the smoke of theyr pryde.
For cause of the wrath of the Lorde of Hostes, is the lande full of darckenesse, and the people be consumed, as it were with fyre, no man doth spare his brother,
but he robbyth on the ryght hand: Ꟶ doth famishe, he eateth on the lefte hande, and he shall not haue ynough. Euery man shall eate the flesh of his awne arme.
Manasses shall eate Ephraim, and Ephraim. Manasses, and they both shall eate Iuda. After all thys is not the Lordes wrath ceassed, but yet is hys hande stretched out styll.
Wo be vnto them that make vnryghteous lawes, Ꟶ deuyse thinges, which be to harde for to kepe:
wher thorow the poore are oppressed, on euery syde, and the innocentes of my people robbed of iudgement: that wyddowes maye be theyr praye, and that they maye robbe the fatherlesse.
What will ye do in tyme of the visitacyon, and whan destruccion shall come from farre? To whom wyll ye ronne for helpe? and to whom wyll ye geue youre honoure, that he maye kepe it?
that when I with drawe my hande ye come not amonge the presoners, or lye amonge the deed? After all this doth not the wrath of the Lord ceasse, but yet is his hande stretched out styll.
Wo be also vnto Assur, which is a staf of my wrath, in whose hande is the rod of my punyshement.
I shall sende hym amonge those ypocritish people, amonge the people that haue deserued my dysfauoures shall I send hym: that he may vtterly robbe them, spoyle them, and treade them downe lyke the myre in the strete.
Howbeit, his meanyng is not so nether thynketh his hert of thys fasshyon. But he ymagineth onely, how he may rote out and destroye moch people,
for he sayeth are not my Prynces all Kynges?
Is not Calno as easye to wynne, as Charchamis? Is it harder to conquere Hamath then Arphad? Or is it lyghter to ouercome Damascus then Samaria?
As who say: I were able to wynne the Kyngdome of the Idolaters and their goddes: but not Ierusalem Ꟶ Samaria.
Shal I not do vnto Ierusalem Ꟶ their ymages, as I dyd vnto Samaria and their ydoles?
Wherfore the Lord sayeth: Assone as I haue perfourmed my whole worcke vpon the hyll of Syon and Ierusalem, then wyll I vyset the noble and stoute hart of the kynge of Assyria, with hys proude lookes.
For he standeth thus in his awne conceate: This do I thorowe the power of myne awne hande, and thorow my wysdome: For I am wyse, I am he that remoue the landes of the people: I robbe their treasures: and (lyke one of the worthyes) I dryue them from their hye seates.
My hande hath founde out the strength of the people, as it were a nest. And lyke as egges, that were layde here and there, are gathered together: So do I gather all countrees. And there is no man, that darre be so bolde, as to touch a fether, that darre open his mouth, or once whysper.
Shall the axe boast it selfe, agaynst him that heweth therwith? or doth the sawe make eny bragging agaynst him that ruleth it? That were euen lyke, as yf the rod dyd exalte it selfe agaynst him that beareth it: or as though the staff shulde magnifye it selfe, as who saye: it were no wood.
Therfore shal the Lord of hostes send him amonge his fatlinges leanes, Ꟶ burne vp his glory, as it were wt a fyre.
But the lyght of Israel shalbe that fyre, and his Sanctuary shalbe the flamme and it shall kyndle, and burne vp his thornes and breers in one daye,
yee all the glory of his woddes and feldes shalbe consumed with body Ꟶ soule: And they shalbe as an hoost of men, whose standerd bearer fayleth.
The trees also of hys felde which remayne, shalbe of soch a nombre, that a childe maye tell them.
After that daye shall the remnaunt of Israel, Ꟶ soch as are escaped out of the house of Iacob, seke nomore conforte at him that smote them, but with faythfulnesse Ꟶ treuth shal they trust vnto the Lord, the holy one of Israel.
The remnaunt, euen the Posteryte of Iacob, shall conuerte vnto God the myghty one.
For though thy people (O Israel) be as the lande of the see, yet shal the remnaunt of them conuerte in hym. Perfecte is the iudgement of him that floweth in ryghteousnesse,
and therfore the Lorde of hostes shall perfectly fulfyll the thynge, that he hath determined in the myddest of the whole worlde
Therfore thus sayeth the Lord God of hostes: Thou my people, that dwellest in Syon, be not afrayed, for the kynge of the Assirians: He shal smyte the with a rodd, Ꟶ shal wagg his staff at the, as the Egypcians dyd some tyme:
But soone after, shall my wrath and myne indignacion be fulfylled in the destruccion of them.
Moreouer, the Lord of Hostes shall prepare a scourge for him, lyke as was the slaughter of Madian vpon the rock of Oreb. And he shall lyft vp his rodd ouer the see, as he dyd somtyme ouer the Egypcians.
Then shall hys burthen be taken from thy shoulders, and his yock from thy neck, yee, the same yock shall be corrupte for very fatnesse.
He shall come to Aiath, and go thorow toward Mygron: at Mychmas shall he laye vp his harnesse,
and go ouer the foorde. Gybea shall be their restynge place, Rhamah shalbe a frayed, Gybea Saul shall flye awaye.
The voyce of the noyes of thy horses (O daughter Gallim) shalbe herde vnto Lays Ꟶ to Anathoth, which also shalbe in trouble.
Madmena shall tremble for reare, but the citesins of Gabin are manly,
yet shal he remayne at Nob that daye. After that, shal he lyft vp hys hande agaynst the mount of the daughter Syon, the hyll of Ierusalem.
But se, the Lord God of hostes shall take awaye the proude from thence, with feare. He shall hewe downe the proude, Ꟶ fel the hye mynded.
The busshes also of the wood shal he rote out with yron, and Lybanus shall haue a myghtye fall.
And there shall come a rodd forth of the kynred of Isai, and a blossome shall florish out of hys rote.
The sprete of the Lord shall lyght vpon hym: the sprete of wysdome, and vnderstandynge: the sprete of councell, Ꟶ strength the sprete of knowledge, and of the feare of the Lorde:
and shall make hym feruent in the feare of God. For he shall not geue sentence, after the thyng that shal be brought before his eyes, nether reproue a matter at the fyrst hearing:
but wt ryghteousnesse shal he iudge the poore, and with holynes shal he refourme the simple of the worlde. He shall smyte the worlde with the rodd of hys mouth, Ꟶ wt the breath of hys mouth shall he staye the vngodly.
Ryghteousnesse shalbe the gyrdle of his loynes, trueth Ꟶ faythfulnesse, the gyrdynge vp of hys raynes.
The wolfe shall dwell with the lambe, and the Leoparde shal lye downe by the goate. Bullockes, Lyons Ꟶ catell shall kepe company together, so that a lytle chylde shall rule them.
The kowe Ꟶ the Bere shall fede together, Ꟶ their yonge ones shall lye together. The Lyon shall eate strawe lyke the oxe, or the kowe.
The childe whyle he sucketh, shal haue a desire to the serpentes nest, and when he is weaned, he shall put hys hande into the Cockatryce denne.
No man shall do euel to another, no man shal destroye another, in all the hyll of my holynes. For the earth shalbe full of the knowledge of the Lord, euen as the see floweth ouer with water.
And in that daye shal the gentyles enquere after the rote of Iesse which shalbe set vp for a token vnto the people, Ꟶ hys dwellynge shalbe glorious.
At the same time shal the lord take in hande agayne, to conquere the remnaunt of his people (which shalbe left alyue) From the Assyrians, Egypcians, Arabians, Morians, Elamites, Caldeyes, Antiochians and from the Ilandes of the see.
And he shall sett vp a token amonge the Gentyles, and gather together the dispersed of Israel, yee Ꟶ the out castes of Iuda from the foure corners of the worlde.
The hatred of Ephraim also and enemyes of Iuda shalbe cleane roted oute. Ephraim shall beare no euell will to Iuda, and Iuda shal not hate Ephraim:
but they both together shall flye vpon the shoulders of the Philistines toward the west, and spoyle them together that dwell towarde the East. The Idumytes and the Moabites shall lett their handes fall, Ꟶ the Ammonites shalbe obedient vnto them.
The Lorde also shall cleue the tunges of the Egypcians see, Ꟶ with a myghtie wynde shall he lyft vp his hande ouer Nilus, and shall smyte hys seuen streames, and make men go ouer drye shod.
And thus shal there be awaye for his people, that remayneth from the Assirians, lyke as it happened to the Israelites, what tyme they departed out of the land of Egypt.
So that then thou shalt saye: O Lorde, I wyll thanke the, for thou waste displeased at me, but refrayne thou from thy wrath, and comforte me.
Behold, God is my saluacion in whom I will trust, and not be afrayde. For the Lorde God is my strength, Ꟶ my songe, he also is become my saluacion.
Therfore with ioye shall ye drawe water out of the welles of the Sauioure,
Ꟶ then shall ye saye: geue thanckes vnto the lorde, call vpon his name, declare his councels amonge the people, kepe them in remembrance, for his name is excellent.
O syng prayses vnto the Lord, for he hath done greate thynges, as it is knowne in all the worlde.
Crye out, and syng thou that dwellest in Syon, for great is the holy one of Israell in the myddes of the.
This is the heuy burthen of Babylon, which Esay the sonne of Amos dyd se.
Lyft vp the banner vpon the hye hyl, call vnto them, holde vp youre hande that the Prynces maye go in at the dore.
I haue sent for my debytes Ꟶ my gyauntes (sayth the Lord) which shall execute wrath, I wyll call for soch, as triumphe in my glory.
There is a noyse of a multytude in the mountaynes, like as of a great people, a russhynge, as though the kyngdomes of the nacions came together. (And the Lord of Hostes, mustreth his armye to bataile.)
They come out of a farre countree, from the ende of heauen: Euen the Lord hym selfe wt the ministers of his wrath, to destroye the whole lande.
Mourne ye, for the daye of the Lord is at hande, and shall come as a destroyer from the almyghtie.
Therfore shall all handes be letten downe, Ꟶ all mens hertes shal melt awaye,
they shall stande in feare, carefulnesse and sorow shall come vpon them, Ꟶ they shall haue payne, as a woman that trauayleth with childe. One shall be abasshed of another, and their faces shall burne lyke the flamme of fyre.
Beholde, the daye of the Lord shall come, terrible, ful of indignacion, furoure Ꟶ wrath to make the lande waste, Ꟶ to roote out the synners therof.
For the starres Ꟶ planetes of heauen shal not geue their lyght, the sunne shalbe darkened in the rysynge, and the moone shall not shyne with his lyght.
And I wyll punysh the wyckednesse of the worlde, and the synnes of the vngodly, sayeth the Lorde. The hye stomackes of the proude wyll I take awaye, and wyll laye downe the boastynge of tyrauntes.
I will make a man dearer then fyne golde, and a man to be more worth then a golden wedge of Ophir.
Therfore, I wyll shake the heauen, and the earth shall remoue out of her place: in the wrath of the Lord of hostes, and in the daye of hys fearfull indignacion.
And Babylon shalbe as an hunted or chased doo, and as a shepe that no man taketh vp. Euery man shall turne to hys awne people, and flye eche one into his awne lande.
Who so is founde alone, shalbe shot thorow: And who so gather together, shalbe destroyed with the swerde.
Their chyldren shalbe slayne before their eyes, their houses spoyled, and their wyues rauished.
For lo, I shall brynge vp the Medes agaynst them, which shall not regarde siluer, nor be desirous of gold.
With bowes shall they destroye the yong chidren, Ꟶ haue no pytie vpon wemen wyth chylde, Ꟶ their faces shall not spare the chyldren.
And Babylon (that glory of kyngdomes and bewtye of the Caldees honour) shalbe destroyed euen as God destroyed Sodome and Gomorre.
It shall not endure for euer, nether shall there be any more dwellyng there, from generacyon to generacyon. The Arabians shall pytch no tentes there, nether shal the shepheardes make their foldes there any more:
but fearfull wild beastes shall lye there, Ꟶ the houses shalbe full of greate Dules. Estriches shall dwel there, Ꟶ Apes shal daunse there
wild cattes shal crye in the palaces, and Dragons shalbe in the pleasaunt houses. And as for Babylons tyme it is at hand, Ꟶ her dayes shal not be prolonged.
But the Lord wylbe mercyfull vnto Iacob, and wil yet chose Israel agayne, and set them in their awne lande. Straungers shal cleaue vnto them, Ꟶ get them to the house of Iacob.
The people shal take them, Ꟶ cary them home to their awne lande. And make them to enherite the house of Israel in the lande of the Lord that they maye be seruauntes Ꟶ hand maydens of the Lord. They shal take those prisoners whose captyues they had bene a fore: Ꟶ rule those that had oppressed them.
When the Lord now shal bringe the to rest, from the trauayle, feare, Ꟶ harde bondage that thou wast laden wt all:
then shalt thou vse thys mockage vpon the kyng of Babylon, Ꟶ saye: How happeneth it that the oppressour leaueth of? Is the golden tribute come to an ende?
The Lord hath broken the ceptre of the vngodly Ꟶ the rodd of the lordly.
Which when he is wroth smyteth the people wt continual strokes, Ꟶ tyrannouselye reignethe ouer the hethen whom he persecuted without compassion.
And therfore the whole worlde is now at rest Ꟶ quyetnes and men synge for ioye.
Ye, euen the Fyrre trees Ꟶ Cedres of libanus reioyse at thy fall sayeng: Nowe that thou art layd downe, there come no mo vp to hewe downe vs.
Hell also beneth trembleth to mete the at thy commynge, Ꟶ for thy sake hath raysed his deade, Ꟶ all myghtie men Ꟶ princes of the earth. All kynges of the earth stande vp from their seates,
that they may all answere Ꟶ speake vnto the. Art thou become weake also as we? art thou become lyke vnto vs?
Thy pompe and thy pryde is layde downe into the pyt, and so is the melody of thy instrumentes. Wormes be layde vnder the, Ꟶ wormes are thy couerynge.
How art thou fallen from heauen (O Lucifer) thou faire mornynge childe? how hast thou gotten a fall euen to the grounde, and art become weaker then the people?
For thou saydest in thyne herte: I will clyme vp into heauen, Ꟶ exalte my throne aboue besyde the starres of God, I will syt also vpon the holy mount towarde the North,
I will clyme vp aboue the cloudes, and wylbe lyke the hyghest of al.
Yet thou shalt be brought downe to the depe of hell.
They that se the, shall narowly loke vpon the, and thynke in them selues, sayenge: Is thys the man, that brought all landes in feare, and made the kingdomes afrayde?
Is this he that made the worlde in a maner waste, and layde the cytyes to the grounde, which let not his prisoners go out?
The kynges of the nacions lye euery one in his awne house with worshype,
and thou art cast out of thy graue lyke a filthy abhominable braunch: lyke as dead mens raymint that are shot thorow with the swerde, Ꟶ go downe to the stones of the depe: as a dead coarse that is troden vnder fete:
and art not buried with them. Euen because that thou hast wasted thy lande, and destroyed thy people The generacyon of the wycked shalbe without honour, for euer.
Let there a waye be sought to destroye their children, that he in their fathers wyckednes, that they come not vp agayne to possesse the lande, and fyll the worlde full of enemyes.
I will stande vp agaynst them (sayeth the lord of hostes) Ꟶ roote out the name Ꟶ remnaunt sonne, Ꟶ sonnes sonne of Babylon (sayeth the Lord)
Ꟶ will geue it to the Otters, Ꟶ will make water poddels of it. And I wyll swepe them out wt the besome of destruccion, sayeth the Lorde of Hostes.
The Lord of Hostes hath sworne an othe, sayinge? It shall come to passe as I haue determyned, and shalbe fulfylled as I haue deuysed.
So that Assiria shal I destroye in my lande, Ꟶ vpon my mountaynes will I treade him vnder foote. Wher thorow his yock shal come from them, and his burthen shalbe taken from their shoulder.
Thys deuyce hath God taken thorow the whole worlde, and thys is hys hande stretched out ouer all people.
For yf the Lord of hostes determen a thynge, who is able to dysanulle it? And yf he stretch forth his hande, who maye holde it in agayne?
The same yeare that Kynge Ahaz dyed, god threatened on this maner:
Reioyse not (thou whole Palestyna) because the rod of hym that beateth the is broken: for out of the serpentes rote, there shall come an adder, Ꟶ the frute shalbe a fyrie flynge worme.
But the fyrst borne of the poore shalbe fed, Ꟶ the symple shal dwel in safetye. Thy rote also will I destroye wt honger, Ꟶ it shal slaye thy remnaunt.
Mourne thou porte, wepe thou citye, for (O whole land of Palestina) thou art layde waste for there shall come from the North, a smoke that not one alone may abyde in his place
Who shall then answere the messangers of the Gentyles? For the Lord hath stablyshed Syon, Ꟶ the poore of his people that be therin, do put theyr trust in him.
This is the heuy burthen vpon Moab: Ar of Moab was destroyed Ꟶ ouerthrowen in the nyght season: Kir also in Moab was destroyed Ꟶ peryshed in the nyght.
They wente vp to the ydols house, euen to Dibon to the hye places, to wepe for Nebo, and Moab dyd mourne for Medba: All theyr heades, were balde Ꟶ all theyr beardes shauen.
In theyr stretes are they gyrded aboute with sack cloth. In all the toppes of their houses Ꟶ stretes shalbe nothynge but mournynge Ꟶ wepynge.
Hesebon Ꟶ Eleale shall crye, that theyr voyce shalbe hearde vnto Iahaz. The worthyes also of Moab shall bleare out and crye for very sorow of their Myndes:
Wo shall my herte be for Moabs sake. They shal flye vnto the cyte of zoar, which is lyke a fayre yong bullock of thre yere olde, for they shall all go vp to Luith, wepinge. Euen so by the waye toward Horonaim they shall make lamentacion for ther vtter destruccion.
For the waters of Nimrim shalbe dried vp, by reason wherof the grasse is withred, the herbes destroyed, Ꟶ the grene thynges gone.
For the residue that he hath done, they are sory. As for theyr substaunce, the enemyes haue caried them to the broke of the wyllyes.
For the crie went ouer the whole lande of Moab: vnto Eglaim Ꟶ vnto Beer Elim was there nothing but mournyng,
because the waters of Dimon were full of bloude: for I the Lord shall sende more bloude vpon Dimon, Ꟶ lyons vpon the remnaunt of the lande, Ꟶ on them that are escaped from Moab.
Sende the Lord of the world a lambe, from the rocke that lyeth towarde the deserte, vnto the hil of the daughter Syon.
For as for the daughters of Moab, they shalbe as a tremblyng byrde, that is put out of heruest, for they shal carye them vnto Arnon:
gather your councel, come together in iudgement, couer vs wt your shadowe in the myddaye, as the nyght doth hyde the chased, and bewraye not them that are fled
let my persecuted people dwell amonge you Moab, be thou their refuge against the destroyer: for the aduersary is brought to naught, the robber is vndone, the tyraunt is waysted out of the land.
And in mercy shall the seate be prepared, and he shal syt vpon it in the trueth, in the tabernacle of Dauid iudgyng and sekyng iudgement, Ꟶ making hast vnto ryghteousnes.
We haue heard of the pryde of Moab, he is very proude, presumpteous, arrogant, and full of indignacyon, Ꟶ vayne are hys lyes.
Therfore shal Moab make lamentacion because of the Moabites (that shalbe slayne) yee they shal wayle all together. Because of the foundacyons of the citye that is made of brick, shal ye complayne: euen ye lame people that are left onely behinde.
For the vynes of Hesbon are cut downe: As for the vyne of Sibma, the Lordes of the Heithen haue broken downe hyr principall braunches: they are come euen vnto Iazer, they went on wandering vnto the wildernesse. Hyr goodly braunches were throwen downe, as they went ouer the see.
Therfore will I mourne for Iazer, Ꟶ for the vyne of Sibma. I will poure my teares vpon the, O Hesbon and Eleale, for the crie of thyne enemyes is fallen vpon thy sommer frutes, and vpon thyne haruest.
The Myrth and chere is taken awaye out of the plentifull felde, and in the vyneyardes there shalbe no ioye ner gladnesse. The treader shall treade out no wyne in the presses, the song of theyr mery chere haue I layde downe.
Wherfore, my bowels shal romble lyke an harpe for Moabs sake, and myne inwarde partes for the cityes sake that is made of bryck.
And it shal come to passe, that whan it is sene that Moab shalbe made wery of hys hyll chapels, he shall come to his temple to praye, but he shal not be able
So then, thys is the sayeng that the Lord hath spoken concernyng, Moab sens that tyme.
But now the Lord hath spoken sayeng. In thre yeares which shalbe as the yeares of an hyred seruaunt: shall the glorye of Moab be turned into confusion, thorow out al his multitude, which is very great. And that whych remayneth, shalbe very small and feble.
Thys is the heuye burthen vpon Damascus: Beholde, Damascus is taken awaye, to be nomore a citye, but shalbe an heape of broken stones.
The waste cityes of Aroer shalbe foldes for catel which shal lye there, and there shalbe none to fraye them awaye
Ephraim also shall nomore be strong, Ꟶ Damascus shall nomore be a kyngdome, Ꟶ the remnaunt of Syria shalbe as the glorye of the children of Israel, sayeth the Lord of hostes.
And in that daye it shal come to passe that Iacob shalbe made very poore, Ꟶ the fatnesse of hys fleshe shall waxe leane.
And he shalbe as one that gathereth vp corne in haruest, euen lyke him whose arme reapeth the eares of corne. He shalbe also lyke hym that gathereth eares of corne in the valley of Rephaim.
Some gathering in dede shal there be left in it, euen as in the shakyng of an olyue tre there remayne two or thre beryes in the toppe of the vppermost bowe, Ꟶ foure or fyue in the brode frutefull braunches therof, sayeth the Lorde God of Israel.
Then shall man turne agayne to his maker, Ꟶ his eyes shall haue respecte to the holy one of Israel.
As for the altares which are his awne handy worke, he shal not regarde them, Ꟶ the thynges that his fyngers haue made (as groues Ꟶ ymages) those shall he not cast his eye vnto.
In that daye shal their strong cities be as the forsaken shrubbes Ꟶ braunches, which they left because of the children of Israel, Ꟶ the londe shalbe desolate.
Because thou hast forgotten God thy saluacion, and hast not bene myndefull of thy strong rock, therfore shalt thou set pleasaunt plantes, Ꟶ shalt graffe the braunche of another mans vyne.
In the daye shalt thou make thy plant to growe, Ꟶ early in the mornynge shalt thou make thy sede to florish. The haruest shalbe gone in the daye of enheritaunce, Ꟶ there shalbe sorowe without hope of comforte.
Wo shalbe to the multitude of moche people, which shall make a sounde lyke the noyse of the see: And the violence of the nacions, which shal rage lyke the russhyng in of many waters:
Euen lyke many waters shall the people rage. God shall rebuke him, and he shal flye farre of. He shalbe chaced awaye lyke as drye strawe vpon the mountaynes before the wynde, and lyke a thing that turneth before the storme.
At euen beholde, there is trouble: Ꟶ or euer it be mornyng, lo, he is gone. This is the porcyon of them that oppresse vs, and the lott of them that robbe vs.
O that lande that trusteth vnder the shadowe of wynges, that lande which is beyonde the waters of Ethiopia:
Sending messaungers by the see, euen in vessels of redes ouer the water. Get you hence (ye spedye messaungers) to a nacion that is scatred a brode Ꟶ robbed of that they had: a fearfull people from their begynning hytherto: a nacion troden downe by lytle and lytle, whose lande the floudes haue spoyled.
All ye inhabiters of the worlde and indwellers of the earth, loke vp whan he setteth a token in the mountaynes, and harken whan he bloweth wyth the trompe.
For so the Lorde sayde vnto me, as for me, I will take my rest, Ꟶ loke vpon the matter in my habitacion, lyke a fayre heate after the rayne, Ꟶ lyke a cloude of dew in the heat of haruest.
For afore the haruest, whan the braunche is growne, there shal come ripe frute out of the floure, Ꟶ he shall cut downe the increace wyth sythes, Ꟶ the braunches shall he take awaye with hokes.
Thus shal they be left together vnto the foules of the mountaynes, and to the beastes of the erth: for in sommer the byrdes shall remayne vpon it, and euery beest of the lande shalbe vpon it in the wynter.
In that tyme shal there a present be brought vnto the Lorde of hoostes: euen a people that is scatred abrode, and robbed of that they had, that same people which hath bene fearfull from theyr begynnyng hyther to: a nacyon troden downe by lytle and lytle whose lande the floudes haue spoyled: To the place of the name of the Lord of hoostes, euen to the mount Syon.
The heuye burthen of Egypte: Beholde, the Lorde rydeth vpon a swyfte clowde, and shall come into Egypte, Ꟶ the ydols of Egypte shall tremble at the presence of hym, Ꟶ the hert of Egypte shall quake in the myddes of her.
And I wyll set the Egypcians one agaynst another, so that one brother shall fyght agaynst another, Ꟶ one neyghboure agaynst another, citye agaynst citye, Ꟶ realme agaynst realme.
The mynde also of Egipte shalbe cleane without councell within it selfe, Ꟶ the deuyce that they take, wyll I destroye, so that they shall seke councell at ydols Ꟶ at sorcerers, at workers with spretes Ꟶ at sothsayers.
And the Egypcians will I geue ouer into the hande of a maruelous cruell Lorde, Ꟶ a myghtie kynge shall haue dominion ouer them, sayeth the Lord God of hostes.
The waters of the see shal fayle, Ꟶ the ryuer shall decreace and be dryed vp.
The waters shalbe drawen out: the ryuers of Egypte shalbe emptyed Ꟶ dryed vp, the redes and flagges shalbe cut downe.
The grasse in the ryuer Ꟶ by the ryuers banck, Ꟶ all that groweth by the ryuer shal wither awaye, and be brought to naught.
The fysshers also shal mourne and all they that cast angle into the water, shal make lamentacion, and they that laye forth theyr nett besyde the waters, shalbe roted out.
Morouer, they that worke in flaxe, and make fyne workes, shall be confounded, and so shall they that weaue open workes.
For theyr open workes shalbe euen destroyed, and all they that make pondes and stewes for fish shall come to naught.
But ye foolish prynces of zoan, ye wyse councelours of Pharao, whose wit is turned to foolyshnes, how saye ye vnto Pharao: I am come of wyse men Ꟶ of auncient kynges?
Wher ar they? where are (I saye) thy wyse men? Let them tell the (yf they can) what the lord of hoostes hath deuysed vpon Egypte.
The prynces of zoan are become fooles, the prynces of Noph are disceaued, they haue disceaued Egypte, euen they that were taken for the chefe kynred therof.
In the myddes of it hath the lord powred the sprete of wyckednes, and they haue disceaued Egypt in euery worke therof, euen as a droncken man stackereth in his vomyte.
Nether shall the heade or tayle, the braunch or rede be able to do anye worke in Egipte.
In that daye shall Egypte be lyke vnto women: It shalbe afrayed and stonde in feare at the mocyon of the hand of the Lorde of hostes, which he shaketh ouer it.
And Egipt shalbe afrayed of the land of Iuda: so that euery one which maketh mencyon of it, shalbe afrayed therat, because of the councell of the Lord of hoostes which he deuyseth for it.
In that daye shall fyue cities in the land of Egypte speake the language of Canaan, Ꟶ swere by the Lord of hoostes: the citye of desolacion shalbe called one of them.
In that daye shall the altare of the Lord be in the myddes of the land of Egypt, Ꟶ thys tytle besyde it: VNTO THE LORDE.
And it shalbe a token and witnesse vnto the Lord of hoostes in the lande of Egypte. For they shall crye vnto the Lorde because of such as trouble them, Ꟶ he shall send them a Sauiour Ꟶ a great man to delyuer them.
And the Lord shalbe knowne in Egipte, and the Egypcians shall knowe the Lord in that daye, and do sacrifice and oblation: yee they shall vowe a vowe vnto the Lord, and perfourme it.
The lord also that smyte Egypte sore, Ꟶ heale them agayne, Ꟶ they shalbe conuerted vnto the Lord, and he shalbe intreated of them, Ꟶ shall heale them.
In that daye shall there be a comen waye out of Egypte into Assyria, and Assyria shall come into Egypte, Ꟶ Egypte in to Assyria, so that the Egypcians and the Assyrians shall serue the Lorde together.
In that daye shal the nacion of Israel be the thyrde wyth Egypte Ꟶ Assyria,
and they shalbe blessed in the myddes of the lande, which lande the Lord of hoostes hath blessed, sayeng: blessed is my people of Egypte, Assur also is the worke of myne handes, and Israel is myne inheritaunce.
In the yeare that Tharthan came vnto Asdod (whan Sargon the kyng of Assyria had sent him) and had foughte agaynst Asdod and taken it.
At the same tyme spake the Lorde by the hande of Esay the sonne of Amos, sayeng: Go and take of the sacke clothe from thy loynes, Ꟶ put of thy shooe from thy foote. And he dyd so, walkynge naked and bare foote.
And the Lord sayde: lyke as my seruaunt Esay hath walked naked, and bare fote for a signe and wonder thre yeares vpon Egypte, and Ethiopia:
Euen so shall the kynge of Assyria take awaye out of Egypte and out of Ethiopia, chyldren and olde men, naked and bare fote wyth their loynes vncouered, to the greate shame of Egypte.
They shalbe brought in feare also, Ꟶ asshamed one of another: Ethiopia of Egypte, and Egypte of Ethiopia, considerynge what glory they were in a fore.
And they that dwell in the same yle, shal saye in that daye: Beholde, thus are we regarded. Whither shall we flye for helpe, that we maye be delyuered from the kyng of Assyria? And howe shall we escape?
The burthen of the wayst see: Euen as the stormy wether that passeth thorow at the noone daye, to come from the wyldernesse, from that horrible lande.
A greuous vision was shewed vnto me: Let one dysceatfull offender come agaynst another, Ꟶ one destroyer agaynst another. Up Elam, laye sege thou of Media all their gronynge haue I layed downe.
Therfore are my loynes fylled with sorow, heuynes, hath taken holde vpon me, as the panges of a woman that is traueyling. It made me stoupe when I herde it, Ꟶ it vexed me whan I sawe it.
My hart panted, fearfulnes came vpon me. The nyght of my volupteousnes hath he turned agaynst me into feare.
Whyle they garnished the table, the watch man loked: And while I was eatynge and drynkyng (it was sayde:) vp ye captaynes, take you to your shylde.
For thus hath the Lord sayd vnto me: Go and set a watch man, to tell what he seyth.
And he sawe a charet, which two horsmen sat vpon, with the cariage of an Asse, and the cariage of a camell.
So he loked Ꟶ toke very diligent hede. And the lyon cried, Lord, I stonde wayting all the whole daye, Ꟶ am appointed to kepe my watch euery nyght.
And beholde, here commeth a charet of men, with two horsmen And he answered Ꟶ sayde: Babylon is fallen, it is fallen, Ꟶ all the ymages of hyr goddes hath he smytten downe vnto the grounde.
Thou art he whom I must threshe, and thou belongest to my corne floore. This that I herde of the Lorde of hoostes the God of Israel haue I shewed vnto you.
The burthen of Duma: he calleth vnto me out of Seir: Watchman, what hast thou espyed by nyght? Watchman, what hast thou espyed by nyght?
The watchman sayde: The mornynge commeth, Ꟶ so doth the nyght. Yf ye wyll aske anye question, then aske it, retourne and come agayne.
The burthen concernyng Arabia: In the pleasaunt grounde of Arabia shal ye tary all nyght, euen in the stretes of Dedanin.
The inhabitours of the lande of Thema brought forth water to him that was thyrstie, they preuented him with their bred that was fled awaye.
For because of swerdes are they become fugitiue, euen for the drawen swerde, and for the bent bowe, Ꟶ because of the greuousnes of warre.
For thus hath the lorde sayde vnto me: There is yet a yeare accordynge to the yeares of an hyred seruaunt, Ꟶ all the glory of Cedar shall fayle.
And the nombre of them that shall escape from the bowes, shall be mynisshed by the myghtye chyldren of Cedar, for so the Lorde God of Israel hath spoken.
The burthen of the valley of vision: What hast thou to do here, that thou clymest vnto the house toppes?
Thou that art full of occupieng, thou sedicious Ꟶ proude citye: thy slayne men are nether put to death wyth swerde, ner deed in batell.
All thy captaynes are fugitiue together, the archers haue taken them presoners: All they that are founde in the, are in captiuyte together, because they fled farre of.
Therfore sayd I: let me alone Ꟶ I wyll make lamentacion. Ye shall not be able to comforte me, because of the destruccyon of the daughter of my people.
For thys is a daye of trouble, of ruyne, Ꟶ of destruccyon that the Lorde wyll bryng to passe in the valley of vision, breakyng downe the citye, Ꟶ cryeng vnto mountaynes.
Elam bare the quyuer wt a charet of fote men and of horsmen, and the cytye of Kyr shewed the shylde open.
Thy chefe valley also was full of charetes, and the horsmen set theyr faces directly towarde the gate.
And in that daye dyd the enemye take awaye the bewtye of Iuda, and then dyddest thou loke towarde the armoure of the house of the forest.
Yee haue sene also the broken places of the citye of Dauid, how that they are many, Ꟶ ye gathered together the waters of the lower pole.
As for the houses of Ierusalem ye haue nombred them, and the houses haue ye broken downe to make the wall strong.
A pytt also haue ye made betwene the two walles, for the waters of the olde pole, and haue not regarded the maker therof, nether had respecte vnto him that toke it in hande.
And in that daye dyd the Lorde God of hoostes call men vnto wepyng and mournyng, to baldnesse Ꟶ gyrdyng aboute wyth sack cloth.
And Behold, they haue ioye and gladnesse, slayeng oxen Ꟶ kylling shepe eatyng flesh Ꟶ drynkyng wyne: Let vs eate and drynke: for tomorowe we shal dye
And it came to the eares of the Lord of hoostes: This iniquite shall not be pourged from you till ye dye, sayeth the lord God of hostes.
Thus sayeth the Lord God of hostes: Go, get the into younder treasurer, euen vnto Sebna, which is the ruler of the house.
What hast thou to do here? and whom hast thou here, that thou shuldest here hewe the out a sepulcre, as it were one that heweth hym out a sepulcre an hye, or that graueth an habitacion for him self in a hard rock?
Beholde, O thou man, the Lord shall carye the awaye into captiuite, Ꟶ shall surely couer the with confusion.
The Lord shall turne the ouer lyke a ball with hys handes into a farre contre: There shalt thou dye, Ꟶ there (in steade of the charettes of thy pompe) shall the house of thy lord haue confusion
I will dryue the from thy place, Ꟶ out of thy dwellyng shall he ouerthrow the.
And in that daye shall I call my seruaunt Eliakim the sonne of Helkia.
And with thy garmentes will I clothe him, and wyth thy gyrdle will I strength hym: thy power also will I committe into his hande Ꟶ he shalbe a father of such as dwel in Ierusalem, and in the house of Iuda.
And the keye of the house of Dauid will I laye vpon his shoulder, so that he shall open and no man shall shut. He shall shut, and no man shall open.
And I wyll fasten hym as a nayle in a sure place, and he shall be the gloryous seate of hys fathers house.
Morouer, all generacions and posterites shall hang vpon him, all the glory of their fathers house, all vessels both great and small, and all instrumentes of measure and musyck.
In that daye (sayeth the Lorde of hostes) shall the nayle that is fastened in the sure place departe, be broken and fall, and the burthen that was vpon it, shall be plucte awaye, for so the lorde hath spoken.
The burthen of Tyre: Mourne ye shyppes of Tharsis, for there commeth such destruccyon that ye shall not haue an house to entre into: Out of the lande of Cittim haue they knowlege of thys plage.
Be styll, ye that dwell in the Ile, the marchauntes of zidon, and such as passe ouer the see, haue made the plenteous.
The corne that groweth by the great waters of Nilus, and the frutes of the ryuer were hyr vitailes, so that it became a comen marte of the nacion
Be ashamed thou zidon, for the see (euen the strength of the see) hath spoken, sayenge: I haue not trauayled, ner broughte forth children, ner norished vp young men, or brought vp virgins.
Whan tydinges commeth to the Egipcians they shall be sory for the rumore that goeth of Tyre.
Get you to Tharsis, mourne ye that dwell in the Ile.
Is not this that glorious cyte of youres, which hath bene of olde antiquite? Hyr awne fete shall cary hyr forth to be a sogeourner in to a farre countre.
Who hath deuysed thys agaynst Tyre (that geueth garlandes vnto other cities) whose marchauntes are princes, and whose captaines are honorable in the worlde?
Euen the lord of hoostes hath deuysed thys, to put downe the pryde of all such as be glorious, and to mynish all them that be proude vpon earth:
Get the out of thy lande vnto the daughter of Tharsis, seyng thou hast nomore strength.
He that smote the kyngdomes together, holdeth out his hande ouer the see: euen the lorde him self hath geuen a commaundement agaynst the same comen place of marchandise, that they shall vtterly destroye the might therof.
And he sayd: Make nomore thy boast (O virgin thou daughter zidon) thou shalt be brought downe: Up, get the ouer vnto Citim, where neuertheles thou shalt haue no rest.
Behold, this people came not of the Caldees, but Assur made them strong with great shippes. They set vp the strong holdes therof, Ꟶ destroyed his palaces, Ꟶ he brought it in decaye.
Mourne ye shippes of tharsis for your strength is brought downe.
And in that daye shall Tyre be forgotten seuentye yeares (accordinge to the yeares of one kyng) and after the ende of the seuentye yeares shall Tyre syng as doth an harlot.
Take an harpe, Ꟶ go aboute the citye (thou harlot that hast bene forgotten) make swete melody, sing moo songes, that thou mayest be had in remembraunce.
And after the ende of the seuentye yeares shall the lorde visyt Tyre, Ꟶ she shall conuerte vnto her rewarde, and shall committe fornicacion with all the kyngdomes of the earth that are in the worlde.
Their occupieng also and their rewarde shalbe holy vnto the lord. Their gaynes shall not be layde vp ner kepte in stoare, but it shalbe theyrs that dwell before the lorde, that they maye eate ynough, Ꟶ haue clothyng sufficient.
Beholde the lord maketh the earth wayst and emptye: he turneth it vp syde downe, Ꟶ scatreth abrode the inhabitours therof:
And the prest shalbe as the people, Ꟶ the master as the seruaunt, the mastresse lyke the mayd, the seller lyke the byer: he that lendeth vpon vsury, lyke hym that boroweth vpon vsury: the creditoure as the detter.
The worlde shalbe cleane wasted Ꟶ vtterly spoyled, for so the lorde hath spoken.
The earth is sory Ꟶ consumeth awaye, the worlde is feble Ꟶ perisheth, the proude people of the erth are come to naught
The earth also is become vnprofitable vnder the inhabitours therof, which haue transgressed the lawes, chaunged the ordinaunce, broken the euerlasting couenaunt.
Therfore hath the curse consumed the earth, and they that dwell therin, are fallen into trespace. Wherfore, the inhabitours of the earth are perished with drouth, and fewe men are left behynde.
The wyne faileth: the vyne hath no myght, all they that haue bene mery of hart, are come to mournyng.
The myrth of tabrettes is layed downe, the noyse of such as haue made mery, is ceassed, the ioye at the herpe is at an ende.
They shall drynke nomore wyne wt myrth, strong drynke shalbe bytter to them that drynke it.
The citye of vanite is broken downe, euery house is shut vp, that noman maye come in.
In the stretes is there a cryeng because of wyne, all chere is vanished awaye, the myrth of the worlde is gone,
in the citye is left desolacyon and the gate is smytten with destruccion.
For in the myddes of the worlde, euen amonge the people, it shall come to passe, as at the shakyng of Olyues, and as the grapes are whan the wyne haruest is done.
They shall lyft vp theyr voyce: and make a mery noyse, and in magnifyeng of the Lord shall they crye out of the west.
Wherfore, prayse ye the lord in the valleys, euen the name of the lord God of Israel in the Iles of the see
From the vttemost parte of the earth haue we heard prayses and myrth because of the ryghteous. And I sayd: I knowe a thyng in secrete, I knowe a thyng in secrete, wo is me, the transgressours haue offended, the transgressours haue greuously offended.
Fearfulnesse, the pytt and the snare are vpon the, O thou that dwellest in the earth.
It will come to passe, that whoso escapeth the fearfull noyse, shall fall in to the pytt. And he that commeth vp out of the pytt, shalbe taken wyth the snare. For the wyndowes from an hye are open, and the foundacions of the earth are moued.
The earth is vtterly broken downe, the earth hath a sore ruyne, the earth quaketh exceadyngly.
The earth shall rele to Ꟶ fro lyke a dronkerd, and shalbe remoued lyke a like a tent Ꟶ the iniquitie therof shalbe heuy vpon it. It shall fall, Ꟶ not rise vp agayne.
And in that daye shall the Lord viset the host aboue that is on hye: Ꟶ the kinges of the world that are vpon the erth.
And they shalbe gathered together, as they that be in preson: Ꟶ they shalbe shut vp in warde, Ꟶ after many daies shall they be visited.
The mone shall be abashed, and the sunne ashamed, when the Lorde of hostes shall raygne in mount Sion and in Ierusalem with worshyp, and in the syght of such as shalbe of hys councell.
Thou arte the Lorde my God, I wyll magnifye the, I wyll geue thankes vnto thy name. For thou hast brought wonderfull thinges to passe, according to thyne olde councels truly Ꟶ faythfully.
Thou hast mad of a citye an heape of stones, and brought a stronge towne into decaye. The habitation of straungers hast thou made to be no citye, nether shal it be builded any more.
Therfore shall the mighty people geue glory vnto the: the citye of the valeaunt Heithen shall feare the.
For thou hast bene a strength vnto the pore, and a succour for the neady in his trouble. A refuge agaynst euell wether, a shadowe against the heate. For the blast of ragyng men is lyke a storme that casteth downe a wall.
Lyke as thou bryngest heate downe out of a drye place, so shalt thou suppresse the noyse of aliauntes. The heate is in the shadow of the cloude: the braunch of the mighty shalbe brought lowe.
And in this mountaine shal the Lord of hostes make vnto all people a feaste of plenteous Ꟶ delicate thinges, euen of most pleasaunt Ꟶ deyntie disshes.
And in this mountayne shall the Lorde destroie the couering, that all people are wraped in, and the hanging that is spred vpon all nacyons.
As for death, he hath destroyed it for euer. And the Lorde God shall wype awaye teares from all faces, and the rebuke of his people shall he take a waie out of all the earth. For so the Lorde hath sayde.
And in that daye it shalbe sayde: Lo, this is our God, we haue wayted for hym, Ꟶ he shall saue vs. Thys is the Lord, in whom we haue hoped, we wylbe mery Ꟶ reioyce in the saluation that commeth of hym.
For in this mountayne shall the hande of the Lorde cease and Moab shalbe thresshed vnder him, euen as strawe is thresshed vpon the grounde.
And he shall stretch out hys hande in the myddes of them (as he that swymmeth, casteth out his handes to swymme) and with the strength of his handes shall he bring downe their pryde.
The strongholde also and fence of thy walles hath he ouerthrowen Ꟶ cast downe, Ꟶ brought them to the grounde, euen vnto dust.
In that daye shall thys songe be songe in the lande of Iuda. We haue a stronge citye. Saluacion shall God appoynte in steade of walles and bulworke.
Open ye the gates that the righteous people which kepeth the trueth maye entre in.
Their minde is set vpon the, because thou preseruest them in peace yee, euen in peace: because they put their trust in the.
Put ye your trust allwaye in the Lorde: for in the Lorde God there is strength for euermore.
For he hath brought downe hye mynded citesens. As for the proude citye, he hath brought it lowe: euen vnto the grounde shall he cast it downe, Ꟶ bring it vnto dust.
The fote euen the fote of the poore: and the steppes of such as be in necessitie shall treade it downe.
The path of equitye wilt thou graunt vnto the iuste, o thou moost ryghteous, thou shalt order the path of him that is ryghteous.
Yee, in the waye of thy iudgmentes, O Lord, haue we put our trust in the. Thy name also: Ꟶ the remembraunce of the, is the thyng that oure soule longeth for.
My soule hath longed for the all the night, and wt my sprete (which is within me) wyll I seke the earlye in the morning. For when thy iudgementes are in the erth, the inhabitatours of the worlde shall learne righteousnes.
Shall the vngodly man be fauoured, which hath not learned ryghteousnes, but doth wickedly in the erth where nothynge ought to be done, but that which is ryghteous? He shall not se the glory of the Lorde.
Lorde, when thy hande is lyfte vp to stryke, they se it not: but they shall se it, and be confounded with the zele of the people, and the fyer that consumeth thyne enemyes, shall deuoure them.
Lord, vnto vs thou shalt prouyde peace: for thou also hast wrought all our workis in vs.
O Lorde our God, other lordes besyde the hath subdued vs: but we wylbe mindfull only of the Ꟶ of thy name.
The deed will not lyue, Ꟶ they that be out of lyfe, will not ryse agayne: therfore hast thou visited Ꟶ roted them out, and destroyed all the memory of them.
Thou hast increased the people (O Lorde) thou hast increased the people, Ꟶ thou art praysed: thou hast sent them farre of vnto all the coastes of the erth.
Lorde in trouble haue they visited the: they powred out their prayer, when thy chastenyng was vpon them.
Lyke as a woman wt chylde that draweth nye towarde her trauell, is sory Ꟶ cryeth in her paynes, euen so haue we bene in thy sight, O Lorde.
We haue bene wt chylde Ꟶ suffred payne, as though we had brought forth winde. For there is no saluation in the erth, nether do the inhabitours of the worlde submyt them selues.
Thy deed men shall lyue, euen wt my body shall they rise agayne. Awake and syng ye that dwell in dust. For thy dewe is euen as the dewe of herbes, and the earth shall cast out them that be vnder her.
Come my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy dores about the: hyde thy selfe a lytle for a whyle, vntyll the indignation be ouerpast.
For lo, the Lorde is commyng out of his place, to viset the wickednes of suche as dwell vpon earth. The earth also shall disclose her awne bloud, and shall nomore hid them that are slayne in her.
In that daye, the Lorde wt his sore, great and myghtye swearde shall viset Leuiathan the fugityue serpent, euen Leuiathan that croked serpent, and he shall slaye the dragon that is in the see.
In that daye, se that ye syng of the congregatyon which is the vyneiard, that bringeth forth the best wyne.
Euen I the Lorde do kepe it. In due seasons shall I water it, Ꟶ lest the enemye do it any harme, I will both nyght and daye preserue it. There is no displeasure in me,
els (when the vyneiarde bringeth me forth breers Ꟶ thornes) I wold go thorow it by warre, Ꟶ burne it vp together.
Let it take holde of my strength, and it shalbe at one wt me, euen at one shall it be with me.
The dayes are commyng, that Iacob shall take rote. Israel shalbe grene Ꟶ floryshe, and the worlde shalbe fylled with frute.
Hath he smytten him as sore, as he did the other that smote him? Or is he slain wt so sore a slaughter as they that slew hym?
In measure doth he smyte him, whyle he sendeth vnto him soch thinges, wherby he commeth to hys mynde agayne. For in the daye that the east wynde bloweth sore, it taketh awaye the frutes.
Thus therfore shall the iniquytie of Iacob be reconcyled, and here is all the frute of the takynge awaye of his synne, yf he make all the stones of the aultars of ydolles, as chalke stones that are beaten in sunder, that theyr groues and ymages ryse not vp agayne.
Els, shall the stronge citye be desolate, Ꟶ the habitation forsaken Ꟶ left lyke a wildernes. There shall the calfe fede, Ꟶ ther shall he lye, Ꟶ eate vp the graffes therof.
When the braunches of it are drie, they are broken of, Ꟶ the wemen come, and set them on fyer. For it is a people of no vnderstanding, Ꟶ therfore he that made them, shall not fauoure them, and he that created them, shall geue them no grace.
And in that daye shall the Lorde make a thresshing from the middes of the riuer Euphrates vnto the riuer of Egipt: and ye children of Israel shalbe gathered together one to another.
In that daye shall the great trompe be blowne, so that they which were lost in the lande of Assiria: Ꟶ they that were banisshed into the lande of Egipt, shall come and worshyp the Lorde in the holy mount at Ierusalem:
Wo be vnto the crowne of pride, euen to the droncken people of Ephraim whose great pompe is as a flour that fadeth awaye vpon the head of the valleye of such as be in welth, and are ouerladen with wyne.
Beholde, ther commeth a vehement and sore daye from the Lorde lyke an vnmeasurable hayle and perellous tempest, euen lyke the force of myghtye and horrible waters, that violentlye beareth downe all thinges.
The crowne of the pryde of the dronken Ephraemites shalbe troden vnder fote:
so that the floure of hys fayrenes and bewty, which is in the head of the valley of fatnes, shall fade awaye, as doth an vntimely rype fygg afore heruest. Which whan a man spyeth, he loketh vpon it: and whyle it is yet in his hande, he eateth it vp.
In the daye shall the Lorde of hostes be the crowne of glory, Ꟶ diademe of bewtye vnto the residue of his people.
He wilbe also a spirite of perfyte knowledge to him that sitteth in iudgement, Ꟶ strength vnto them that turne awaye the battell to the gate of the enemies.
But they are out of the waye by reason of wyne: yee, farre out of the waye are they thorowe strong drynke. The preste also Ꟶ the prophet are gone astraye by the meanes of strong drincke, they are dronken wt wyne, they go amisse thorowe strong drincke: they fayle in prophecying Ꟶ stomble in iudgment.
For tables are so full of vomyte and fylthines, that no place is cleane.
Whom then shall such one teach knowledge? And whom shall he make to vnderstonde the thing that he heareth? For they are as ignoraunt as yong children, that are taken from the mylke and are weened.
For they that be such must haue after one lesson, another lesson: after one commaundement, another commaundement, after one rule another rule, after one instruccion another instruccyon, there a lytle and there a lytle.
For he that speaketh vnto this people is euen as one that vseth rudenes of spech, and a straunge language. Yf any man saye vnto them:
lo, this is the rest wherwith ye maye ease hym that is weerye, thys is the refresshinge, they wyll not herken.
Therfore, the worde of the Lorde (lesson vpon lesson, commaundement vpon commaundement, rule vpon rule, instruccyon vpon instruccion, there a lytle and there a lytle) shall be vnto them an occasyon of stombling that they maye go on, and fall backward, be brused, tangled and snared.
Wherfore, heare the worde of the Lorde ye mockers, ye that haue rule of this people which is at Ierusalem.
Because ye haue sayd: we haue made a couenaunt with death, Ꟶ with hell are we at agrement. And though there go forth a sore plage, it shall nott come vnto vs. For we haue made falshode our refuge, and vnder vanitie are we hid.
Therfore thus sayth the Lorde God: Beholde, I laye in Sion for a foundation a stone, euen a tryed stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation: Whoso beleueth, let hym not be to hastye.
Iudgment also will I laye to the rule, and righteousnes to the balaunce: so that the hayle shall take awaye your vayne confidence as a broome, and the preuy place of youre refuge shall the waters renne ouer.
And thus the couenaunt that ye made wt death, shalbe disanulled: and your agrement that ye made with hell, shall not stand. Yee, when the sore plage goeth forth, ye shalbe troden downe vnder it. From the tyme that it goeth forth, it shall take you awaye.
For early in the mornynge euery daye: yee, both daye Ꟶ night shall it go thorowe: Ꟶ when the noyse therof is perceaued, it shall gendre vexation.
For the bed is narow, and nott large: Ꟶ the couering so small that a man can not wynde him selfe vnder it.
For the Lorde shall stonde as in mount Perazim, and shalbe wrothe lyke as in the valley Gibeon, that he maie do his worke, his straung worke Ꟶ bring to passe his acte, his straunge acte.
Now therfore se that ye be no mockers, lest your punyshment increace: for I haue heard of the Lorde of hostes, that there shall come a short ende vpon the whole earth.
Heare ye then, Ꟶ herken vnto my voyce, considre Ꟶ pondre my spech.
Doth not the husbandman plowe all the daie, and openeth Ꟶ breaketh the clottes of his grounde, that he maye sowe?
Whan he hath made it playn, will he not spred abrode the fitches, and sowe comyn, Ꟶ cast in whete by measure, Ꟶ the appoynted barlye and rye in their place?
God will instructe hym to haue discretion, euen his God wyll teach hym.
For fitches shall not be tresshed with an harowe: nether shall a carte whele be brought thorowe the comyn: but the fitches are beaten out with a stafe, and comyn wt a rodd.
But the seede that bread is made of, is tresshed, though it be not alwaye a thresshing. And the carte whele must be brought ouer it, lest he grynde it with his teth.
This also commeth of the Lorde of hoostes, which worcketh wt wonderfull wysdome, and bringeth excellent workes to passe.
Wo vnto the O Ariel Ariel thou citye that Dauid dwelt in Go on from yeare to yeare, and let the lambes be slayne.
I will laye sege vnto Ariel, so that there shalbe heuynes and sorowe in it: and it shalbe vnto me euen an aultar of slaughter.
I wyll besege the round about, and fight agaynst the thorowe a bulworke: and wyll reare vp diches agaynst the.
Thou shalt be brought downe, Ꟶ shalt speake out of the grounde, and thy spech shall go lowe out of the duste.
Thy voyce also shall come out of the grounde lyke the voyce of a witch: and thy talkyng shall whisper out of the dust. Moreouer, the noyse of thy straunge enemyes shalbe lyke thynne dust, Ꟶ the multitude of tyrauntes shalbe as drye strawe, that cannot tary: euen sodenly and in hayste shall theyr blast go.
Thou shalt be visited of the Lorde of hostes wt thondre, erthquake, and wt a great noise: with storme and tempest and wt the flame of a consuming fyer.
And the multitude of all nations that fyght agaynst Ariel, shalbe as a dreame sene by night: euen so shall all they be that make warre agaynst it, and stronge holdes to ouercome it, and that laie eny sege vnto it.
In conclusion, it shalbe euen as when an hongry man dreameth that he is eating, and when he awaketh, hys soule is emptye. Or as when a thurstye man dreameth that he is drincking: and when he awaketh, he is yet faynt: and his soule lacketh the appetite. Euen so shalbe the multitude of all nations that fyght agaynst Syon.
Pondre these thynges once in your myndes, Ꟶ wondre. Blinded are they them selues and the blind guides of other. They are dronken: but not with wyne: they are vnstable, but not thorowe strong drincke.
For the Lorde hath couered you with a slomberinge sprete, and hath closed your eyes. Your prophetes also Ꟶ rulers that shuld se, them hath he couered.
And the visyon of all the prophetes is become vnto you, as the wordes of a boke that is sealed vp, which men deliuer to one that is learned, saying: Reade thou in it. And he sayth: I cannot, for it is sealed.
And the boke is geuen vnto him that is not learned, saying: Reade thou in it, and he sayth: I am not learned.
Therfore thus hath the Lorde sayde: For somoche as this people when they be in trouble, do honour me with their mouth Ꟶ wt their lippes: but their hert is far fro me, Ꟶ the feare which they haue vnto me, proceadeth of a commaundment that is taught of men.
Therfore wyll I do maruayls amonge this people, euen maruelous thinges (I saye) Ꟶ a wonder. For the wysdome of their wise men shall perysh, Ꟶ the vnderstanding of their wittye men shall hyd it selfe.
Wo vnto them that kepe secrete their thoughtes, to hyde their councell from the Lorde, and do their workes in darknesse, sayinge: who seeth vs? Ꟶ who knoweth vs?
Doutles, your destruccion is (in my handes) in reputacyon as the potters claye. And doth the worcke saye of hym that made it, he made not me? And doth an earthen vessell saye of him that fasshyoned it, he had no vnderstandinge?
Is it not hard at hande, that Lybanus shalbe turned into a lowe felde, and that the lowe felde shalbe taken as the wodd?
And in that daye shall deaffe men heare the wordes of the boke, and the eyes of the blinde shall se euen out of the cloud and out of darcknes.
The meke spreted also shalbe mery in the Lorde, and the poore amonge them that be lowly, shall reioyce in the holy one of Israel.
For he that dyd violence, is brought to naught, and the scornefull man is consumed: and they roted out that were hastie so soone to vnryghteousnes,
makynge a man to synne in the worde, and that toke hym in a snare which reproued them in the open place: and they that haue turned the cause of the ryghteous to naught.
Therfore thus sayth the Lorde vnto the house of Iacob, euen thus sayeth he that redemed Abraham: Iacob shall not nowe be confounded, ner his face pale.
But when he seeth hys chyldren the worcke of my handes in the middes of him, they shall sanctifie my name, and prayse the holy Lord of Iacob, and feare the God of Israel.
They also that haue bene of an erronyouse sprete, shall come to vnderstandyng: and they that haue bene scornefull, shall learne doctryne.
Alas, for those disobedient chyldren (sayth the Lorde) that they wyll take councell without me. Alas, that they wyll take a secret aduice, and not out of my sprete, and therfore adde they synne vnto synne.
Euen they that walke to go downe into Egypte, and haue asked no question at my mouth: but seke strength in the myght of Pharao, and trust in the shadowe of Egypt.
Therfore shall the strength of Pharao be your confusion, and the truste of the shadowe of Egypte youre shame.
For his captaynes were at zoan, and his ambassadours came vnto Hanes.
They were all ashamed of the people that could do them no good, and that might not helpe them, ner shew them any profyt, but were theyr confusyon and rebuke.
The heauy burthen of the beastes of the south in a lande of trouble and anguysshe, from whence shall come the yonge and olde lion, the vyper and fyrye serpent that flyeth agaynste them that vpon coltes beare theyr riches, and vpon camels their treasures, to a people that can do them no good.
For vaine and nothynge worth shall the helpe of the Egipcyans be. Therfore haue I cryed vnto Ierusalem. They shall haue strength ynough, yf they wyll settle their myndes in quietnes.
Now therfore, go thy waie, and wryte thys before them in a table, Ꟶ note it in a boke, that it maye finally remayne and be kept styll for euer.
For it is an obstinat people, and dissembling chyldren, children that refuse to heare the lawe of the Lorde.
For they saye vnto the seers: Se not, and to them that be cleare of iudgement: loke not out ryght thinges for vs: but speake fayre wordes vnto vs: loke out erroures,
gett you out of this waye, departe out of this path, Ꟶ turne the holy one of Israel from vs.
Wherfore thus sayth the holy one of Israel: Because your hertes rise agaynst this worde, Ꟶ because ye trust in wrongeous dealyng Ꟶ peruerse iudgment, Ꟶ put your confidence therin.
Therfore shall ye haue thys myschefe for yo destruccion and fall lyke as an hye wall that falleth, because of some ryfte or blast, whose breaking commeth sodenly.
And the hurte therof is lyke an erthen vessell, which breaketh without helpe: so that in the burstyng of it, there is not found one sheuer to fetch fyre in, or to take water withall out of the pyt.
For thus sayth the Lorde God, euen the holy one of Israel: In repentaunce Ꟶ in rest shall ye be safe: in quietnes and sure confydence shalbe your strength.
But ye haue had no lyst therto. For ye haue sayd: No, but we will escape thorowe horses. (Therfore shall ye flye) Ꟶ we will get vs vp vpon swyft beastes. And therfore shal your persecutours be swyfter.
A .M. shall flye at the rebuke of one, Ꟶ at the rebuke of .v. shall ye all flye, tyll ye be left as a shypp mast vpon the topp of a mountayne, and as a beaken vpon an hyll.
Therfore doth the Lorde cause you to wayte, that he maye haue mercy vpon you: to thintent that he maye haue the preemynence, when he is gracyous vnto you. For the Lorde is the God of iudgement. Blessed are all they that hope in hym.
Yf the people remayne in Syon and at Ierusalem, thou shalt not be in heuines: but at the voyce of thy complaynte shall he haue mercy vpon the. And when he heareth it he shall geue the an answer.
And though the Lorde geue you the bread of trouble, and the water of aduersitie, thy rayne shalbe nomore so skant, but thyne eyes shall see thy rayne.
Yee, and thyne care shall heare the talkynge of hym that doeth speake behynde the. Thys is the waye, walke ye in it. Turne not aside nether to the ryght hande ner to the lyft.
Ye shall destroye also the couerynge of youre syluer ymages, and the deckinge of youre golden ydols. Euen as filthynes shall ye put them awaye. And thou shalt say vnto it. Gett the hence.
Then shall God geue rayne vnto thy seede, that thou shalt sowe the ground withall, and bred of the increace of the earth, which shalbe fat and very plenteous. In that daye also, shall thy catell be fed in large pasture.
The oxen lykewise and the younge asses, that eate the grounde, shall eate cleane prouender, which is pourged with the wynde and the fanne.
Finally, vpon euery hye mountaine and hyll shall ther be riuers and streames of waters, in the daye of the greate slaughter, when the towers fall.
Moreouer, the lyght of the moone shalbe as the light of the sunne, and the sunne lyght shalbe seuen folde, and haue as much shyne as in seuen dayes besyde: when the Lorde byndeth vp the sore of hys people, and healeth the stroke of their wound.
Beholde, the fame of the Lord commeth from farre, and his presence is so hote, that no man is able to abyde. His lyppes are full of indignation, and hys tonge is as a consumynge fyer.
Hys breth is as a vehement floude of water, that reacheth vp to the necke. That he maye syft awaye the Heythen in the syue of vanitye. And his breth is as a brydle of errour in the chawes of the people.
And ye shall syng, lyke as in the nyghte, when the holy solempnitye beginneth. And ye shall haue gladnes of hert, lyke as when one commeth with a pype vnto the hyll of the Lorde, and to the moost mightye one of Israel.
And the Lorde shall cause his gloryous voyce to be heard, and shall declare his stretched out arme with a terrible countenaunce and with the flame of a consuming fyer, with noysome lyghtenynge, with a shower, and with hayle stone.
For thorowe the voyce of the Lorde shall Assur be destroyed, which smote other men with the rodde.
And it shall come to passe, that whyther soeuer he goth, the rodde shall cleue vnto him, which the Lorde shall laye vpon him with tabrettes and harpes: and with greate warre shall he fyght agaynst his hoost.
For the fyer of payne is ordeyned from the begynning: yee, euen for kynges is it prepared. Thys hath the Lorde set in the depe, and made it wyde: the burninge wherof is fyer and muche wodde. The breth of the Lorde, which is a ryuer of brymstone, doth kyndle it.
Wo be vnto them that go downe into Egypte for helpe, and truste in horses, and put their confidence in charettes, because they be manye, and in horsemen, because they be lusty and strong. But they regarde not the holy one of Israel, and they aske no question at the Lord.
Where as he neuertheles (beynge wysest of all) plageth the wycked, and yet goeth nott from his worde, when he steppeth forth, and taketh the victory agaynst the housholde of the frowarde, and agaynst the helpe of euell doers.
Nowe the Egiptians are men, and not God, and their horses flesh and not sprete. And assoone as the Lorde stretcheth oute hys hande, then shall the helper fall, and he that shulde haue bene helped, and they shall all together be destroyed.
For thus hath the Lorde spoken vnto me: Like as the lyon or lyons whelpe roareth vpon the praye that he hath gotten, and is not afrayed, though the multitude of shepherdes crye out vpon hym, nether abashed for all the heape of them. So shall the Lorde of hoostes come downe to fyght for mount Syon, and defende hys hyll.
Lyke as byrdes flotre aboute their nestes, so shall the Lorde of hoostes kepe, saue, defende and delyuer Ierusalem.
Therfore, O ye chyldren of Israel, turne agayne, from that infydelitye, wherin you drowned your selues.
For in that daye euery man shall cast out hys ydolles of syluer and hys ydolles of golde, which ye haue made with youre awne handes vnto youre synne.
Assur also shalbe slayne with the swearde, not with a mans swearde, nether shall the swearde of eny man deuoure hym. And he shall fle from the slaughter and his seruauntes shalbe disconfyted in their hertes.
He shall go for feare to hys strongeholdes, and hys prynces shall fle from hys badge. Thys hathe the Lorde spoken, whose lyght burneth in Syon, and his fyer in Ierusalem.
Beholde, a king shall gouerne after the rule of ryghtewesnesse, and the princes shall rule, accordyng to the balaunce of equitye.
And that man shalbe vnto men as a defence for the wynd, and as a refuge for the tempest: lyke as a riuer of water in a thirstye place, and the shadowe of a greate rocke in a drye lande.
The eyes of the seynge shall not be dym, and the cares of them that heare, shall take diligent hede.
The hert of the vnwyse shall attayne to knowledge, and the vnparfyte tong shall speake playnely and distinctlye.
Then shall the folyshe nygarde be nomore called gentle, ner the churle liberall.
But the nygarde will be nigardly minded, and his hert wyll worke euell and playe the ypocrite, and ymagyn abhominations agaynst God, to make the hongry leane, and to witholde drincke from the thirsty.
These are the perlous weapons of the churlysh, these be his shamefull councels: that he maye begyle the poore with disceatfull wordes: yee, euen there as he shulde geue sentence with the poore.
But the lyberall persone ymagineth honest thynges, Ꟶ commeth vp for liberalytie vnto promotyon:
Up (ye ryche and ydell women) herken vnto my voyce. Ye careles cities, marke my wordes.
After yeares and dayes shall ye be brought in feare, O ye careles cities. For haruest shalbe out, Ꟶ the grape gatherynge shall not come.
O ye rych ydell cities ye that feare no parell. Be abashed, you that lyue in aboundaunce: tremble, you that lyue careles: cast of your rayment, make your selues bare, put sacke cloth aboute you.
For as the infantes wepe when their mothers tetes ar dryed: so shall you weape for your fayre feldes and frutefull vyneyardes.
My peoples felde shall brynge thornes and thistles: and so shall it be euen in euery house of volupteousnesse and in euery citye that reioyseth.
The palaces also shalbe broken, Ꟶ the greatly occupyed cityes desolate. The towres and bulwarckes shall become dennes for euermore, the pleasure of mules shalbe turned to pasture for shepe:
vnto the tyme that the sprete be powred vpon vs from aboue. Then shall the wyldernes be a frutefull felde, and the plenteous feld shalbe rekened for a wodde.
Then shall equytie dwell in the desert, and rigteousnes in a frutefull land.
And the rewarde of righteousnesse shalbe peace, and her frute rest Ꟶ quietnes for euer.
And my people shall dwell in the ynnes of peace, and in sure dwellinges in safe places of conforte.
And when the hayle falleth, it shall fall in the wodde, and the citye shalbe set lowe in the valleye.
O howe happy shall ye be, when ye shall safely sowe your seed besyde all waters, and dryue thyther the fete of your oxen and asses.
Wo to the that destroiest, when thou waste not destroyed, thou breakest the leage, where as none hath broken it with the: for when thou shalt leaue destroying, thou thy self shalt be destroyed. And when thou ceasest from breakinge the leage, then shall they breake it to the.
O Lorde, haue mercy vpon vs: we haue put our hole trust in the. Be an arme to suche early: and our helth, in the tyme of trouble.
At that confuse noyse, the people fledd, and at thyne exaltinge, the Heythen were scatred.
And the spoyles shalbe gathered (which shalbe youres) as are the gathering of Bruchus. And the multitude going to it, shalbe as locustes runnyng to and fro.
The Lorde is exalted, for it is he that dwelleth an hye: he hath fylled zion with iudgement and righteousnes.
And a sure stablysshing of thy tymes shalbe strength, health, wisdome Ꟶ knowledge: and the very feare of the Lorde shalbe the treasure of it.
Beholde, the messengers shall crie without: Ꟶ the ambassatours of peace shall weape bytterly:
The stretes are wast, ther walketh no man therin: God hath broken the appoyntment, the cyties are cast awaye, Ꟶ men are nothing regarded
the desolat erth is in heuynes. Libanus is shamed: Ꟶ hewen downe. Saron is lyke a wyldernes: Basan Ꟶ Charmel are despoyled of their frutes.
And therfore sayth the Lord: I will vp nowe: now will I be auaunced: now will I be exalted as a mightye God.
Ye shall conceaue stubble, Ꟶ beare strawe, Ꟶ youre sprete shalbe the fyer, that it maye consume you,
Ꟶ the people shalbe burnt like lyme, Ꟶ as thornes burne that are hewen of, Ꟶ cast in the fyer.
Now herken to ye that are farre of how I haue done, Ꟶ considre my power, ye that be at hande.
The sinners at zion are afrayde, a soden fearfulnes is come vpon the ypocrites. What is he amonge vs, say they, that shall dwell by the consuming fier? which of vs maye abyde that euerlasting heat?
He that ledeth a godly lyfe, say I, Ꟶ speaketh the trueth. He that abhorreth gaines wonne by violence Ꟶ disceyte: he that kepeth his hande that he touch no rewarde: which stoppeth his eares, that he heare no councell agenst the innocent bloude: which holdeth downe his eyes, that he se none euell.
He it is, that shall dwell on hye: whose sauegarde shalbe in a bulwarcke of rockes, to hym shalbe geuen meate, Ꟶ hys waters shall not fayle.
Thyne eies shall se the king in his glory: euen the king of the farre countreis shall they se:
thine herte studied for feare thinkinge thus. What shall then become of the scribe? of the receyuer of our money? what of him that taxed our fairest houses?
There shalt thou not se a people a straunge tong to haue so diffused a language, that it may not be vnderstand: nether so straunge a speach but it shalbe perceaued.
There shall zion be sene the heed citye of oure solempne feastes. There shall thyne eyes se Ierusalem that glorious habitatyon: the tabernacle that neuer shall remoue: whose nayles shall neuer be taken out world wt out ende: whose coardes euerychone shall neuer corrupte:
for the gloryous magestie of the Lorde shall there be present among vs: as a place, where fayre broade ryuers Ꟶ streames are, thorow the which shall nether galey rowe, ner greate shyppe sayle.
For the Lorde is our iudge, the Lorde is our lawe geuer. The Lorde is our king, and he him selfe shalbe our sauioure.
There are the coardes so layde abroade, that they cannot be better. And therfore they haue not fyxed their maste, nor spredde abroade their sayle. Then there is dealed great spoyle: yee, lame men ronne after the pray.
There lyeth no man that sayth: I am syck, but all euell is taken awaye from the people that dwell there.
Come ye Heythen and heare, take hede ye people. Herken thou erth Ꟶ all that is therin: thou round compasse and all that groweth there vpon:
for the Lorde is angry wt all people, and his displeasure is kindled agaynst all the multitude of them, he hath destroied them, Ꟶ deliuered them to the slaughter.
So that their slayne shalbe cast out, and their bodyes stynck: that euen the very hylles shalbe wet wt the bloud of them.
All the starres of heauen shall waist, and the heuen shall folde together lyke a roll, and all the starres therof shall fall, lyke as the leaues fall from the vynes and fyggetrees.
For my sweard shalbe bathed in heauen, and shall immediatly come downe in iudgment vpon Idumea, and vpon the people which I haue cursed for my vengeaunce.
And the Lordes swearde shalbe full of bloude, Ꟶ be rusty wt the fatnes and bloude of lambes and goates, with the fatnesse of the kidneys of wethers. For the Lord shall kill a great offering in Bozra, Ꟶ a great slaughter in the lande of Idumea.
There shall the vnicornes fall wt them, and the bulles wt the gyauntes: and their lande shalbe thorowely soaked with bloude, Ꟶ their grounde corrupt with fatnes.
Unto the also, O zion, shall come the daye of the vengeaunce of God, and the yeare when thyne awne iudgmentes shalbe recompensed.
And his floudes shalbe turned to pytch, and his earth to brimstone: Ꟶ there with shall the land be kindled,
so that it shall not be quenched daye ner nyght: but smoke euermore, and so forth to lye waste. And no man shall go thorowe it for euer.
But pellicanes, storkes, great oules and rauens shall haue it in possession, and dwell therin. For God shall spreede out the lyne of desolation vpon it, Ꟶ weye it with the stones of emptines.
When kynges are called vpon there shalbe none, Ꟶ all princes shalbe awaye.
Thornes shall growe in their palaces, nettels and thistles in their strongholdes, that the dragons may haue their pleasure therin, and that they maye be a court for estryches.
There shall straunge visures and monstruous bestes mete one another, and the wylde kepe company together. There shall the lamia lye, Ꟶ haue her lodging.
There shall the oule make her nest, buylde, be there at home and bring forth his yonge ones. There shall the kytes come together, echone to his lyke.
Seke thorow the scripture of the Lorde and reade it. There shall none of these thynges be lefte out, there shall not one, ner soche lyke, fayle. For what his mouth commaundeth that same doeth his sprete gather together, or fulfylleth.
He hath cast the lot for them, and to those beastes hath his handes deuyded the line: therfore those shall possesse the enherytaunce from generatyon to generatyon, and dwell therin for euer.
But the deserte and wildernes shall reioyce, the waste grounde shalbe glad and florysh as the lylly.
She shall floryshe pleasauntlye, and be ioyfull, and euer be geuyng of thankes more and more. For the glory of Libanus, the bewtye of Charmel and Saron shalbe geuen her. These shall knowe the honoure of the Lorde, and the magesty of oure God.
And therfore strength the weake handes, and conforte the feble knees.
Saye vnto them that are of a fearefull hert. Be of good chere, and feare not. Beholde, youre God commeth to take vengeaunce: and you shall se the rewarde that God geueth: God commeth his awne selfe, Ꟶ will delyuer you.
Then shall the eyes of the blinde be lyghtened, and the eares of the deaffe opened.
Then shall the lame man leape as an hert, Ꟶ the domme mans tonge shall geue thanckes. In the wildernes also, there shall welles spring, Ꟶ floudes of water in the desert.
The drye grounde shall turne to riuers, and the thursty to sprynges of water. Where as dragons dwelt afore, ther shall growe swete floures and grene rushes.
There shalbe fote pathes Ꟶ comen stretes, this shalbe called the holy waye. No vnclene person shall go thorowe it: for the Lorde him self shall go with them that waye, and the wayferer, nor ignoraunt shall not erre.
There shalbe no lyon Ꟶ no rauishing beast shall come therin, nor be there but men redemed shall go there fre and safe.
And the redemed of the Lorde, I saye, shall conuerte and come to zion with thanckesgeuing. Euerlastyng ioye shall they haue: pleasure and gladnes shalbe among them. And as for all sorowe and heuynes, it shall vanysh awaye.
In the .xiiij. yere of king Hezekias came Sennaherib kyng of the Assirians downe, to laye seage vnto all the stronge cityes of Iuda; to conquer them.
And the kyng of Assiryans sent Rabsakeh from Lachis towarde Ierusalem, agaynst king Hezekias, wt an exceading hoste, which set him by the condyte of the ouerpole in the waye that goeth thorow the fullers lande.
And so ther came forth vnto him Eliakim Helkias sonne the president Sobna the scribe, and Ioah Asaphs sonne the secretary.
And Rabsakeh sayde vnto them: Tell Hezekias, that the greate kynge of Assiria sayth thus vnto him: What presumpcion is thys, that thou trustest vnto?
I sayde, Surely thou trustest in thy lyplaboure, when councell Ꟶ strength are necessary to battayl: or elles wher to trustest thou, that thou castest thy selfe of frome?
lo, thou puttest thy trust in a broken staf of rede (I meane Egipt) which he that leaneth vpon, it goeth into his hande Ꟶ shutteth hym thorowe. Euen so is Pharao the kynge of Egipte, vnto all them that trust in hym.
But yf thou woldest saye to me: we truste in the Lord our God. A goodly God in dead: whose hye places and aultars Hezekia toke downe, and commaunded Iuda and Ierusalem to worshyp onely before the aultare.
Nowe therfore delyuer hostages that thou rebelle nomore agaynst my Lorde the kynge of Assirians. And I wyll geue the two thousande horses: yf thou be able to set men vpon them?
How darest thou resist the power of the smallest prynce, that my Lord hath? how darest thou trust in the charettes and horse men of Egipt?
Moreouer, thinckest thou that I am come downe hyther to destroye this land wtout the Lordes will? The Lord sayde vnto me: go downe into the lande, that thou mayest destroie it.
Then sayd Eliakim, Sobna and Ioah vnto Rabsaketh: Speake to vs thy seruauntes (we praye the) in the Siryans language: for we vnderstande it wel. And speake not to vs in the Iewes tong, lest the folcke heare which lyeth vpon the wall.
Then answered Rabsakeh: Thincke ye, that the kyng sent me to speake this only vnto the Lord and the? Hath he not sent me to them also, that lye vpon the wall? that they maye be compelled to eate their awne donge, Ꟶ drynck their awne stale wt you?
And Rabsakeh stode stif, and cryed with a loude voyce in the Iewes tong, and saide: Nowe take hede, howe the great king of the Astyrians geueth you warning.
Thus sayth the king: Let not Hezekias disceaue you: for he shall not be able to delyuer you.
Morouer let not Hezekias conforte you in the Lorde, when he sayth: The Lord wtout doubt shall defende vs, and shal not geue ouer this citye into the handes of the kyng of the Assyrians, beleue hym not.
But thus sayth the kyng of Assyria: opteyne my fauoure, enclyne to me: so maye euery man enioye hys vyneyardes and fygg trees, and drynke the water of his cysterne:
vnto the tyme that I come my self, and bringe you into a lande that is lyke your awne: wherin is wheate and wyne, which is both sowen with seede, and planted with vyneyardes.
Let not Hezekia disceaue you, when he sayth vnto you: the Lorde shall delyuer vs? Might the Goddes of the Gentils kepe euery mans lande, from the power of the kynge of the Assirians?
Where is the God of Hemath and Arphad? Where is the God of Sepharuaim? And who was able to defende Samaria out of my hande?
Or which of all the Goddes of these landes hath delyuered theyr countrey out of my power? is the lorde in dede able to delyuer Ierusalem fro my hande?
Unto this Hezekias messaungers helde theyr tonges, and answered not one worde: for the king had charged them, that they shulde geue hym none answere.
So came Eliakim Helkias sonne the president, Sobna the scribe, and Ioah Asaphs sonne the secretary, vnto Hezekias with rent clothes, and tolde hym the wordes of Rabsaketh.
When Hezekias hearde that, he rent hys clothes, and putt on a sacke cloth, and went into the temple of the Lorde.
But he sente Eliakim the president. Sobna the scribe, with the eldest prestes clothed in sacke, vnto the prophet Esay the sonne of Amoz,
and they said vnto hym: Thus sayth Hezekias: Thys is the daye of trouble, of plage and of blasphemye: for the children are come to the place of byrth: but there is no power to brynge them forth.
The Lorde thy God (no doubte) hath well consydered the wordes of Rabsaketh, whom his Lorde the king of Assirians hath sent to defye Ꟶ blaspheme the lyuynge God: with soche wordes as the Lorde thy God hath hearde ryght well. And therfore, lyfte vp thy prayer for the remnaunt, that yet are left.
So the seruauntes of the kynge Hezekias came to Esay.
And Esay gaue them thys answere: Saye thus vnto your lorde: thus sayth the Lorde: Be not afraied of the wordes that thou hast hearde wherwith the kyng of the Assirians seruauntes haue blasphemed me.
Beholde, I will cause a wynde to go ouer him, assone as he heareth the rumour, he shall go again into hys contrey: there wyll I destroye hym with the swearde in his awne lande.
Nowe when Rabsakeh returned, he founde the king of Assiria laying sege to Libnas: for he had vnderstande that he was departed from Lachis.
For ther came a rumour that Tharhakas kinge of Ethiopia was come forth to warre agaynst him. And when the king of Assiria heard that, he sent other messaungers to kyng Hezekias wt this commaundement:
Saye thus to Hezekias king of Iuda: Let not thy God disceaue the, in whom thou hopest, and sayest: Ierusalem shall not be geuen into the handes of the king of Assiria.
For lo, thou knowest well howe the kinges of Assiria haue handled all the landes that they haue subuerted, and hopest thou to escape?
Were the people of Gentyles (whom my progenitours conquered) deliuered at any tyme thorow their goddes? As namely, Gozan, Haran, Rezeph, and the chyldren of Eden, which were at Thalassar.
Where is the kynge of Hemah, and the kyng of Arphad, and the king of the cytie Sepharuaim, Ena Ꟶ Aua?
Now when Ezekia had receaued the lettre of the messaungers, and read it, he went vp into the house of the Lorde, and opened the letter before the Lorde.
And Ezekia prayed before the Lorde on this maner.
O Lorde of Hostes, thou God of Israel, which dwellest vpon Cherubin. Thou art the God, that onely is God of all the kyngdomes of the worlde, for thou onely hast created heauen and earth.
Enclyne thyne eare Lorde Ꟶ consydre, open thyne eyes, O Lorde, and se, and pondre all the wordes vpon Sennaherib, which hath sent his embassage to blaspheme the lyuyng God
It is true, O Lorde, that the kynges of Assyria haue conquered all kyngdomes and landes,
and cast theyr goddes in the fyre. Not withstandynge those were no goddes, but the worckes of mens handes, of wood or stone, therfore haue they destroyed them.
Delyuer vs then, O Lorde oure God, from the handes of Sennaherib, that all Kyngdomes of the earth maye knowe, that thou onely art the Lorde.
Then Esaye the sonne of Amoz sent vnto Hezekia, sayinge: Thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel. Where as thou hast made thy prayer vnto me, as touchyng Sennaherib the kynge of Assyria,
this is the answere, that the Lorde hath geuen concernynge hym. Despised art thou, and mocked (O daughter of Syon) he hath shaken his head at the, O daughter of Ierusalem.
But thou Sennaherib. whom hast thou defyed and blasphemed? Agaynst whom hast thou lifted vp thy voyce, and exalted thy proude lookes? euen agaynst the holy one of Israel.
Thou with thy seruauntes hast blasphemed the Lorde, and thus holdest thou of thy selfe. I will couer the hye mountaynes, and sydes of Libanus with my horsmen. And there will I cut downe the hye Cedre trees and the fayrest Fyrre trees. I wyll vp into the heygth of it, and into the chefest of hys tymbre woddes.
If there be no water, I wyll graue and drinke. And as for waters of defence, I shall drye them vp with the fete of myne hoost.
Yee, hast thou not hearde, what I haue taken in hande, Ꟶ brought to passe of olde tyme? That same wyll I do nowe also: waste, destroye, and brynge stronge cyties vnto heapes of stones.
For theyr inhabitatours shalbe lyke lame men, brought in feare and confounded. They shalbe lyke the grasse Ꟶ grene herbes in the felde, lyke the hey vpon house toppes, that withereth afore it be growne vp.
I knowe thy wayes, thy goinge forth and thy commynge home, yee, Ꟶ thy madnesse agaynst me.
Therfore thy furiousnes against me, and thy pryde is come before me. I wyll put my rynge in thy nose, and my brydle byt in the chawes of the, and turne the about, euen the same waye thou camest.
I wyll geue the also this token (O Hezekia) thys yere shalt thou eate such as groweth of yt selfe Ꟶ the secunde yeare, that which springeth agayne of the same, and in the thyrde yeare, ye shall sowe Ꟶ reape, yee, ye shall plante vineyardes, and enioye the frutes therof.
And soche of the house of Iuda as are escaped, shall come together, and the remnaunt shall take rote beneth, and bringe forth frute aboue.
For the escaped shall go out of Ierusalem, and the remnaunt from the mounte Syon. And thys shall the gelousy of the Lorde of Hostes bring to passe.
Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde, concernynge the kynge of the Assyrians. He shall not come into this cyte, and shal shote no arowe into it, there shal no shilde hurt it, nether shal they cast ditches about it.
The same waye that he came, he shal retourne, and not come at thys cytie, sayeth the Lorde.
And I wyll kepe and saue the cytie (sayeth he) for myne awne, and for my seruaunte Dauids sake.
Thus the angel went forth, and slewe of the Assyrians hoost, an hundred fourescore and fyue thousande. And when men arose vp early in the mornynge. Beholde, they were slayne, and all laye full of deed bodyes.
So Sennaherib the kyng of the Assyrians brake vp, Ꟶ dwelt at Niniue.
Afterwarde it chaunsed, as he prayed in the temple of Nesrah his God, that Adramalech and Sarazer hys awne sonnes slewe him with the sweard, and fled into the lande of Armenia. And Asar hadon his sonne raygned in his steade.
Not longe afore this, was Hezechia sycke vnto the deeth, Ꟶ the prophete Esay the sonne of Amoz came vnto him, Ꟶ sayd: Thus commaundeth the Lord: Set thyne house in ordre, for thou must dye, and shalt not escape.
Then Hezechia turned hys face towarde the wall, and prayed vnto the Lorde,
and sayde: Remembre (O Lorde) that I haue walcked before the in treuth and a stedfast herte, Ꟶ haue done the thynge that is pleasaunt to the. And Hezechia wepte sore
Then sayde God vnto Esay:
Go and speake vnto Hezechia: the Lord God of Dauid thy father sendeth the this worde: I haue hearde thy prayer, and consydred thy teares, beholde, I will put fyftene yeares mo vnto thy lyfe,
and delyuer the and the cytie also, from the hande of the kynge of Assyria, for I wyll defende the cytie:
And take the thys token of the Lord, that he will do it, as he hath spoken:
Beholde, I wyll returne the shadowe of Ahaz dyal, that nowe is layed out with the Sunne and bringe it ten degrees backward. So the Sunne turned ten degrees backwarde, the which he was descended afore.
A thanckesgeuynge, which Hezekia Kynge of Iuda wrote, when he had bene sycke, and was recouered.
I thought I shulde haue gone to the gates of hell when myne age was shortened, and haue wanted the resydue of my yeares.
I spake within my selfe: I shall neuer viset the Lorde (the Lord I saye) in thys lyfe. I shal neuer se man among the dwellers of the worlde.
Myne age is folden vp together, Ꟶ taken awaye fro me, lyke a shepherdes cotage: I haue hewen of my lyfe by my synnes, lyke as a weeuer cutteth of hys webb. He wyll with pyninge sycknesse make an ende of me: yee, he wyll make en ende of me in one daye.
I thought I wolde haue lyued vnto the morowe, but he brosed my bones lyke a lyon, and in one daye thou wilt make an ende of me.
Then chatred I lyke a swalowe, and lyke a crane, and mourned as a doue. I lyfte vp myne eyes into the heygth: O Lorde (sayde I) my sycknes kepeth me downe: ease thou me.
What shall I saye? The Lorde hath made a promise to me. Yee, and he him selfe hath perfourmed it. I shall therfore as longe as I lyue remembre thys bitternes of my lyfe.
O Lorde men maye lyue beyond theyr yeares, and I wyll declare to all men: that euen in those yeres I haue a ioyfull lyfe, and that it was thou that causedest me to sleape and agayne thou hast geuen lyfe to me.
Beholde bytter as gall was my pensyuenesse, so sore longed I for helth. And it was thy pleasure to deliuer my lyfe, from the fylthye pytt, for thou it is (O Lorde) that hast cast all my synnes behynde thy backe.
For hell prayseth not the, death doth not magnifye the. They that go downe into the graue prayse not thy trueth:
but the lyuinge, yee, the lyuing a knowledge the, lyke as I do thys daye. The father telleth hys chyldren of thy faythfulnesse.
To heale me it is the Lordes worcke, and we wyll synge my songes in thy house, all the dayes of oure lyfe.
And Esaye sayde: take a playster of fygges, and laye it vpon the sore, so shall it be whole.
Then sayd Hezekia: O what a great miracle is this, that I shall go vp into the house of the Lorde?
At the same tyme Merodach Baladam, Baladamus sonne kynge of Babylon, sent lettres and presentes to Hezekia. For he vnderstode howe that he had bene syck, Ꟶ was recouered agayne.
And Hezekia was glad therof, Ꟶ shewed them the commodities of his treasure, of syluer, of gold, of spices Ꟶ rotes, of precious oyles, all that was in his cubbordes Ꟶ treasure houses. There was not one thinge in Hezekias house, and so thorow out all his kyngdome, but he let them se it.
Then came Esaye the prophete to kynge Hezekia, and sayd vnto him. What haue the men sayde, and from whence came they vnto the? Hezekia answered: they came oute of a farre countre vnto me, out of Babylon:
Esay sayde: what haue they loked vpon in thyne house? Hezekia answered. All that is in myne house haue they sene: and there is nothynge in my treasure, but I shewed it them.
Then sayde Esay vnto Hezekia: Understande the worde of the Lord of Hostes:
Beholde, the tyme wyll come, that euery thyng which is in thyne house, and all that thy progenitoures haue layde vp in stoare vnto this daye, shalbe caried to Babilon, and nothing left behynde. This sayeth the Lord.
Yee, and parte of thy sonnes, that shall come of the, and whom thou shalt get, shalbe caryed hence, and become gelded chamberlaynes in the kynge of Babylons courte.
Then sayde Hezekia to Esay. Now God prospere his awne councell, which thou hast tolde me. He sayde more ouer: So that there be peace Ꟶ faithfulnes in my tyme.
Comforte my people (O ye prophetes) comforte my people, sayeth your God,
comforte Ierusalem at the hert, Ꟶ tell her: that her trauayle is at an ende that her offence is pardoned, that she hath receaued of the Lordes hande sufficient correccion for all her synnes.
A voyce crieth in wildernes. Prepare the waye for the Lorde in the wildernesse, make streyght the path for oure God in the deserte.
Let all valleyes be exalted, Ꟶ euery mountayne Ꟶ hill be layed lowe, what so is croked, let it be made strayght: Ꟶ let the rough be made playne feldes.
For the glory of the Lorde shall appeare, and all flesh shall at once se it, for why: the mouth of the Lorde hath spoken it.
The same voyce spake: Nowe crye. And the prophet answered: what shall I crye? that all fleshe is grasse, Ꟶ that all the godlines therof, is as the floure of the felde.
The grasse is wythered, the floure falleth awaye. Euen so is the people as grasse, when the breath of the Lorde bloweth vpon them.
Neuertheles, whether the grasse wyther, or the floure fade awaye. Yet the word of our God endureth for euer.
Go vp vnto the hye hyll (O Syon) thou that bringest good tydynges, lyfte vp thy voyce with power, O thou preacher Ierusalem. Lyfte it vp without feare, and saye vnto the cyties of Iuda: Beholde youre God,
beholde the Lord God shall come with power, and beare rule with his arme. Beholde, he bringeth hys treasure with him, and his worckes go before hym.
He shall fede his flock lyke an herdman. He shall gather the lambes together with hys arme, and carye them in his bosome, Ꟶ shall kyndely intreate those that beare yonge.
Who hath holden the waters in hys fyst? Who hath measured heauen wt his spanne, Ꟶ hath comprehended all the earth of the worlde in thre measures? Who hath weyed the mountaynes Ꟶ hylles in a balaunce.
Who hath refourmed the mynde of the Lorde? or to whom hath he shewed his counsell. Or who is of his councell to teach him?
or who hath geuen him vnderstandynge and hath taught him the path of iudgement Who taught him conninge and opened to him the waye of vnderstandynge.
Beholde, all people are in comparyson of hym, as a droppe to a bocket full, Ꟶ are counted as the lest thinge that the balaunce weyeth. Yee Ꟶ the Iles he taketh vp as a very lyttel thing.
Libanus is not sufficient to ministre fyre for hys offeringe, and all the beastes therof are not ynough to one sacrifice.
All people in comparyson of him are rekened as nothing, yf they be compared with him lesse then nothyng and as it that is not.
To whom then wyll ye liken God? or what Similitude will ye set vp vnto him?
Shall the caruer make him a carued ymage? Ꟶ shall the goldsmyth couer hym with golde, or cast him into a fourme of syluer plates?
Moreouer, shall the ymage maker (that the poore man which is disposed, maye haue some thing to sett vp also) seke out and chose a tree, that is not roten, Ꟶ carue therout an ymage, that moueth not?
Knowe ye nothing o wretches? Hearde ye neuer of it? Hath it not bene preached vnto you sence the begynning? Haue ye not bene enfourmed of this, by the foundacyon of the earthe,
that he sytteth vpon the circle of the worlde, and that all the inhabitoures of the worlde are in comparyson of him, but as greshopers. That he spredeth out the heauens as a couerynge, that he stretched them out, as a tent to dwell in.
That he bringeth Princes to nothing, and the iudges of the earth to dust:
so that of them it may be sayde they be not planted nor sowen agayne, nether their stock roted agayne in the earth? For as soone as he bloweth vpon them, they wither Ꟶ fade awaye, like the straw in a whyrle winde.
To whom nowe will ye lyken me, Ꟶ whom shall I be lyke, sayeth the holy one?
Lyft vp your eyes on hye, Ꟶ consydre. who hath made those thinges, which come out by so great heapes? Ꟶ he can call them all by their names. For there is nothing hid vnto the greatnesse of hys power, strength, Ꟶ myght.
Howe may then Iacob thincke, or how may Israel saye: My wayes are hid from the Lorde, Ꟶ my God knoweth not of my iudgementes.
Knowest thou not, or hast thou not hearde, that the euerlastynge God, the Lorde which made all the corners of the earth, is nether weery nor faynt? and that his wysdome cannot be comprehended:
but that he geueth strength vnto the weery, and power vnto the faynte?
Children are weery and faynt, and the strongest men fall.
But vnto them that haue the Lord before theyr eyes, shall strength be encreased. Aegles wynges shall growe vpon them. When they runne they shall not fall: and when they go, they shall not be weery.
Be styll (ye Ilandes) and herken vnto me. Be stronge ye people, Come hyther, and shewe youre cause, we wyll go to the lawe together.
Who raysed vp the iust man from the rysinge of the Sunne, Ꟶ called him to go forth? Who cast downe the people, and subdued the kynges before him: that he maye throwe them all to the grounde with his swearde, and scatre them lyke stubble with his bowe?
He foloweth vpon them, and goeth safely him self. And that in a waye where before his fote had not troden.
Who hath made and created thes thinges? euen he that called the generacions from the begynnyng? Euen I the Lorde, which am the fyrst, and with the last.
The yles sawe it, Ꟶ did feare, and the endes of the earth, were abashed, drewe nye, Ꟶ cam hither.
Euery man exhorted hys neyghboure, Ꟶ brother, and bad him be stronge.
The carpenter comforted the goldsmyth, Ꟶ the goldsmyth the hammer man, saying: Glue wyll do very wel in it. It shalbe good, that we fasten this cast worke: Ꟶ then they fastened it with nayles, that it shulde not be moued,
But thou Israel art my seruaunte: thou Iacob art electe, thou art the sede of Abraham my beloued
thou art he whom I led from the endes of the earth by the hande. For I called the from farre euen from among the gloriouse men of it, Ꟶ sayd vnto the. Thou art my seruaunt. I haue chosen the, and not cast the awaye:
be not afrayed, for I am wt the. Melt not away as waxe, for I am thy God, to strength the, helpe the, Ꟶ to kepe the wt this ryght hande of myne.
Beholde, all they that resyst the shall come to confusyon Ꟶ shame: and thyne aduersaries shalbe destroyed Ꟶ brought to naught.
So that whoso seketh after them, shall not fynde them. Thy destroyers shall perysh, and so shall they that vndertake to make batayll agaynst the be as that is not, Ꟶ as a thinge of naught.
For I thy Lorde and God will strengthen thy ryght hand. Euen I that saye vnto the. Feare not. I wyll helpe the
Be not afrayde thou lytle worme Iacob, Ꟶ thou despysed Israel: for I wyll helpe the, sayeth the Lorde, and the holy one of Israel thyne auenger.
Beholde, I wyll make the a treading cart and a new flayle, that thou mayst thresshe and grinde the mountaynes, and brynge the hylles to poulder.
Thou shalt fanne them and the wynde shall carye them awaye, and the whirlwynde shall scater them. But thou shalt reioyse in the Lorde, and shalt delyte in praysinge the holy one of Israel.
When the thyrsty and poore seke water Ꟶ fynde none, and when theyr tonge is drye of thyrst. I geue it them sayth the Lorde. I the God of Israel forsake them not.
I brynge forth floudes in the hylles, and welles in the playne feldes. I turne the wyldernes to ryuers, and the drye lande to condyttes of water.
I plante in the waste grounde trees of Cedre, Boxe, Myrre and Oliues. And in the drye I set Fyrre trees, Elmes, Ꟶ Hawthornes together.
All this do I, that they altogether may se and marcke, perceaue with their hertes and consydre, that the hande of the Lord maketh these thynges, and that the holy one of Israel bryngeth them to passe.
Stande at youre cause (sayeth the Lorde) Ꟶ bringe forth youre strongest grounde, sayth the kynge of Iacob.
Let them bring forth their goddes, and let ther goddes tel vs what shall chaunse here after: yee, let them shewe vs the thynges that are past, what they be: let them declare them vnto vs that we maye take them to herte, and knowe them herafter.
Ether, shewe vs thynges for to come, Ꟶ tel vs what shalbe done herafter: so shall we knowe, that you are goddes do somthing, ether good or bad: so will we both knowledge the same: and tell it out.
Beholde, ye goddes are of naught, Ꟶ your makynge is of naught, yee abhominable is the man that hath chosen you.
Neuertheles, I haue waked vp one from the North, and he shall come. And another from the East, which shall call vpon my name, Ꟶ shall treade vpon princes as vpon claye, Ꟶ as the potter treadeth downe the myre.
Who declared this from the begynning, and we wyll knowe him. Or from the olde tymes, Ꟶ we will confesse, and saye that he is righteous. But there is none that sheweth or declareth eny thing, there is none also that heareth youre wordes.
The fyrst is he that shall saye to zyon, Beholde, beholde they are present, Ꟶ to Ierusalem it selfe will I geue an Euangeliste.
But when I consyder there is not a man amonge them, nor any that can geue counsell, nor that when I examen them that can answer one word.
Lo, wicked are they Ꟶ vayne, wt the thinges also that they take in hand: yee, their ymages are but wynde Ꟶ vayne thinges.
Beholde, this is my seruaunte vpon whom I leane, myne electe, In whom my soule is pacifyed. I haue geuen hym my sprete, that he maye shewe forth iudgement and equitye among the Gentiles.
He shall not be an outcrier, ner lyfte vp his voyce. His voyce shal not be hearde in the stretes.
And a brosed rede shall he not breake, and the smoking flaxe shall he not quench: but faythfully and truly shall be geue iudgement,
not be pensyue nor carefull, that he maye restore ryghteousnes vnto the earth, and the Gentyles also shal kepe his lawes.
For thus sayeth God the Lorde vnto hym (euen he that made the heauens, and spred them abrode, and set forth the earth wt her increase: which geueth breath vnto the people that is in it, and spirite to them that dwell therin)
I the Lord haue called the in ryghteousnes, and led the by the hande. Therfore wyll I also defende the, and geue the for a couenaunnt of the people, and to be the lyght of the Gentiles.
That thou mayest open the eyes of the blynde, let out the prisoners from ther bondes Ꟶ them that syt in darcknesse, out of the dongeon house.
Euen I am the Lorde, and this is my name: And my glory wyll I geue to none other, nether myne honoure to grauen ymages.
Beholde, olde thinges are come to passe, Ꟶ new thynges do I declare. And or euer they come, I tell you of them.
Synge vnto the Lorde, a newe songe of thanckesgeuinge, blowe out his prayse from the ende of the worlde. They that be vpon the see, and all that is therin, prayse hym, the Iles and they that dwell in them.
Let the wyldernes with the cyties lifte vp her voyce, the townes also that they of Cedar dwell in. Lett them be glad that syt vpon rockes of stone, and let them crye downe from the hye mountaynes:
ascrybynge glorye vnto the Lorde, and magnifyinge hym amonge the Gentyles.
The Lorde shall come forth as a gyaunte, and take a stomack to him lyke as a fresh man of warre. He shall roare Ꟶ crie, Ꟶ ouercome his enemies.
I haue longe holden my peace (sayeth the Lorde) I haue bene styll and refrayned my selfe, but nowe I wyll crye lyke a trauelynge woman, Ꟶ at once wyll I destroye, and deuoure.
I will make wayste both mountayne and hill, Ꟶ drye vp euery grene thing that groweth theron. I will drye vp the floudes of water, and drincke vp the ryuers.
I wyll bring the blinde into a strete, that they knowe not. and lede them into a fote path, that they are ignoraunt in. I shall make darcknesse lyght before them, and the thynge that is croked to be streyght. These thinges haue I done vnto them, and not forsaken them:
They are fallen backe yee, and let them be ashamed earnestly, that hope in Idoles, Ꟶ saye to fashyoned ymages: ye are oure goddes.
Heare, O ye deafe men, and sharpen youre syghtes to se (O ye blinde.)
Who is blinde, but my seruaunt? Or so deafe, as my messaunger, whom I sent vnto them? For who is so blynde (faye they) as the perfecte man and so blynde as the Lordes seruaunte?
Thou vnderstondest moch, and kepest nothynge: the eares are open, Ꟶ no man heareth.
The Lorde is mercyfull vnto them for his ryghteousnesse sake: that his worde myght be magnifyed and praysed.
But the people them selues is robbed and troden vnder the fote chayned in dongeons and they all (I saye) be shut into preson houses. They be caryed awaye captiue and no man doth lowse them: They be troden vnder fote, and no man doth laboure to bring them agayne.
But who is he amonge you, that pondreth this, that consydreth it, Ꟶ taketh it for a warnynge in tyme to come?
Who suffred Iacob to be troaden vnder fote, and Israel to be spoyled? Dyd not the Lord? Because we haue synned agaynst him Ꟶ haue had no delyte to walke in his wayes, nether bene obedient vnto his lawe.
Therfore hath he poured vpon hym hys wrathfull displeasure, and stronge battayll, which fyreth hym on euery syde, yet wyll he not vnderstande. He burneth hym vp, yet syncketh it not into hys herte.
But nowe, the Lorde that made the O Iacob, and he that fashyoned the: O Israel, sayeth thus: Feare not, for I haue redemed the. I haue called the by name: thou art myne awne.
Yf thou goest thorow the water, I wilbe with the, that the stronge floudes shulde not pluck the awaye. And yf thou walckest thorowe the fyre, it shall not burne the, and the flame shall not kyndle vpon the.
For I am the Lord thy God the holy one of Israel, thy Sauioure. I gaue Egypte for thy deliueraunce, the Morians Ꟶ the Sabees for the:
because thou wast deare in my syght, and because I set by the, and loued the. I wyll geue ouer all men for the, and delyuer vp all people for thy sake,
feare not: for I am with the. I wyll bringe thy sede from the East, and gather the together from the west.
I wyll saye to the North, lett go. And to the South, kepe not backe: but bring me my sonnes from farre, and my daughters from the endes of the worlde.
Namely, all those that be called after my name. For them haue I created, fashyoned, Ꟶ made for myne honour.
Bringe forth that people, which is blinde Ꟶ yet hath eyes, which are deafe although they haue eares.
If all nacions come in one and be gathered together, which amonge them shall declare soche thynges, and tell vs what is to come? Let them brynge theyr witnesse so shall they be fre: els, let them heare, and saye, it is truth.
You are my witnesses (sayth the Lorde) and my seruaunt, whom I haue chosen: therfore be certified and geue me faithfull credence: and consydre, that I am he, before whom there was neuer any God, and that ther shalbe none after me.
I am euen, I am the only Lorde and beside me ther is no Sauioure.
I gaue warninge, I made whole I taught you when there was no straunge God amonge you. And this recorde must ye beare me youre selues, (sayth the Lord) that I am God.
And euen he am I from the begynnynge, and there is none that can take any thynge out of my hande. I do the worke and who shall be able to let it.
Thus sayeth the Lorde the holy one of Israel youre redemer: for youre sake I haue sent to Babylon, and brought downe the strongest of them. All they are fugityue with the Chaldees that boost them of theyr shyppes:
Euen I the Lorde youre holy one which haue made Israel, and am youre kynge.
Thus sayeth the Lorde (euen he that maketh a waye in the see, Ꟶ a footpath in the myghty waters:)
which bringeth forth the charettes Ꟶ horses, the hoste Ꟶ the power of warre, that they may fall and neuer ryse, and be extincte, lyke as towe is quenched.
Remembre not thynges of olde, and regarde nothinge that is past.
Beholde I shall make a newe thynge, and shortly shall it appeare, Ꟶ shall you not knowe it? I wyll make stretes in the deserte, and ryuers of water in the wyldernes:
The wylde beastes shall worshyppe me: the dragons, and the yonge Estriches. For I shall geue water in the wyldernes, and streames in the desert: that may geue drincke to my people, whom I chose.
Thys people haue I made for my self, and they shall shewe forth my prayse.
For thou (Iacob) woldest not call vpon me, but thou haddest an vnlust towarde me, O Israel.
Thou gauest me not thy beastes for burntofferinges nether dydest honour me with thy sacrifyces. Thou boughtest me no deare spyce with thy money, nether pouredest the fat of thy sacrifyces vpon me. Howbeit I haue not bene chargeable vnto the in offeringes, nether greuous in incense.
But thou hast laden me with thy synnes, Ꟶ weryed me with thyne vngodlynes.
Where as I yet, euen I am he onely, that for myne awne selfes sake do awaye thyne offences, and forget thy synnes: so that I will neuer thincke vpon them.
Put me now in remembraunce (for we wyll reason together) and shewe what thou hast for the, to make the ryghteous.
Thy fyrst father offended sore, and thy rulers haue synned agaynst me.
Therfore I ether suspended, or slue the chefest prynces. I dyd curse Iacob, and gaue Israel into reprofe.
So heare nowe, O Iacob my seruaunt, and Israel whom I haue chosen.
For thus sayth the Lord, that made the, fashyoned the, and helped the, euen from thy mothers wombe. Be not afrayed, O Iacob my seruaunt, thou ryghteous, whom I haue chosen.
For I shall powre water vpon the drye grounde, Ꟶ ryuers vpon the thurstye. I shall poure my sprete vpon thy sede, and myne encrease vpon thy stock.
They shall growe together, lyke as the grasse, and as the wyllowes by the waters syde.
One shall saye: I am the Lordes. Another shall call hym selfe after the name of Iacob. The thyrde shall subscribe with hys hande vnto the Lorde, and geue him self vnder the name of Israel.
Thus hath the Lorde spoken: euen the Kynge of Israel, and his redemer, the Lorde of Hostes: I am the fyrst and the last, and without me is there no God.
Yf any be lyke me, lett hym call forth the thynge paste and openly shewe it, and laye it playne before me what hath chaunsed synce I apoynted the people of the worlde, and what shall be shortly or what shall come to passe, in tyme longe to come, let them shewe thes thynges.
Be not abashed nor afrayde. For haue not I euer tolde you hytherto, and warned you? Ye can beare me recorde youre selues. Is there any God excepte me? or any maker, that I shulde not knowe hym?
All caruers of Images are but vayne, Ꟶ the carued ymages that they loue, can do no good. They must beare recorde them selues, that (seynge they can nether se ner vnderstande) they shalbe confounded.
Who darre them make a God, or fashyon an ymage, that is profytable for nothynge?
Beholde, all the felowshyppe of them must be brought to confusyon. And truly all the worke masters of them ar men, they shall all be gathered to gyther, they shall stande, tremble, and be confounded one with a nother.
The smith maketh an axe, and tempereth it with hoate coales, and fashyoneth it with hammers, and worketh wt it with all the strength of hys armes: yee, sometyme he is faynt for very hunger, and so thurstye, that he hath no more power.
The carpenter (or ymage caruer) taketh measure of the tymbre: and spredeth forth his lyne: he marketh it with some coloure. he playneth it, he ruleth it, and squareth it, and maketh it after the ymage of a man, and according to the bewty of a man: that it maye stande in the temple.
Moreouer, he goeth oute to hewe downe Cedre trees. He bryngeth home Elmes and Okes: and takynge a bolde corage, he seketh out the best tymbre of the wodde. He him selfe hath planted a pyne tree, which the rayne hath swelled,
which wodd serueth for men to burne. Of this he taketh and warmeth hym selfe withall: he maketh afyre of it to bake breade. And afterwarde maketh a God there of, to honoure it: Ꟶ an Idole to knele before it.
One pece he burneth in the fyre, with another he rosteth flesh, that he maye eate roste his bely full: with the thryde he warmeth him self, and sayeth: Aha, I am well warmed, I haue bene at the fyre.
And of the residue he maketh him a God, Ꟶ an Idole for him selfe. He kneleth before it, he worshippeth it, he prayeth vnto it, Ꟶ sayeth: delyuer me, for thou art my God.
Yet men nether consydre ner vnderstande, because theyr eyes are stopped, that they cannot se: and their hertes, that they cannot perceaue.
They pondre not in theyr myndes, for they haue nether knowledge ner vnderstandynge, to thincke thus. I haue brent one pece in the fyre. I haue baked bread with the coles there of, I haue rosted flesh with all, Ꟶ eaten it: shall I nowe of the resydue make an abhominable Idole, and fall downe before a rotten pece of wood?
Thus he doth but lese hys laboure, and hys herte which is disceaued, doth turne hym asyde: so that none of them can haue a fre conscience to thincke: maye not Ierre?
Consydre thys (O Iacob and Israel) for thou art my seruaunt. I haue made the, that thou myghtest serue me. O Israel, forget me not.
As for thyne offences, I haue dryuen them awaye lyke the cloudes, and thy synnes as the myst. Turne the agayne vnto me, for I haue redemed the.
Be glad ye heauens, whom the Lorde hath made for the Lorde hath dealte graciously wt hys people, let all that is here beneth vpon the earth, be ioyfull. Reioyse ye mountaynes and woddes, with all the trees therof: for the Lorde hath redemed Iacob, and wyll shewe hys glory vpon Israel.
Thus sayth the Lord thy redemer, euen he that fashyoned the from thy mothers wombe. I the Lorde, do all thynges my selfe alone. I only sprede out the heauens and I only haue layde the foundacyon of the earth by myn awne selfe.
I destroye the tokens of witches, and make the Sothsaiers fooles. As for the wyse, I turne them backwarde, and make theyr connyng folyshnesse.
He doth set vp the purpose of his seruaunte, and fulfylleth the councell of his messaungers Concernynge Ierusalem, he sayeth: It shalbe inhabited. And of the cyties of Iuda: They shalhe buylded agayne, and I will repayre theyr decayed places.
He sayeth to the grounde: be drye. And I will drye vp thy wader floudes.
He sayeth of Cyrus. He is myne herdman: so that he shall fulfyll all thynges after my will. He sayeth also of Ierusalem: It shall be buylded, and of the temple: It shalbe fast grounded.
Thus sayeth the Lord vnto Cyrus his anoynted whom I haue taken by the ryght hande, to subdue nations before him. I wyll lowse the gyrdle of kynges, Ꟶ I wyll open the gates before his face, and not to shut their dores.
I will go before the, and make the croked streyght, I shall breake the brasen dores, Ꟶ burst the yron barres.
I shall geue the the hyd treasures, Ꟶ the thynge which is secretly kept: that thou mayest knowe that I am the Lorde God of Israel which haue called the by thy name:
Ꟶ that for Iacob my seruauntes sake, Ꟶ for Israel my chosen. For I called the by thy name, and ordeyned the or euer thou knewest me.
Euen I the Lord before whom there is none other: for without me ther is no God. I haue prepared the or euer thou knewest me,
that I myght be knowne from the rysing of the sunne to the goynge downe of the same, that all is nothynge without me. For I am the Lorde, and there is els none.
It is I that created the lyght Ꟶ darcknes. I make peace and trouble: yee, euen I the Lorde do all these thinges.
Ye heauens from aboue droppe downe, Ꟶ let the cloudes rayne ryghteousnes. The earth open it selfe, and bringe forth health, that therby righteousnes maye florysh. Euen I the Lorde bringe it to passe.
Wo be vnto him that stryueth wt his maker, the potsherde with the potter. Sayeth the claye to the potter. What makest thou? or thy worke serueth for nothing?
Wo be vnto him that sayeth to hys father. Why begettest thou? And to his mother: why bearest thou?
Thus sayeth the Lorde, euen the holy one, Ꟶ maker of Israel. Aske me of thynges for to come, concernynge my sonnes: and put me in remembraunce, as touching the worckes of my handes:
I haue made the earth, and created man vpon it. With myne handes haue I spred forth heauen, and geuen a commaundement for all the hoost therof.
I shall wake him vp with ryghteousnes, and ordre all his wayes. He shall buylde my cytie, and let out my prisoners: Ꟶ that nether for gyft nor rewardes, sayeth the Lord of Hostes.
Thus sayeth the Lord. The occupiers of Egypt, the marchauntes of the Morians and Sabees, shall come vnto the with tribute, they shalbe thyne, they shall folowe the, and go with cheynes vpon their fete. They shall fall downe before the, and make supplicacyon vnto the. For God (without whom there is none other God) shalbe with the.
O howe profounde art thou O God, thou God and Sauioure of Israel?
Confounded are they all, and put to dishonoure: they are gone hence together with shame, euen the makers of ymages.
But Israel shalbe saued in the Lorde, which is the euerlastinge saluacyon. Ye shall not come to shame ner confusyon, worlde without ende.
For thus sayeth the Lord: euen he that created heauen, the God that made the earth, that fashyoned it, and sett it forth. He dyd not make it for naught, but to be enhabited. Euen I the Lorde, without whom there is none other.
I haue not spoken secretly, nether in darcke places of the earth. It is not for naught, that I sayde vnto the sede of Iacob: seke me. I am the Lorde, which when I speake, declareth the thing that is righteous Ꟶ true:
gather you Ꟶ come together, draw nie hyther, you that are escaped of the people. Haue they eny vnderstandynge, that set vp the stockes of theyr Idols, Ꟶ praye vnto a God, that cannot helpe them?
drawe nye, come hyther, and let them aske councell one at another and shewe forth. What is he, that tolde thys before? or, who spake of it, euer sence the begynning? Haue not I the Lord done it? wtout whom there is none other God? the true God and Sauioure, and ther is els none but I?
And therfore turne you vnto me (all ye endes of the earth) that ye maye be saued: for I am God, Ꟶ there is els none.
I sweare by my selfe: oute of my mouth commeth the word of ryghteousnesse, and that maye no man turne: but all knees shall bowe vnto me, and all tunges shall sweare by my name,
saying. Uerely, in the Lord is my ryghteousnes and strength. To him shal men come: but all they that thincke scorne of him, shalbe confounded.
And the whole sede of Israel shalbe iustified and make their boast in the Lorde.
Bell is fallen, Nabo is broken downe: whose ymages were a burthen for the beastes and catell, to ouerlade them, and to make them weery.
They are soncke downe, and fallen together: for they maye not ease them of theyr burthen, therfore must they go into captiuitie.
Herken vnto me, O house of Iacob, and all ye that remayne yet of the housholde of Israel: whom I haue borne from youre mothers wombe, and brought you vp from youre byrth, tyll ye were growen.
I, I, which shall beare you vnto youre last age. I haue made you, I wyll also norysh you, beare you and saue you.
Whom wyll ye make me lyke or to whom wyll ye make me equall or compare me that I shulde be lyke hym, in fashyon or ymage, that I maye be lyke him?
Ye fooles (no doute) wyll take out syluer Ꟶ golde oute of youre purses, and wepe it, Ꟶ hyre a goldsmyth to make a God of it, that men maye knele downe and worshyppe it.
Yet must he be taken on mennes shoulders Ꟶ borne, and set in his place, that he maye stande and not moue out of his place. Alas, that men shuld crye crie vnto him which geueth no answere: and delyuereth not the man that calleth vpon him, from hys trouble:
Consydre this well, and be ashamed. Go into youre awne selues (O ye runnagates.)
Remembre the thynges which are past, sence the begynninge of the worlde: that I am God Ꟶ that there is els no God, yee, Ꟶ that there is nothinge, lyke vnto me.
In the begynnynge of a thynge. I shewe the ende therof: Ꟶ I tell before, thinges that are not yet come to passe. My deuice stondeth, stedfastly stablyshed, Ꟶ I fulfyll all my pleasure.
I call a byrde out of the East, Ꟶ the man by whom my councell shall be fulfylled out of farre countrees, as soone as I thyncke to deuise a thynge, I do it.
Heare me, O ye that are of an hye stomacke, but farre from ryghteousnesse,
I shall bringe forth my ryghteousnes. It is not farre, Ꟶ my health shall not tary longe awaye. I wyll laye health in Sion, and in Israel my glory.
But as for the (O daughter, thou vyrgyn Babilon) sytt thou downe in the dust syt vpon the grounde, Ꟶ not in a throne (O thou mayden of Caldea.) Thou shalt nomore be called tender Ꟶ pleasaunt.
Bring forth the querne, Ꟶ grinde meele, vntrusse thy broyded heare, put of thy shoes, make bare thy knees: Ꟶ wade thorowe the water ryuers.
Thy shame shalbe discouered and thy pryuityes shalbe sene. For I wyll auenge me of the Ꟶ wyll shewe no mercy to the as, I do to other men
sayeth oure redemer, which is called the Lorde of Hostes the holy one of Israel.
Syt styll, holde thy tunge, and get the into some darck corner (O daughter Chaldea) for thou shalt nomore be called lady of kyngdomes.
I was so wroth wt my people, that I punished myne enheritaunce, and gaue them into thy power. Neuertheles, thou shewedest them no mercy, but euen the very aged men of them, dydest thou oppresse ryght sore with thy yock,
and thou thoughtest thus: I shalbe lady for euer. And besyde all that, thou hast not regarded these thynges, nether remembred what was the ende of that cytie Ierusalem.
Heare now therfore, thou wyllfull, that syttest so careles, and speakest thus in thyne herte: I am alone, and without me is there none: I shall neuer be wydowe, ner desolate agayne.
And yet both these thynges shall come to the vpon one daye in the twynclinge of an eye: Namely, wyddowhead, and desolacyon. They shall myghtely fall vpon the, for the multitude of thy witches, and for the greate heape of thy coniurers.
For thou hast trusted in thy wickednes, and hast sayd. No man seyth me. Thyne awne wysdome and connyng hath deceaued the. In that thou hast sayde: I am alone and without me ther is none.
Therfore shall trouble come vpon the, and thou shall not knowe, from whence it shall aryse. Myschefe shall fall vpon the, which thou shalt not be able to put of. A sodayne vtter destruction, shall come vpon the or euer thou be aware.
Nowe go to thy coniurers, Ꟶ to the multitude of thy wytches (with whom thou hast weried thy selfe from thy youth) yf they maye helpe the, or strengthen the.
Thou hast hytherto had many councels of them, so let the heauen gasers and the beholders of starres and mone prophetes come on nowe and delyuer the: yee, and lett them shewe, when these newe thinges shall come vpon the.
Beholde, they shalbe lyke strawe, whith yf it be kyndled with fyre, no man maye rydde it for the vehemencye of the flame. And yet it geueth no synders to warme a man by, ner cleare fyre to syt by.
Thus are they with whom thou hast weryed thy selfe, and thus are thy marchauntes that haue bene with the from thy youth. Euery one hath taken his awne waye and shall none of them defende the.
Heare this, O thou house of Iacob: ye that are called by the name of Israel, and are come out of one stocke with Iuda: which sweare by the name of the Lorde, and beare witnes by the God of Israel (but not with trueth and ryght)
which are called fremen of the holy cytie, Ꟶ are grounded vpon the God of Israel, whose name is the Lord of Hostes.
The thinges that I shewed you euer sence the begynnynge haue I not brought them to passe, immediatly as they came out of my mouth, and declared them, and they are come?
Howbeit, I knowe that thou art obstinate, and that thy neck hath an yron veyne, Ꟶ that thy browe is of brasse.
Neuerthelesse, I haue euer sence the begynninge shewed the of thinges for to come, and declared them vnto the, or euer they came to passe: that thou shuldest not saye: myne Idol hath done it, my carued or molten ymage hath shewed it.
Thou herdest it before, and beholde, It is come to passe, and whether can ye prophecye of thynges to come? But as for me, I tolde the before at the begynnynge, newe and secret thynges, that thou knowest not of.
And some done nowe, not of olde tyme, wherof thou neuer herdest before they were brought to passe: that thou canst not saye: Beholde, I knewe of them:
Moreouer, there be some wherof thou hast nether hearde ner knowne, nether haue they bene opened vnto thyne eares afore tyme. For I knewe that thou woldest maliciously offende, therfore haue I called the a transgressoure, euen from thy mothers wombe.
Neuertheles, for my names sake, I wyll wtdrawe my wrath: Ꟶ it shalbe for myne honours sake, yf I paciently forbeare the, and do not rote the out.
Beholde, I haue pourged the, yet not as siluer. I haue chosen the in the fyer of affliccyon:
and that onely for myne awne sake: yee, euen for myne awne sake will I do this: or els, what dishonour wolde they do to my name?
Herken vnto me, O Iacob, and Israel whom I haue called, I am he. I am euen he that is, I am the fyrst Ꟶ the last.
My hande hath layde the foundacyon of the earth: and my right hande hath spanned ouer the heauens. Assone as I call them they are there.
Gather you all together, and herken: Which of yonder goddes hath declared this? The Lorde hath a loue vnto him, and he shall perfourme hys wyll agaynst Babel, Ꟶ declare hys power agaynst the Chaldees.
I my selfe alone, euen I haue told you this before. Yee, I dyd call hym Ꟶ bringe hym forth: and he shall geue a prosperous iorney.
Come nye and heare thys: haue I spoken eny thing darckly, sens the beginnynge? When a thyng beginneth, I am there. Wherfore, the Lorde God and hys sprete hath sent me.
And thus sayth the Lord God thy redemer, the holy one of Israel: I am the Lorde thy God, which teach the profitable thynges, and leade the the waye, that thou shuldst go.
O that thou hadst regarded my commaundementes, then had thy welthynes bene as the water streame: and thy righteousnes as the waues flowynge in the see:
Thy seede also had be like as the sande in the see, and the frute of thy body lyke the grauelle stones therof. His name shulde not be roted out: nor destroyed before me.
Go awaye from Babilon, flye from the Chaldees wt a mery voyce speake of this, declare it abroade, and go forth vnto the ende of the worlde, saye: The Lorde hath redemed hys seruaunt Iacob,
that they suffred no thurst, he lead them thorow the wildernes, and caused the waters to flowe out vnto them from out of the rocke. He claue the rocke a sonder, and the water gusshed out.
As for the vngodly, they haue no peace, sayth the Lorde.
Ye yles, herken vnto me, Ꟶ take heede ye people from farre. The Lorde hath called me fro my birth, and made mencyon of my name fro my mothers wombe:
he hath made my mouth like a sharpe swerde: vnder the shadowe of hys hande hath he defended me, and hyd me in hys quyuer as a good arowe,
Ꟶ sayd vnto me. Thou art my seruaunt Israel, I wilbe honoured in the.
Then answerde I: I haue lost my laboure, I haue spent my strength in vayne. Neuertheles, I will commyt my cause and my worcke vnto the Lorde my God.
And nowe sayth the Lorde, euen he that fashyoned me fro my mothers wombe to be his seruaunte, that I maye bryng Iacob agayn vnto him: howbeit, Israel wyll not be gathered vnto hym agayne. In whose sight I am greate, which also is my Lorde, my God and my strength.
And he sayde: It is but a small thinge that thou art my seruaunt, to sett vp the kynreddes of Iacob, and to restore the destruccyon of Israel. For I haue made the the light of the Gentyls, that thou mayst be my health vnto the ende of the worlde.
Moreouer, thus sayth the Lorde the auenger and holy one of Israel: because of the abhorringe and despysinge amonge the Gentiles, concerning the seruaunt of all them that beare rule. Kynges and princes shall se, and aryse and worshyp, because of the Lord that is faythfull: Ꟶ because of the holy one of Israel, which hath chosen the.
And thus saith the Lorde: In the tyme accepted haue I heard the, and in the daye of saluacion haue I helped the. I will preserue the and make the to be the atonement of the people, that thou mayst helpe vp the earth agayne: Ꟶ possesse agayne the desolate herytages.
That thou mayest saye to the presoners: go forth, and to them that are in darcknesse: come into the lyght, they shall fede in the hye wayes, and get their pasture in all hye places.
They shall nether honger, ner thurst: heate nor sunne shall not hurte them. For he that fauoureth them, shall leade them, and geue them dryncke of the springe welles.
I wyll make wayes vpon all my mountaynes, and my fote pathes shalbe exalted.
And beholde, they shall come from far: lo, some from the north and west, some from the lande of Sinis, which is in the south.
Reioyse ye heauens: Ꟶ synge prayses, thou earth. Talke of ioye ye hylles, for God hath conforted hys people, and wyll haue mercye vpon his that be in trouble.
But Sion sayde: God hath forsaken, Ꟶ my Lorde hath forgotten me.
Wyll a wyfe forget the childe of her wombe, and not pitie the sonne whom she hath borne? And though, they do forget, yet will not I forget the.
Beholde, I haue written the vp vpon my handes, thy walles are euer in my syght.
They make hast to buylde the vp agayne. As for those that ouerthrowe the, and made the wast, they shall departe from the.
Lyft vp thyne eyes, and loke about the: all these gather them together, Ꟶ come to the. As truly as I lyue (sayth the Lord) thou shalt put them all vpon the, as an apparell, Ꟶ gyrde them to the as a bryd doth her iewels.
As for thy land that lyeth desolate wasted and destroyed: it shalbe to narowe for them that shall dwell in it. And they that wolde deuoure the, they shalbe farre awaye.
Then the childe whom the baren shall bringe forth vnto the, shall saye in thyne care: thys place is to narowe, gyue place that I maye haue rowme.
Then shalt thou thynke by thy selfe: Who hath begotten me these? seinge I am baren and alone, a captyue and an out cast? And who hath noryshed them vp for me? I am desolate and alone, but from whence come these?
And therfore thus sayth the Lorde God: Behold, I wyll stretch out myne hande to the Gentyls, and set vp my token to the people. They shall bring the thy sonnes in their lappes: and carye thy daughters vnto the vpon their shoulders.
For kinges shalbe thy nursyng fathers, and quenes shalbe thy nursing mothers. They shall fall before the wt theyr faces flatt vpon the earth: and lycke vp the dust of thy fete: that thou mayst knowe how that I am the Lorde. And who so putteth his trust in me, shall not be confounded.
Who spoyled the gyaunte of his praye? or who taketh the presoner from the mightye?
And therfore, thus sayeth the Lorde. The prisoners shalbe taken from the gyaunte, and the spoyle delyuered from the violente: for I wyll maynteyne thy cause agaynst thyne aduersaryes, and saue thy sonnes.
And wyll fede thyne enemyes with theyr awne fleshe, and make them drynke of their awne bloude, as of swete wyne. And all flessh shall knowe, O Iacob, that I am the Lorde thy sauiour, thy noble redemer.
Thus sayth the Lord: where is the byll of your mothers deuorcement, that I sent her awaye? or who is the vsurer, to whom I solde you? Beholde, for your awne offences are ye solde, Ꟶ because of youre transgression, is youre mother forsaken.
For why wolde no man receaue me, when I came? and when I called, no man gaue me answere. Is my hande shortened that it might not helpe? or haue I not power to deliuer? lo, at a worde I dryncke vp the see and of water floudes I make drye lande: so that for want of water, the fyshe corrupt and dye for thurst.
As for heauen, I clothe it with darcknesse, and put as it were a sack vpon it.
The Lorde God hath geuen me a well lerned tonge, so that I can confort them which are troubled: yee, and that in due ceason. He wakeneth myne eare vp by tymes in the mornynge: by tymes in the morninge, I saye, he will waken myne eare, that I myght herken as to the scole masters.
The Lord God hath opened myne eare, therfore can I nott saye, naye: ner withdrawe my selfe:
but I offre my backe vnto the smyters, Ꟶ my chekes to the nippers. I turne not my face from shame and spittyng,
Ꟶ the Lord God shall helpe me: therfore shall I not be confounded. I haue hardened my face like a flynt stone, for I am sure, that I shall not come to confusion.
He is at hand that iustifieth me, who will then go wt me to lawe? Let vs stande one against another: yf there be any that wyll reason with me, let hym come here forth to me.
Beholde, the Lorde God standeth by me, what is he then that can condempne me? lo, they shalbe all like as an olde clothe, the mothe shall eate them vp.
Therfore, whoso feareth the Lord among you, let him heare the voyce of his seruaunt, Whoso walketh in darcknesse, and no lyght shyneth vpon him, lett hym put hys trust in the name of the Lorde, and holde him by his God.
But take hede, ye all kyndle a fyre of the wrath of God, and stere vp the coales: walke on in the glistering of your awne fyre Ꟶ in the coales that ye haue kindled. This cometh vnto you fro my hande, namely that ye shall slepe in sorowe.
Herken vnto me, ye that holde of righteousnes, Ꟶ ye that seke the Lorde. Take hede vnto the stone, whereout ye are hewen, Ꟶ to the graue wherout ye are dygged.
Considre Abraham your father, Ꟶ Sara that bare you: howe that I called him alone, Ꟶ blessed hym, and encreased him
Therfore shall the Lorde comforte Syon, Ꟶ repayre all her decaye: making her deserte as a paradise, Ꟶ her wildernesse as the garden of the Lorde. Myrth and ioye shalbe founde there, thankesgeuing Ꟶ the voyce of prayse.
Haue respect vnto me then, O my people both hyghe Ꟶ lowe Ꟶ laye thyne eare to me: for a lawe Ꟶ an ordinaunce shall go forth fro me, to lyghten the Gentils.
It is hard by, that my health Ꟶ my righteousnes shall go forth, and the people shalbe ordred with myne arme. The ylandes, that is the Gentils, shall hope in me, and put their trust in myne arme.
Lift vp your eyes towarde heauen, and loke vpon the earth beneth. For the heauens shall vanyshe awaye lyke smoke, and the earth shall waxe olde lyke a cloth, Ꟶ they that dwell therin shall perysh in lyke maner. But my saluacion shall endure for euer, and my righteousnesse shall not cease.
Herken vnto me, ye that haue pleasure in righteousnes, thou people that bearest my lawe in thyne hert. Feare not the curse of men: be not afrayde of their blasphemyes and reuylinges:
for wormes Ꟶ mothes shall eate them vp lyke cloth Ꟶ woll. But my ryghteousnes shall endure for euer, Ꟶ my sauynge health from generacion to generacyon.
Wake vp, wake vp: and be stronge. O thou arme of the Lorde, wake vp, lyke as in tyme past, euer and sence the worlde beganne.
Art not thou the same arme, that hast wounded the proude Egypt, and hewen the Dragon in peces? Art not thou euen he, which hast dryed vp the depe of the see, which hast made playne the see grounde, that the delyuered myght goo thorow?
Therfore the redemed of the Lord shall turne agayne, Ꟶ come wyth ioye vnto Sion, there to endure for euer? That myrth Ꟶ gladnesse myght be with them: that sorowe and wo myght fle from them?
Yee I, I am euen he, that in all thynges geueth you consolacyon. What art thou then, that fearest a mortall man, the chylde of man, which goeth awaye as doeth the floure?
And forgettest the Lorde that made the, that spred out the heauenes, and layde the foundacion of the earth But thou art euer afrayde for the syght of thyne oppressoure, which is ready to do harme: Where is the wrath of the oppressoure?
The tyme commeth on faste when the presoner shall be losened, and he shall not dye in the dongeon nor yet be consumed by famyshement.
I am the Lorde thy God (that make the see to be styll, Ꟶ to rage:) whose name is the Lorde of Hoste
I haue put my wordes in thy mouth, Ꟶ haue defended the in the shadowe of my hande: that I maye plante the heauens, Ꟶ leye the foundacyon of the earth, and saye vnto Sion: thou art my people.
Awake, awake, and stande vp, O Ierusalem, thou that from the hande of the Lord, hast droncken out the cuppe of hys wrath: thou that hast supped of, and sucked out the dregges of his deadly cuppe to the botome.
For among all the sonnes whom he hath begotten, there is not one that maye holde it vp: Ꟶ not one to leade it by the hande, of all the sonnes that he hath noryshed.
Both these thynges are happened vnto the, but who is sory for it? Yee, destructyon, wastynge, hunger and swerde: but who wyll comforte the?
Thy sonnes lye comfortles at the heade of euery strete lyke a taken venyson, and are full of the terrible wrath of the Lorde, and punishment of thy God.
And therfore thou miserable and droncken (howbeit not wyth wyne) Heare this:
Thus sayeth thy Lorde: thy Lorde and God, the defender of hys people: Beholde, I wyll take the slombrynge cuppe out of thy hande, euen the cuppe wyth the dregges of my wrath: that from hence forth thou shalt neuer drinke it more,
but I wyll putt it into their hande that trouble the: whych haue spoken to thy soule: stoupe downe, that we maye go ouer the: Ꟶ thou laydest thy body euen wyth the grounde, and as the strete to go vpon.
Vp Sion vp, take thy strength vnto the: put on thyne honest rayment O Ierusalem, thou holy citie. For from thys tyme forth, there shall no vncircumcysed ner vncleane person come in the.
Shake the from the dust, aryse Ꟶ stande vp, O Ierusalem. Plucke out thy neck from the bonde: O thou captiue daughter Sion.
For thus sayeth the Lord: ye are solde for naught, therfore shall ye be redemed also without eny mony.
For thus sayeth the Lorde God: My people wente downe afore tyme into Egypte, there to be straungers, and the kynge of the Assyrians oppressed them wythout anye cause.
And nowe what profyt is it to me (sayth the Lorde) that my people is frely caryed awaye, and brought in to heuynes by their rulers, Ꟶ my name euer still blasphemed? sayeth the Lorde?
Therfore that my people maye knowe my name, therfore I say in that daye they shall knowe it, that I am he that do speake. I saye euen I.
O howe bewtifull are the fete of the Embassitoure, that bryngeth the message from the mountayne, Ꟶ proclameth peace: that bryngeth the good tydynges, and preacheth health, and sayeth vnto Sion: Thy God is the kynge.
Thy watchmen shall lyft vp theyr voyce: with lowde voyce shall they preach of hym: for they shall se hym present, when the Lorde shall conuerte Sion.
Be glad, with thankes gyuynge. O thou desolate Ierusalem, Ꟶ reioyce together for the Lorde hath comforted hys people, he hath delyuered Ierusalem.
The Lorde hath made bare hys holy arme, and shewed it forth in the syght of all the Gentiles, Ꟶ all the endes of the earth hath sene the sauinge health of our God.
Awaye, awaye, get you out from thence and touche no vncleane thynge. Go oute from amonge soche. And be cleane, that beare the vessell of the Lorde.
For ye shall not escape by rennynge ner by flyenge awaye: but the Lorde shall go before you, and the God of Israel shall gather you together.
Beholde, my seruaunt shall deale wysely, therfore shall he be magnified, exalted Ꟶ greatly honoured.
Lyke as the multitude shall wondre vpon hym, because hys face shalbe so deformed Ꟶ not as a mans face, hys bewtye lyke no man:
Euen so shall the multitude of the Gentyles loke vnto hym, Ꟶ kynges shall shut their mouthes before him. For they that haue not bene tolde of him, shall se hym, Ꟶ they that herde nothynge of hym, shall beholde him.
But who hath geuen credence vnto the thynge we haue hearde? Or to whom is the arme of the Lord knowne?
For he dyd growe before the Lord lyke as a braunche, Ꟶ as a rote in a drye grounde, he hath nether bewtye nor fauoure. When we shall loke vpon hym, there shalbe no fayrnesse: we shall haue no lust vnto him.
He is despised Ꟶ abhorred of men, he is soch a man as is full of sorowe Ꟶ as hath good experience of infirmyties. We haue rekoned hym so vyle, that we hyd oure faces from hym, ye he was despised Ꟶ therfore we regarded him not.
Howbeit he only hath taken on hym oure infyrmitie, Ꟶ borne our paynes. Yet we dyd iudge hym, as though he were plaged Ꟶ cast downe of God:
and punished where as he (not wythstandynge) was wounded for oure offences, and smytten for oure wyckednes. For the chastysement of oure peace was layde vpon him, and wyth hys strypes are we healed.
As for vs, we haue gone all astraye (like shepe) euery one hath turned his awne way. But the Lorde hath heaped together vpon him the iniquitie of vs all.
He suffred violence and was euell intreated, Ꟶ dyd not yet open his mouth. He shalbe led as a shepe to be slayne, yet shall he be as styll as a lambe before the shearer, and not open hys mouth.
He was had awaye from preson hys cause not herde, and wythout eny iudgement: Whose generacyon yet who maye nombre? he was cut of from the grounde of the lyuynge: Whych punyshment dyd go vpon hym, for the transgressyon of my people, whych in deade had deserued that punyshment,
Hys graue was geuen hym wyth the condemned, and wyth the ryche man at hys deeth. Where as he dyd neuer violence ner vnryght, nether hath there bene eny disceatfulnesse in hys mouth.
Yet hath it pleased the Lorde thus to bruste hym wyth plages, and to smyte hym wyth infyrmite, that when he had made his soule an offeryng for synne, he myght se longe lastynge sede. And thys deuyce of the Lorde shall prospere in hys hande.
With trauayle Ꟶ laboure of hys soule, shall he optayne frute, and he shall be satisfyed by the knowledge of hym whych is my ryghteous seruaunt he shall iustifye the multitude, for he shall beare awaye theyr synnes.
Therfore wyll I geue hym the multitude for hys parte, and he shall deuyde the spoyle wyth the strongest because he geueth ouer hys soule to death, and is rekened amonge the transgressours, whych neuertheles hath taken awaye the synnes of the multitude, and made intercessyon for the mysdoers.
Be glad now, thou baren that bearest not, reioyce, synge and be mery thou that art not wyth chylde: For the desolate hath moo chyldren, then the maryed wyfe, sayeth the Lorde.
Make thy tentes wyder, and sprede out the hangynges of thyne habitacion: spare not, laye forth thy coardes, and make fast thy stakes:
for thou shalt be multiplied on the ryght syde Ꟶ on the left, and thy sede shall haue the Gentyles in possessyon and dwell in the desolate cyties.
Feare not, for thou shalt not be confounded: Be not ashamed, for thou shalt not come to confusyon. Yee thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, Ꟶ shalt not remembre the dishonoure of thy wedowhead.
For he that made the, shalbe thy Lord Ꟶ husbande (whose name is the Lorde of hostes) and thy redemer shalbe euen the holy one of Israel, the Lorde of the whole worlde.
For the Lord, hath called the, beynge as a desolate sorowfull woman, Ꟶ as a younge wyfe that hath broken her wedlocke: sayeth thy God.
A lytle whyle haue I forsaken the, but wt greate mercyfulnes shall I take the vp vnto me.
When I was angry, I hydde my face from the for a lytle season, but thorow euerlastinge mercye haue I pardoned the, sayth the Lord thyne auenger.
And this is vnto me as the water of Noe: for lyke as I haue sworne that I wyll not bringe the water of Noe eny more vpon the worlde: so haue I sworne that I wyll neuer be angry with the, ner reproue the:
The mountaynes shall remoue, and the hylles shall fall downe: but my louynge kyndnesse shall not moue, and the bonde of my peace shall not fall downe from the, sayeth the Lorde thy mercyfull louer.
Beholde thou pore, ouerwhelmed with tempest Ꟶ wythout comforte. I will make thy walles of precyous stones, Ꟶ thy foundacyon of Saphyres,
thy wyndowes of Chrystal, thy gates of fyne cleare stone, Ꟶ all thy borders of pleasaunt stones.
Thy children shall all be taught of God, Ꟶ I wyll geue them plenteousnes of peace.
In ryghteousnes shalt thou be grounded, Ꟶ be farre from oppressyon: for the whych thou nedest not be afrayed, nether for hynderaunce, for it shall not come nye the.
Beholde, the aleaunt that was farre from me, shall dwell with the: Ꟶ he that ioyneth batayle agenst the shall perishe.
Beholde, I make the smith that bloweth the coales in the fyre, Ꟶ he maketh a weapen after hys handy worcke. I make also the waster to destroye:
but all the weapens that are made agaynst the, shall not prospere. And as for all tunges, that shall resyste the in iudgement, thou shalt ouercome them, Ꟶ condemne them. Thys is the heritage of the Lordes seruauntes, and their ryghteousnes commeth of me, sayeth the Lorde.
Come to the waters all ye, that be thursty, and ye that haue no money. Come, bye, that ye maye haue to eate. Come, bye wyne and mylck, wythout any money, or money worth.
Wherfore do ye laye out youre money, for the thynge that fedeth not, Ꟶ spende youre laboure aboute the thynge that satisfyeth you not. But herken herken rather vnto me, Ꟶ ye shall eate of the best, and youre soule shall haue her pleasure in plenteousnes.
Enclyne your eares, and come vnto me, take hede (I saye) Ꟶ your soule shall lyue. For I will make an euerlastynge couenaunt wyth you, euen the sure mercyes of Dauid.
Beholde, I gaue him for a wytnesse among the folke, for a Prynce and captayne vnto the people.
Lo, thou shalt call an vnknowne people: Ꟶ a people that had not knowledge of the, shall runne vnto the: because of the Lord thy God, and the holy one of Israel, whych glorifyeth the.
Seke the Lorde, whyle he may be founde, and call vpon hym whyle he is nye.
Let the vngodly man forsake his owne wayes, Ꟶ the vnryghtuous hys owne ymagynacyons, and turne agayne vnto the Lorde: so shall he be mercyfull vnto hym: and to oure God, for he is very ready to forgeue.
For thus sayeth the Lorde: my thoughtes are not youre thoughtes, and youre wayes are not my wayes,
but as farre as the heauens are hyer then the earth, so farre do my wayes exceade yours, and my thoughtes yours.
And lyke as the rayne Ꟶ snowe commeth downe from heauen, and returneth not thyther agayne, but watereth the earth, maketh it frutefull and grene, that it maye geue corne vnto the sower, and breade to hym that eateth.
So the worde also that commeth out of my mouth shall not turne againe voyde vnto me, but shall accomplyshe my wyll and prospere in the thynge wherto I sende it.
And so shall ye goo forth wt ioye, Ꟶ be led wt peace. The mountaynes Ꟶ hylles shall synge wyth you for ioye, Ꟶ all the trees of the felde shall clappe theyr handes.
For thornes, there shall growe Fyrre trees, Ꟶ the Myrre tre in the steade of breers. And thys shall be done to the prayse of the Lorde, and for an euerlastynge token, that shall not be taken awaye.
Thus sayeth the Lorde. Kepe equite, and do ryght, for my sauyng health shall come shortly, Ꟶ my ryghteousnes shalbe opened.
Blessed is the man that doth thys, and the mans chylde whych kepeth the same. He that taketh hede, that he vnhalowe not the Sabboth (that is) he that kepeth hym selfe that he do no euel.
Then shall not the straunger, which cleaueth to the Lorde, saye: Alas, the Lorde hath shut me cleane out from hys people. Nether shall the gelded man saye: lo, I am a drye tre.
For thus sayeth the Lorde, vnto the gelded that kepeth my Sabboth: Namely, that holdeth greatly of the thynge that pleaseth me, and kepeth my couenaunt:
Unto them wyll I geue in my housholde and wythin my walles, a better herytage Ꟶ name, then yf they had bene called sonnes Ꟶ daughters. I will geue them an euerlastinge name, that shall not perish.
Agayne the straungers that stycke to the Lorde, to serue hym, and to loue hys name: and to be hys seruauntes. And all they, whych kepe them selues, that they vnhalowe not the Sabboth, namely, that they fulfyll my couenaunt:
Them wyll I brynge to my holy mountayne, and make them ioyfull in my house of prayer. Theyr burnt offrynges and sacrifyces shalbe accepted vpon myne aulter. For my house shalbe called an house of prayer for all people.
Thus sayeth the Lorde God whych gathereth together the scatred of Israel: I will brynge yet another congregacyon to hym.
Come all ye beastes of the felde, that ye may deuoure, all the beastes of the wodd.
For hys watchmen are all blynde, they haue all together no vnderstandynge, they are all domme dogges, not beynge able to barcke, they are slepy: slogysh are they, and lye snortynge:
they are shamelesse dogges, that be neuer satisfyed. The sheperdes also in lyke maner haue no vnderstandynge, but euery man turneth his awne waye, euery one after his awne couetousnes with all hys power.
Come (saye they) I wyll fetch wyne, so shall we fyll oure selues, that we maye be dronken. And do to morowe, lyke as to daye, yee and moche more.
The ryghteous perisheth, and no man regardeth it in hys hert, Good godly people are taken a waye, and no man consydreth it. Namely, that the ryghteous is conuayed awaye from the wycked.
He commethe into peace, Ꟶ godlye men rest in their chambres, and before the godly man goeth peace.
Come hyther therfore ye charmers children, ye sonnes of the aduoutrer and the whore:
Wherin take ye youre pleasure? Upon whom gape ye with your mouth, Ꟶ bleare out your tonge? Are ye not children of aduoutry, and a sede of dissimulacion?
Ye make youre fyre vnder the okes, and vnder all grene trees, and ye offre chyldren in the valleys, and dennes of stone.
Thy parte shalbe with the stony rockes by the riuer: Yee, euen these shall be thy parte. For there thou hast poured meat Ꟶ drincke offringe vnto them. Shulde I delite in that?
Thou hast made thy bed vpon hye mountaynes, thou wentest vp thyther, and there hast thou slayne sacrifices.
Behynde the dores and postes, hast thou sett vp thy remembraunce. When thou haddest dyscouered thy selfe to another then me, when thou wentest downe and made thy bed wyder, and wyth those Idols hast thou made a couenaunt, and louedest theyr couches, where thou sawest them.
Thou wentest streyght to kynges wyth oyle Ꟶ dyuerse oyntmentes (that is) thou hast sent thy messaungers farre of, Ꟶ yet art thou fallen into the pyt therby.
Thou art weery for the multitude of thyne awne wayes, yet saydest thou neuer: I wyll leaue of. Thou hast had the lyfe that thy handes wrought, Ꟶ therfore thou art carelesse.
For when wylt thou be abasshed or feare, seynge thou hast broken thy promyse, and remembrest not me, nether hast me in thyne hert? Thynkest thou, that I also wyll holde my peace (as afore tyme) that thou fearest me not?
Yee, verely I wyl declare thy goodnes and thy workes, but they shall not profyt the:
when thou cryest, let thy chosen heape deliuer the. But the wynde shall blowe them furth, and vanite shall take them all awey. Neuertheles, they that put their trust in me, shall inheret the lande, Ꟶ haue my holy hyll in possessyon.
And therfore thus he sayeth: Make playne, make playne, Ꟶ clense the strete, take vp the stomblynge blockes out of the waye that ledeth to my people.
For thus sayeth the hye Ꟶ excellent, euen he that dwelleth in euerlastyngnesse, whose name is the holy one: I dwell hye aboue and in the sanctuary, and wyth hym also, that is of a contrite and humble sprete do I dwell: that I maye heale a troubled mynde, and a contrite herte.
For I chyde not euer, Ꟶ am not wroth wyth out ende. But the blastyng goeth from me, and is included in the body, and I made the breath.
I am wroth wyth hym for his couetousnes, I smyte him, I hyde me, and am angrye, when he turneth him selfe, Ꟶ foloweth the by waye of his awne hert.
I haue seen his wayes and I heale hym I lede him and restore to hym comforte, and to those that were sory for him
I make the frutes of thankesgeuynge, that he maye saye. Peace peace vnto them that are farre of, and to them that are nye, sayth the Lorde, and I make hym whole.
But the wycked are lyke the ragynge see, that cannot rest, whose water fometh wyth the myre Ꟶ grauel.
Euen so the wycked haue no peace, sayeth God.
Crye nowe, as loude as thou canst. Leaue not of, lyft vp thy voyce lyke a trompet, Ꟶ shewe my people theyr offences, Ꟶ the house of Iacob their synnes.
For they seke me daylye, Ꟶ wyll knowe my wayes, euen as it were a people that dyd ryght, and had not forsaken the statutes of theyr God. They argue wyth me concernynge ryght iudgement, and will be nye vnto God.
Wherfore fast we (saye they) and thou seest it not? we put out lyues to straytenes, and thou regardest it not?
Beholde, when ye fast, youre lust remayneth styll: for ye do no lesse vyolence to your detters: lo, ye fast to stryfe and debate, Ꟶ to smyte with youre fyst without mercy. Now ye shall not fast thus that your voyce myght be hearde aboue.
Thyncke ye this fast pleaseth me, that a man shulde chasten him selfe for a daye, and to wrythe his head aboute lyke an hoope, Ꟶ to lye vpon the earth in an heary cloth? Shulde that be called fastynge, or a daye that pleaseth the Lorde?
Doth not this fastynge rather please me, that thou loose him out of bondage, that is in thy daunger: that thou breake the ooth of wycked bargaynes, that thou lett the oppressed go fre, and take from them all maner of burthens:
to deale thy bread to the hongry, Ꟶ bringe the poore wandringe, home into thy house, when thou seest the naked that thou couer him, and hyde not thy face from thy neyghboure.
Then shall thy lyght breake forth as the mornyng, Ꟶ thy health floryshe ryght shortly: thy righteousnesse shall go before the, and the glory of the Lorde shall embrace the.
Then yf thou callest, the Lorde shall answere the: yf thou cryest, he shall saye: here I am. Yee, yf thou layest awaye from the thy burthens, and holdest thy fingers, Ꟶ ceasest from blasphemous talkinge,
yf thou hast compassyon vpon the hongrye, Ꟶ refreshest the troubled soule: Then shall thy lyght sprynge out in the darcknesse, Ꟶ thy darcknesse shalbe as the noone day.
The lord shall euer be thy guyd, Ꟶ satisfie the desyre of thyne herte in the tyme of drougthe, Ꟶ fyll thy bones wt mary. Thou shalt be lyke a fresh waterd garden Ꟶ lyke the fountayne of water, that neuer leaueth runnynge.
Then the places that haue euer bene waste, shalbe builded of the: there shalt thou laye a foundacion for many kynredes. Thou shalt be called the maker vp of hedges, Ꟶ the buylder agayne of the waye of the Sabboth.
Yee, yf thou turne thy fete in the Sabbath, so that thou do not the thynge which pleaseth thy self in my holy daye: Ꟶ thou call the pleasaunt, holy, and glorious Sabbath of the Lorde, and that thou gyue him the hononoure: so that thou do not after thyne awne ymagination, nether seke thyne awne wyll, ner speake thyne awne wordes.
Then shalt thou haue thy pleasure in the Lord, and I wyll carye the hye aboue the earth, and fede the wyth the herytage of Iacob thy father: for the Lordes awne mouth hath so promysed.
Beholde the Lordes hande is not so shortened that it can not helpe, nether is his eare so stopped that it maye not heare.
But youre mysdedes haue separated you from youre God, Ꟶ your synnes hyde his face from you, that he heareth you not.
For youre handes are defyled wyth bloude, Ꟶ youre fyngers wt vnrighteousnesse: Your lyppes speake lesynges, and youre tonge setteth oute wyckednes.
No man regardeth ryghteousnes, and no man iudgeth truly. Euery man hopeth in vayne thynges, and ymagineth disceate conceaueth weerynesse, and bryngeth forth euell.
They brede cockatrice egges, and weaue the spyders webb: Who so eateth of their egges, dyeth. But yf one treade vpon them, there commeth vp a serpent.
Theyr webbe maketh no clothe, and they maye not couer them wyth their labours. Their dedes are the dedes of wyckednes, and the worcke of robbery is in their handes.
Theyr fete runne to euell, and they make haste to shed innocent bloude. Theyr councels are wicked councels, harme and destruccyon are in their wayes.
But the waye of peace they knowe not. In theyr goinges is no equyte: their wayes are so croked, that whosoeuer goeth theryn, knoweth of no peace.
And this is the cause that equite is so farre from vs, and that righteousnes commeth not nye vs. We loke for lyght, lo, it is darckenesse: for the mornynge shyne, se, we walcke in the darcke.
We grope lyke the blynde vpon the wall, we grope euen as one that hath none eyes. We stomble at the none daye, as though it were toward nyght: in the fallyng places, lyke men that are halfe deed.
We roare all lyke Beers, and mourne styll lyke doues. We loke for equyte, but there is none: for health, but it is farre from vs.
For oure offences are many before the, Ꟶ oure synnes testifye agaynst vs. Yee, we must confesse that we offende, Ꟶ knowledge that we do amysse:
Namely, transgresse Ꟶ dissemble agaynst the Lorde, and fall awaye from oure God: vsynge presumptuous and traytorous ymaginacyons, and castinge false matters in oure hertes.
And therfore is equite gone asyde, and ryghteousnes standeth farre of treuth is fallen downe in the strete, and the thynge that is playne and open, maye not be shewed.
Yee, the treuth is taken awaye, and he that refrayneth him selfe from euell, must be spoyled. When the Lord sawe thys, it displeased him sore, that there was no equite.
He sawe also, that there was no man, ryghtwise, Ꟶ he wondered that ther was no man to helpe hym. Wherfore he helde hym by his awne power, and he sustayned him by his awne righteousnes.
He put ryghteousnes vpon him for a brest plate, a set the helmet of health vpon hys head. He put on wrath in steade of clothynge, Ꟶ toke gelousy about hym for a cloke:
(lyke as when a man goeth forth wrathfully to recompence hys enemyes, Ꟶ to be auenged of hys aduersaryes.) Namelye, that be myght recompence Ꟶ rewarde the Ilandes,
wher thorowe the name of the Lorde myght be feared, from the rysynge of the Sunne: and hys magesty, vnto the goinge downe of the same. For he shall come as a violent waterstreame, whych the wynde of the Lorde hath moued.
But vnto Sion there shall come a redemer, and vnto them in Iacob that turne from wyckednesse, sayeth the Lorde.
I wyll make thys couenaunt wyth them (sayth the Lorde:) My sprete that is vpon the, and the wordes which I haue put in thy mouth, shall neuer go out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy chylders chyldren, from thys tyme forth for euermore worlde wythout ende sayth the Lorde.
Get the vp by tymes, Ꟶ be bryght, for thy lyght commeth, Ꟶ the glory of the Lorde is rysen vp vpon the.
For lo, whyle the darcknesse Ꟶ cloude couereth the earth and the people, the Lorde shall shewe the lyght, Ꟶ his glory shall be sene in the.
The Gentiles shall come to thy lyght, and kynges to the bryghtnes that spryngeth forth vpon the.
Lyft vp thyne eyes, Ꟶ loke rounde aboute the? All these gather themselues, Ꟶ come to the. Thy Sonnes shall come vnto the from farre, and thy daughters shall gather them selues to the on euery syde.
Then thou shalt se thys: and be gloriouse, thou shalt maruell exceadyngly, and thyne hert shalbe opened: when the abundaunce of the see shalbe conuerted vnto the (that is) when the ryches of the Gentiles shall come vnto the.
The multitude of Camels shall couer the, the dromedaries of Madian Ꟶ Epha All they of Saba shall come, bryngynge golde Ꟶ incense, Ꟶ shewinge the prayse of the Lord.
All the catell of Cedar shalbe gathered vnto the, the rammes of Nabaioth shall serue the, to be offred acceptablye vpon myne aulter, which I haue chosen, Ꟶ in the house of my glory which I haue garnyshed.
But what are these, that fle here lyke the cloudes, Ꟶ as the doues flyenge to theyr wyndowes?
The Iles also shall wayte for me, Ꟶ specially the shyppes of Tharsis: that they maye brynge thy sonnes from farre, Ꟶ theyr syluer Ꟶ their golde with them, vnto the name of the Lorde thy God, vnto the holy one of Israel, that hath glorifyed the.
Straungers shall buylde vp thy walles, Ꟶ theyr kynges shall do the seruyce. For when I was angrie, I smote the: and of my mercye, I pardoned the:
Thy gates shall stande open styll both daye and nyght, and neuer be shut: that the hooste of the Gentiles maye come, and that theyr kinges maye be brought vnto the.
For euery people and kyngdome that serueth not the, shall perysh, Ꟶ be distroyed wt vtter destructyon.
The glory of libanus shall come vnto the. The Fyrre trees, Boxes and Cedres together, to garnyshe the place of my Sanctuary, for I wyll glorifye the place of my fete.
Moreouer, those shall come knelyng vnto the, that haue vexed the: and all they that despysed the, shall fall downe at thy fote. Thou shalt be called the cytie of the Lorde, Sion the cytie of the holy one of Israel.
Because thou hast bene forsaken and hated, so that noman went thorowe the: I wyll make the gloryous for euer and euer, and ioyful thorow out all posterities:
Thou shalt sucke the mylck of the Gentiles, and kynges brestes shall fede the. And thou shalt know, that I the Lorde am thy Sauyoure and redemer, the myghty one of Iacob.
For brasse, wyll I geue the golde, and for yron syluer: for wod brasse, Ꟶ for stones yron. I will torne thyne oppressyon into peace, Ꟶ thyne exactyons into ryghteousnes.
Uiolence and robbery shall neuer be hearde of in thy lande, nether harme and destruccyon with in thy borders. Thy walles shalbe called health, and thy gates the prayse of God.
The Sunne shall neuer be thy daye lyght, and the lyght of the Moone shall neuer shyne vnto the: but the Lorde him selfe shalbe thyne euerlastyng lyght, and thy God shalbe thy glory.
Thy Sunne shall neuer go downe, and thy Moone shall not be hydde, for the Lorde hym selfe shalbe thy euerlastynge lyght, and thy sorowfull dayes shalbe ended.
Thy people shalbe all ryghteous, and possesse the lande euer: the floure of my plantynge, the worke of my handes, wherof I wyll reioyce.
Thy yongest and leest shall growe in to a thousande, and the symplest in to a stronge people. I the Lorde shall shortly bringe this thinge to passe in his tyme.
The sprete of the Lorde God is vpon me, for the Lorde hath anoynted me, and sent me, to preach good tydynges vnto the poore, that I myght bynde vp the wounded hertes, that I myght preach delyueraunce to the captyue, and open the preson to them that are bounde:
that I myght declare the acceptable yeare of the Lorde, and the daye of the vengeaunce of oure God: that I myght comforte all them that are in heuynesse,
that I myght geue vnto them that mourne in Sion, that I myght geue I saye, bewty in the steade of ashes, ioyfull oyntement for syghthinge, pleasaunt rayment for an heuy mynde: That they myght be called trees of ryghteousnesse, a plantynge of the Lorde for hym to reioyce in.
They shall buylde the longe rough wyldernes, Ꟶ sett vp the olde deserte. They shall repayre the waste places, Ꟶ soch as haue bene voyde thorowe out many generacyons.
Straungers shall stande and fede youre catel, and the Aleauntes shalbe youre plowmen Ꟶ dressers of youre vynes.
But ye shalbe named the prestes of the Lorde, and men shall call you the seruauntes of oure God. Ye shall enioye the goodes of the Gentiles, and triumphe in their substaunce.
For youre greate reprofe youe shall haue double ioye, and for shame, shalt they haue ioye of their porcyon. For they shall haue double possession in their lande, and euerlastynge ioye shalbe with them.
For I the Lorde, which loue ryght and hate robbery (though it were offred me) shall make theyr workes full of faythfulnes Ꟶ make an euerlastinge couenaunt with them.
Their sede also and their generacion shalbe knowen amonge the Gentiles, and amonge the people. All they that se them, shall knowe that they are the hye blessed sede of the Lord.
And therfore I am ioyfull in the Lorde, Ꟶ my soule reioyseth in my God. For he hath put vpon me the garment of saluacion, Ꟶ couered me with the mantle of ryghteousnes. He shall decke me lyke a brydegrome, and as a bride that hath hyr apparell vpon her.
For lyke as the grounde bryngeth forth frute, Ꟶ as the garden shoteth forth sede: So shall the Lord God cause righteousnes, and prayse to God to florysh forth, before all the Heathen.
For Sions sake therfore wyll I not holde my tunge, and for Ierusalems sake I will not ceasse: vntyll their righteousnes breake forth as the shynynge lyght, and their saluacyon as a burnynge lampe.
Then shall the Gentiles se thy ryghteousnes, and all kynges thy glory. Thou shalt be named with a newe name, which the mouth of the Lord shall shewe.
Thou shalt be a crowne in the hande of the Lorde, and a gloryous garlande in the hande of thy God.
From thys tyme forth thou shalt neuer be called the forsaken, and thy lande shall nomore be called the wildernesse. But thou shalt be called: My pleasure is in her, Ꟶ thy lande shalbe called: the maryed woman: for the Lord loueth the, Ꟶ thy lande shalbe ioyned in mariage.
And lyke as a yonge man taketh a daughter to mariage, so shall thy sonnes be maryed vnto the. And as a bryde grome is glad of hys bryde, so shall thy God reioyse ouer the.
I haue set watchmen vpon thy walles (O Ierusalem) which shall nether ceasse daye nor night to preache the Lorde. And ye also that remembre the Lorde ye shall not kepe him close,
nor leaue to speake of him, vntyll Ierusalem be sett vp, Ꟶ made the prayse of the worlde.
The Lord hath sworne by his right hande Ꟶ by his stronge arme, that from hence forth he wyll not geue thy corne to be meate for thyne enemyes, ner thy vyne (wherin thou hast laboured) to be drincke for the straungers.
But they that haue gathered in the corne, shall eate it, Ꟶ geue thanckes to the Lord: Ꟶ they that haue borne in the wyne, shall drinck it in the court of my Sanctuary.
Go you, go you thorowe the gatis, make cleane the way, make playne, make playne the fote pathe, Ꟶ take awaye the stones, out of yt Ꟶ set out a token for the people.
Beholde, the Lord proclameth vnto the endes of the worlde: tell the daughter Syon: se, thy sauyour commeth, beholde, he bringeth his treasure with him, Ꟶ his worckes go before him.
For they whom the Lord delyuereth, shalbe called the holy people: Ꟶ as for the: thou shalt be named the greatlye occupyed, Ꟶ not the forsaken cytie:
What is he thys, that cometh from Edom, wt redd coloured clothes of Bosra: (which is so costly cloth) Ꟶ cometh in so myghtylye wt all his strength. I am he that teacheth ryghtuousnes, Ꟶ am of power to helpe.
Wherfore then is thy clothynge read, Ꟶ thy rayment lyke his that treadeth in the wyne presse?
I haue troaden the presse my selfe alone, and of all people there is not one with me. Thus wyll I treade downe myne enemyes in my wrath, and set my fete vpon them in my indignacyon. And their bloude shalbe spronge vpon my cloothes, and so wyll I stayne all my rayment.
For the daye of vengeaunce is assigned in my hert, Ꟶ the yeare when my people shall be delyuered, is come.
I loked aboute me, and there was no man to shewe me eny helpe, I maruayled that no man helde me vp. Then I helde me by myne awne arme, Ꟶ my feruentnesse susteyned me.
And thus will I treade downe the people in my wrath, Ꟶ bathe them in my displeasure: and vpon the earth will I laye their strength.
I will declare the goodnesse of the Lord, ye and the prayse of the Lorde for all that he hath geuen vs, for the greate good that he hath done for Israell: which he hath gyuen them of his awne fauoure, Ꟶ accordynge to the multitude of his louynge kindnesses.
For he sayde: These no doute are my people, Ꟶ no shrinkynge chyldren, and so he was their sauyoure.
In their troubles he was also troubled wt them, and the angell that went forth from hys presence, delyuered them: Of very loue Ꟶ kyndnesse that he had vnto them, redemed he them. He hath borne them, and caryed them vp euer, sence the worlde beganne.
But after they prouoked him to wrath Ꟶ vexed his holy mynde he was their enemye, Ꟶ fought agaynst them him selfe.
Yet remembred Israell the olde tyme of Moses Ꟶ his people. sayinge wher is he that brought them from the water of the see, with them that fead his shepe? where is he that hath geuen his holy sprete amonge them?
he ledd them by the ryght hande of Moses with hys glorious arme: deuidinge the water before them (wherby he gat him selfe an euerlastinge name)
he led them in the depe, as an horse is led in the playne, that they shulde not stomble,
as a tame beast goeth in the felde: and the breath gyuen of God gyueth him rest. Thus (O God) hast thou led thy people, to make thy selfe a glorious name with all.
Loke downe then from heauen, Ꟶ beholde the dwellynge place of thy sanctuary Ꟶ thy glory. Howe is it, that thy gelousy, thy strength, the multitude of thy mercyes Ꟶ thy louynge kyndnesse, wyll not be entreated of vs?
Yet art thou our father. For Abraham knoweth vs not, nether is Israel acquaynted wt vs. But thou Lorde art our father Ꟶ redemer, Ꟶ thy name is euerlastynge.
O Lorde, wherfore hast thou led vs out of thy waye: Wherfore hast thou hardened our hertes, that we feare the not? Be at one wt vs agayne, for thy seruauntes sake and for the generacyon of thyne herytage.
Thy people hath had but lytle of thy Sanctuary in possessyon, for oure enemyes haue troden downe the holy place.
And we were thyne from the begynnynge: when thou wast not their Lorde, for they haue not called vpon thy name.
O that thou woldest cleue the heauen in sonder, Ꟶ come downe: that the mountaynes myght melte awaye at thy presence,
lyke as at an hote fyre: Ꟶ that the malicyous myght boyle, as the water doth vpon the fyre: Wherby thy name myght be knowne amonge thyne enemyes, Ꟶ that the Gentyls myght tremble before the.
When thou wroughtest wonderous straunge worckes, we loked not for them. Thou cammest downe and the hylles melt at thy presence.
For sence the begynnynge of the worlde it hath not bene hearde or perceaued, nether hath any eye sene another God besyde the: which dost so moche for them, that put their trust in the.
Thou helpest him that doth ryght wyth cherefulnesse, Ꟶ them that thyncke vpon thy wayes. But lo, thou hast bene angrye, for we offended Ꟶ haue bene euer in synne, yet shall we be saued.
We are all as an vnclene thynge, Ꟶ all oure ryghteousnes are as the clothes stayned with the floures of a woman: we fall euerychone as the leafe, for oure synnes cary vs awaye lyke the wynde.
There is no man that calleth vpon thy name, that standeth vp to take holde by the. Therfore hydest thou thy face from vs, and consumest vs, because of oure synnes.
But nowe O Lorde, thou father of oures: we are the claye, Ꟶ thou art oure potter, Ꟶ we all are the worcke of thy handes.
Be not to sore dyspleased (O Lorde) Ꟶ kepe not oure offences to longe in thy remembraunce, but consydre that we all are thy people.
The cyties of thy Sanctuary lye waste. Syon is a wyldernesse, and Ierusalem a desert.
Oure holy house which is oure bewty, where oure fathers praysed the, is brent vp: ye, all oure commodities Ꟶ pleasures are wasted awaye.
Wylt thou not be intreated (Lorde) for all this? Wylt thou holde thy peace, and scourge vs so sore?
They seke me, that hytherto haue not asked for me: they fynde me, that hyther to haue not sought me. I haue sayde I am here, I am here. I am founde of a people that neuer called vpon my name.
For thus longe haue I euer holden out my handes to an vnfaythfull people, that go not the ryght waye, but after their awne ymaginacyons:
To a people that is euer defyinge me to my face. They make their oblacyons in gardens, and their smoke vpon aulters of brycke,
they lurcke amonge the graues, and lye in the dennes all nyght. They eat swynes fleshe, Ꟶ vncleane broth is in their vessels.
If thou comest nye them, they saye touch me not, for I am holyer then thou All these men when I am angry, shalbe turned to smoke Ꟶ fyre, that shall burne for euer.
Beholde it is wryten before my face, Ꟶ shall not be forgotten, but recompensed. I shall rewarde it them into their bosome:
I meane youre mysdedes, and the mysdedes of youre fathers together (sayeth the Lorde) which haue made their smokes vpon the mountaynes, and blasphemed me vpon the hylles: therfore will I measure their olde dedes into their bosome againe.
Moreouer, thus sayeth the Lorde: lyke as when one wolde gather holy grapes, men saye vnto hym: breake it not of for it is holy: euen so wyll I do also for my seruauntes sakes, that I wyll not destroye them all.
But I wyll take a sede out of Iacob, Ꟶ out of Iuda one, to take possession of my hyll. My chosen shall possesse these thinges, Ꟶ my seruauntes shall dwell there.
Saron shalbe a shepefolde, Ꟶ the valley of Achor shall geue the stallynge for the catell of my people, that feare me.
But as for you, ye are they that haue forsaken the Lord, and forgotten my holy hill. Ye haue set vp an aulter vnto Iuppiter, Ꟶ geuen rych dryncke offerynges vnto the planettes.
Therfore wyll I nombre you with the swerde, that ye shall be destroyed all together. For when I called, no man gaue me answere: when I spake, ye herkened not vnto me, but dyd wyckednes before myne eyes, and chose the thynge that pleased me not:
Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde God: Beholde, my seruauntes shall eate, but ye shall haue honger: Beholde, my seruauntes shall dryncke, but ye shall suffre thurste. Beholde, my seruauntes shall be mery, but ye shall be confounded.
Beholde, my seruauntes shall reioyce for very quyetnesse of herte: But ye shall crye for sorowe of hert, and complayne for vexacyon of mynde.
Youre name shall you leaue accursed amonge my chosen, for God the Lorde shall slaye you, and call his seruauntes by another name.
Who so reioyseth vpon earth, shall reioyse in the true God. And who so sweareth vpon earth, shall sweare in the true God. For the olde enmyte shalbe forgotten, and taken awaye oute of my syght.
For lo, I shall make a newe heauen, and a newe earth. And as for the olde, they shall neuer be thought vpon, ner kepte in mynde:
but the Lorde sayth be glad and euermore reioyse, for the thynges, that I shall do. For why: Beholde, I shall make a ioyfull Ierusalem, and his people ioyfull,
yee, I my selfe will reioyse wyth Ierusalem, Ꟶ be glad wt my people. And the voyce of wepynge and waylinge shall not be herde in her from thence forth.
There shall nether be chylde ner olde man, that haue not their full dayes. But when the chylde commeth to an hondreth yeare olde, it shall dye. And yf he that is an hundreth yeare of age do wronge, he shalbe cursed.
They shall buylde houses, Ꟶ dwell in them: they shall plante vyneyardes, Ꟶ eate the frute of them.
They shall not buylde, and another possesse: they shall not plant and another eate: But the lyfe of my people shalbe lyke a tre, and so shall the worcke of their handes.
My chosen shall lyue longe, they shall not laboure in vayne, ner begett wyth trouble: for they are the hye blessed sede of the Lorde, and their frutes with them.
And it shalbe, that or euer they call, I shall answere them. Whyle they are yet but thinckynge howe to speake, I shall heare them.
The wolff and the lambe shall fede together, and the lyon shall eate haye lyke the bullock. But earth shalbe the serpentes meate. There shall no man hurte ner slaye another, in all my holy hyll, sayeth the Lorde.
Thus sayeth the Lorde: Heauen is my seate, Ꟶ the earth is my fote stole. Where shall nowe the house stande, that ye wyll buylde vnto me? And where shall be the place, that I wyll dwell in?
As for these thynges, my hande hath made them all, Ꟶ they are all created, sayeth the Lorde. Whych of them shall I then regarde? Euen him that is pore and of a lowly troubled sprete, Ꟶ standeth in awe of my wordes.
For who so slayeth an oxe for me, doth me so greate dishonoure, as he that kylleth a man. He that kylleth a shepe for me, knetcheth a dogge. He that bryngeth me meatoffrynges, offreth swynes bloude: Who so maketh me a memoryall of incense, prayseth the thynge that is vnryght. Yet take they soch wayes in hande, and their soule delyteth in these abhominacyons.
Therfore wyll I also haue pleasure in laughynge them to scorne, and the thynge that they feare, wyll I brynge vpon them. For when I called, no man gaue answere: when I spake, they wolde not heare: But did wickednesse before myne eyes, and chose the thynges that displease me.
Heare the worde of God all ye that feare the thynge which he speaketh. Youre brethren that hate you, and cast you out for my names sake, saye: The Lorde is haynouse against vs, but you shall se him in ioye when they shalbe confounded.
Then shall be heard agret noyse from the cytie and the temple, the voyce of the Lorde, that wyll rewarde, Ꟶ recompence his enemyes:
lyke as when a wyfe bringeth forth a man chylde, or euer she suffre the payne of the byrth Ꟶ anguyshe of the trauayle.
Who euer hearde or sawe soche thynges? doth the grounde beare in one daye? or are the people borne all at once, as Syon traueyled in childe byrth and bare her sonnes?
For thus sayeth the Lorde. Am I he that maketh other to beare, and beare not my selfe? Am not I he that beareth and maketh baren? sayeth thy God.
Reioyse with Ierusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that loue her. Be ioyfull with her, all ye that mourned for her.
For ye shall sucke comforte out of her brestes, and be satisfyed. Ye shall taste, and haue delyte in the plenteousnesse of her power.
For thus sayeth the Lord: beholde, I wyll lett peace into her, lyke a water floude, and the myght of the Heythen lyke a flowynge streame. Then shall ye sucke, ye shall be borne vpon her sydes, and be ioyfull vpon her knees.
For lyke as a chylde is comforted of his mother, so shall I comforte you, and ye shalbe comforted in Ierusalem.
And when ye se thys, youre herte shall reioyse and youre bones shall floryshe lyke an herbe. Thus shall the hande of the Lorde be knowne amonge hys seruauntes, and hys indignacyon amonge hys enemyes.
For beholde, the Lorde shall come with fyre, Ꟶ hys charet shall be lyke a whorle wynde, that he maye recompence his vengeaunce in his wrath and hys indignacyon with the flame of fyre.
For the Lorde shall iudge all flesh wyth the fyre and with his swerde, and there shalbe a greate nombre slayne of the Lorde.
Soch as haue made them selues holy and cleane in the gardens, Ꟶ those that haue eaten swynes flesh, myce, and other abhominacyons, shalbe taken awaye together, sayeth the Lorde.
For I wyll come to gather all people Ꟶ tonges with their workes and ymaginacyons: these shall come, and se my glory.
Unto them shall I geue a token, and sende certayne of them (that be delyuered) amonge the Gentiles: into Cilycia, Affryca, and Lydia (where men can handle bowes) into Italye and also Greke lande. The Iles farre of, that haue not herde speake of me, and haue not sene my glory, shall preache my prayse amonge the Gentiles,
and shall brynge all youre brethren for an offrynge vnto the Lorde, out of all the people, vpon horses, charrettes and horse lytters, vpon Mules and cartes to Ierusalem my holy hyll (sayeth the Lorde) lyke as the chyldre of Israel brynge the offrynge in cleane vessels, to the house of the Lorde.
And I shall take out certayne of them for to be prestes and leuites, sayeth the Lorde.
For lyke as the newe heauen and the newe earth which I wyll make, shalbe fast stablisshed by me: (sayeth the Lorde) So shall youre sede and youre name contynue,
and there shalbe a newe Moone for the other, and a newe Sabbath for the other, and all fleshe shall come to worshippe before me (sayeth the Lorde)
And they shall go forth and loke vpon the caryons of them that haue transgressed agaynst me. For their wormes shall not dye, nether shall their fyre be quenched, Ꟶ all flesh shall abhorre them.
These are the Sermons of Ieremy the sonne of Helkiah the Preste, one of them that dwelt at Anathoth in the lande of Ben Iamin:
when the Lorde had fyrst spoken with him, in the tyme of Iosiah the sonne of Amon kynge of Iuda, in the .xiij. yeare of his reygne:
and so durynge vnto the tyme of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosiah kynge of Iuda, and vntyll the .xi. yeare of zedekiah the sonne of Iosiah kynge of Iuda were ended: when Ierusalem was taken, euen in the fyfth Moneth.
The worde of the Lorde spake thus vnto me:
Before I fasshioned the in thy mothers wombe, I dyd knowe the. And or euer thou wast borne, I sanctifyed the, and ordeyned the, to be a prophete vnto the people.
Then sayde I: Oh Lorde God, I canne not speake, for I am yet but younge.
And the Lorde answered me thus: Saye not so, I am to younge: For thou shalt goo to all that I shall sende the vnto, and whatsoeuer I commaunde the, that shalt thou speake.
Be not afrayed of their faces, for I am with the, to delyuer the, sayeth the Lorde.
And with that, the Lorde stretched oute his hande, and touched my mouth, Ꟶ the same lorde sayde vnto me. Behold, I put my wordes in thy mouth,
and beholde thys daye do I set the ouer the people Ꟶ kyngdomes: that thou mayest rote out, breake of, destroye, Ꟶ make waste: and that thou mayest buylde vp Ꟶ plante.
After this, the Lorde spake vnto me sayinge: Ieremy, what seyst thou? And I sayde: I se a rodde of an almond tree.
Then sayde the Lorde vnto me: thou hast sene right, for I wyll make haste spedelye vpon my worde, to perfourme it.
It happened afterwarde, that the Lorde spake to me agayne, and sayde: What seest thou? And I sayde: I do se a seethynge pot, lokynge from out of the north.
Then sayde the Lorde vnto me: Out of the north shall come a plage vpon all the dwellers of the lande.
For lo I wyll call all the kinredes of the kyngdomes of the north (sayeth the Lorde.) And they shall come, Ꟶ euery one shall sett his seate in the gates of Ierusalem, and in all their walles rounde aboute Ꟶ in all cyties of Iuda.
And thorowe them shall I declare my iudgement, vpon all the wyckednesse of those men that haue forsaken me: that haue burnt incense vnto straunge goddes, Ꟶ worshypped the workes of there awne handes.
And therfore girde vp thy loynes, aryse, and tell them all, that I geue the in commaundement. Feare them not, lest I destroye the before them.
For beholde, this daye do I make the a stronge fensed towne, an yron pyler, and a brasen wall agaynst the whole lande, agaynst the kynges and myghtye men of Iuda, agaynst the prestes and people of the lande.
They shall fyght agaynst the: but they shall not be able to ouercomme the for I am wyth the, to delyuer the, sayeth the Lorde.
Moreouer, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me sayinge:
Go thy waye, crye in the eares of Ierusalem, Ꟶ saye: Thus sayeth the Lord: I remembre the, for the kyndenesse of thy youth, and because of thy stedfast loue: at the tyme of thy despousynge, in that thou folowdest me thorowe the wyldernesse, in an vntylled lande.
Israel was an halowed thynge vnto the Lorde, and so was his fyrst frutes. All they that deuoure Israel shall offende: mysfortune shall fall vpon them, sayeth the Lorde.
Heare therfore the worde of the Lorde, O thou house of Iacob, and all the generacyons of the house of Israel.
Thus sayeth the Lorde. What vnfaythfulnesse founde youre fathers in me, that they wente so farre awaye fro me, fallynge to lightnesse, and beynge so vayne?
They thought not in their hertes. Where haue we left the Lorde, that brought vs oute of the lande of Egypte that led vs thorowe the wildernesse, thorowe a deserte Ꟶ rough lande, thorowe a drye and a deedly lande, yee, a lande that no man had gone thorowe, and wherin no man had dwelt.
And when I had brought you into a pleasaunt welbuylded lande, that ye myght enioye the frutes and all the commodyties of the same: ye went forth and defyled my lande, Ꟶ brought myne herytage to abhominacyon.
The Prestes them selues sayde not: Where is the Lorde? They that had the lawe in theyr handes, knewe me not: The shepherdes offended agaynst me. The prophetes dyd seruyce vnto Baal, Ꟶ folowed soch thynges as shall brynge them no profyt.
Wherfore, I am constrayned (sayeth the Lord) to make my complaynte vpon you, Ꟶ vpon youre childers chyldren.
Go in to the Iles of Cethim, and loke well: sende vnto Cedar, take diligent hede: and se, whether soch thynges be done there,
whether the Gentils them selues deale so falsly and vntruly wt their goddes, (which yet are no goddes in dede) But my people hath geuen ouer their hye honoure, for a thynge that maye not helpe them.
Be astonyshed (O ye heauens) be afrayde, Ꟶ abashed at soch a thinge, sayeth the Lorde.
For my people hath done two euels. They haue forsaken me the well of the water of lyfe, and dygged them pyttes, yee vyle and broken pyttes, that can holde no water.
Is Israel a bonde seruaunt, or one of the housholde? Why then is he so spoyled?
Why do they roare and crye then vpon him, as a lyon? They haue made his lande waste, hys cyties are so brent vp, that there is no man dwellynge in them.
Yee, the chyldren of Noph and Taphnes haue defyled thy neck.
Commeth not this vnto the, because thou hast forsaken the Lorde thy God, euer sence he led the by the waye?
And what hast thou now to do in the strete of Egypte? to drincke the water of Nilus? Ether, what makest thou in the waye of Assyria? To dryncke water of the floude?
Thyne awne wickednesse shall reproue the, Ꟶ thy turnynge awaye shall condemne the: that thou mayest knowe Ꟶ vnderstande: howe euell and hurtfull a thynge it is, that thou hast forsaken the Lorde thy God, Ꟶ not feared him, sayeth the Lorde God of Hostes.
I haue euer broken thy yock of olde, Ꟶ burste thy bondes: yet sayest thou, I wyll nomore offend, but (lyke an harlot) thou runnest about vpon all hye hilles, Ꟶ amonge all grene trees,
where as I planted the as a noble vyne, Ꟶ a good rote whose seed is all faithfull. How art thou turned then in to a bytter, vnfrutefull, Ꟶ straunge grape?
Yee, Ꟶ that so sore: that though thou washe the wt Nitrus Ꟶ make thy selfe to sauoure with that swete smellinge herbe of Borith: yet in my syght thou art stayned wyth thy wyckednesse, sayeth the Lorde thy God.
Saye not nowe: I am not vnclene, and I haue not folowed Baal. Loke vpon thyne awne wayes in the woddes, valleys and dennes: so shalt thou knowe, what thou hast done. Thou art lyke a swyft Dromedary, that goeth easely his waye:
and thy wantonnes is lyke a wylde Asse, that vseth the wyldernesse, and that snoffeth and bloweth at his wyll. Who can tame the? All they that seke the shall not fayle, but fynde the in thyne awne vnclennes
Kepe thou thy fote from nakednes, and thy throte from thyrste, and without shame thou answerest. No, for I haue loued straungers and them will I folowe.
Lyke as a thefe that is taken with the dede commeth to shame, euen so is the house of Israel come to confusion: the comen people, their kynges and rulers, their prestes Ꟶ prophetes.
For they saye to a stocke, thou art my father, and to a stone: thou hast begotten me yee, they haue turned their backe vpon me, Ꟶ not their face. But in the tyme of their trouble, when they saye: stande vp, and helpe vs,
I shall answere them: Where are nowe thy goddes, that thou hast made the? lett them stande vp, Ꟶ helpe the in the tyme of nede? yf they be able. For loke howe many cyties thou hast (O Iuda) so many goddes hast thou also.
Wherfore then will ye goo to lawe with me, seynge yee all are synners agaynst me, sayeth the Lorde?
It is but lost laboure, that I smyte youre chyldren, for they receaue not my correccion. Youre awne swearde destroyeth youre prophetes, lyke a deuouringe lyon.
O ye people, loke vpon the worde of the Lorde. Am I then become a wyldernesse vnto the people of Israel? or a lande that hath no lyght? Wherfore sayeth my people then: we are Lordes, we will come no more vnto the?
Doth a mayden forget her rayment, or a bryde her stomacher? But as for my people they haue forget me, dayes innumerable.
Why boastest thou thy wayes so hylie (to optayne fauoure there thorowe) when thou hast yet stayned them with blasphemyes? and teachest thyne awne wayes.
Upon thy wynges is founde the bloude of poore and innocent people, Ꟶ that not in corners Ꟶ holes only, but openly in all these places.
Yet darest thou saye: I am gyltlesse. Tush, his wrath can not come vpon me. Beholde, I condempne the in iudgement, because thou darest saye: I haue not offended.
And why runnest thou so often to and fro, to chaunge thy wayes? For thou shalt be confounded, as well of Egypte, as of the Assyrians:
yee, thou shalt go thy waye from them, and smyte thyne handes together vpon thy head. Because the Lorde doth abhorre that confydence and hope of thyne, and thou shalt not prospere with all.
Comenly, when a man putteth awaye his wyfe, and she goeth from him Ꟶ marieth with another, then the questyon is: shulde he resorte vnto her eny more after that? Is not this felde then defyled and vncleane? But as for the, thou hast played the harlot with many louers, yet turne agayne to me, sayeth the Lorde.
Lyft vp thyne eyes vnto the hilaulters Ꟶ loke, yf thou be not defyled with whoredome. Thou hast wayted for them in the stretes, and as a murtherer in the wyldernesse. Thorowe thy whordome Ꟶ shamefull blasphemyes, is the lande defyled.
This is the cause, that the rayne Ꟶ eueninge dewe hath ceased. Thou hast gotten the an whores forehead, and wilt not be ashamed.
Els woldest thou saye vnto me: O my father, thou art he that hast brought me vp, Ꟶ led me fro my youth:
Wylt thou then put me awaye, Ꟶ cast me of for euer? Or wilt thou withdrawe thy selfe cleane fro me? Neuertheles, thou speakest soch wordes, but thou art euer doinge worse and worse.
The Lorde sayde also vnto me: in the tyme of Iosiah the kynge: Hast thou sene what that rebellyon Israel hath done? howe she hath runne vp vpon all the hylles, and amonge all thick trees, and there played the harlot.
hast thou sene also (when she had done all thys) howe I sayde vnto her: that she shulde turne agayne vnto me, Ꟶ yet she is not returned? Iuda that vnfaythfull syster of hers also sawe thys:
Namely, that after I had well sene the aduoutrye of the shrynckyng harlot Israel, I put her awaye, and gaue her a byll of deuorcement. For all this, her vnfaythfull syster Iuda was not ashamed, but went backe Ꟶ played the whore also:
Yee, and the noyse of her whordome hath defyled the whole lande. For she hath commytted fornycacyon wyth stones and stockes.
Neuerthelesse, her vnfaythfull syster Iuda is not turned vnto me agayne wyth her whole herte, but faynedly, sayeth the Lorde.
And the Lorde sayde vnto me: The backslyder Israell is more ryghtuous, then the vnfaythfull Iuda:
Ꟶ therfore go preache these wordes towarde the north, and saye: Thou disobedient Israell, turne agayne (sayeth the Lorde) Ꟶ I wyll not let my wrathe fall vpon you, for I am mercyfull (sayeth the Lorde) Ꟶ I wyll not alwaye beare displeasure agaynst the:
but this I will, that thou knowe thy greate blasphemy: Namely, that thou hast vnfaythfully forsaken the Lorde thy God, Ꟶ hast made thy selfe partake of straunge Goddes vnder all grene trees, but hast had no wyll to heare my voyce, sayeth the Lorde.
O ye disobedient chyldren, turne agayne sayeth the Lorde: Ꟶ I wyll be maryed wyth you. For I wyll take one out of the cytie, Ꟶ two out of one generacyon, from amonge you, and brynge you in to Syon:
and wyll geue you herdmen after myne awne mynde, which shall fede you with learnynge and wysdome.
Moreouer, when ye be increased and multiplyed in the lande, then (sayeth the Lorde) there shall no more boast be made of the arcke of the Lordes testament: No man shall thinke vpon it, nether shall any man make mencyon of it: for from thence forth it shall nether be vysyted, ner honoured with gyftes.
Then shall Ierusalem be called the Lordes seate, Ꟶ all Heathen shalbe gathered vnto it, for the name of the Lordes sake, which shalbe set vp at Ierusalem. And from the tyme forth, they shall folowe no more the ymaginacyon of their awne frowarde herte.
Then those that be of the house of Iuda, shall go vnto the house of Israell: Ꟶ they shall come together out of the North, into the same lande that I haue geuen your fathers.
I haue shewed also, howe I toke the vp beynge but a childe Ꟶ gaue the a pleasaunt lande for thyne herytage, yee, Ꟶ a goodly Hoste of the Heathen, Ꟶ howe I commaunded the, that thou shuldest call me father only, and not to shryncke fro me.
But lyke as a woman vnfaythfully fayleth her husbande, so are ye vnfaythfull vnto me (O ye house of Israel) sayeth the Lorde.
And therfore the voyce of the chyldren of Israel was herde on hye, wepinge and waylinge: for they haue defyled their waye, and forgotten God their Lorde.
O ye disobedient chyldren, turne agayne (sayinge: lo, we are thyne, for thou art the Lorde oure God:) And so shall I heale youre backturninges.
Truly vaynly trusteth he for helth that loketh for it in the hylles and in vayne is it sought in the multitude of the mountaynes, but the health of Israell standeth only vpon God oure Lorde.
Confusyon hath deuoured oure fathers laboure from oure youth vp: yee, their shepe and bullockes, their sonnes and daughters.
So do we also slepe in oure confusyon, and shame couereth vs: for we Ꟶ oure fathers from oure youth vp vnto this daye haue synned agaynst the Lorde oure God, and haue not obeyed the voyce of the Lorde oure God.
O Israel, yf thou wylt turne the, then turne vnto me, sayeth the Lorde. And yf thou wylt put awaye thyne abhominacyons out of my syght, thou shalt not be moued:
And shalt sweare: The Lord lyueth: in trueth, in equyte and ryghteousnesse: and all people shall be fortunable Ꟶ ioyfull in him.
For thus sayeth the Lorde, to all Iuda Ꟶ Ierusalem: plowe your lande, and sowe not amonge the thornes.
Be circumcysed in the Lorde, and cut awaye the foreskynne of youre hertes, all yee of Iuda, and all the indwellers of Ierusalem: that my indignacyon breake not out lyke fyre and kyndle, so that no man maye quench it, because of the wyckednes of youre ymaginacyons.
Preach in Iuda and Ierusalem, crye out and speake: blowe the trompettes in the lande, crye that euery man maye heare gather together, Ꟶ saye: Gather you together, and we will go into stronge cyties.
Set vp the token in Syon, spede you, and make no tarienge: for I wyll bringe a greate plage, and a greate destruccyon from the north.
For the spoyler of the Gentyles is broken vp from his place, as a lyon out of his denne, that he maye make thy lande waste, and destroy the cyties, so that no man maye dwel therin.
Wherfore, gyrd your selues aboute with sacke clothe, mourne, and wepe, for the fearful wrath of the Lord is not withdrawen from vs.
At the same tyme (sayth the Lorde) the herte of the kynge and of the princes shall be gone, the preastes shalbe astonisshed, and the Prophetes shalbe sore afrayed.
Then sayd I: O Lorde God, hast thou then disceyued this people and Ierusalem, saying: ye shal haue peace, and nowe the swearde goeth thorowe theyr lyues:
Then shall it be sayde to the people Ꟶ Ierusalem: a stronge wynde in the hye places of the wyldernesse commeth thorow the waye of my people, but neyther to fan, nor to cleanse.
After that, shall there come vnto me a stronge wynde from those places, and then wyll I also gyue sentence vpon them.
For lo, he commeth downe lyke as a cloude, and his charrettes are lyke a stormye wynde: His horsemen are swyfter then the Egle. Woo vnto vs, for we are destroyed.
O Ierusalem, wash thyne hert from wickednesse, that thou mayest be helped. How long shal thy noysom thoughtes remayne with the?
For a voyce from Dan and from the hyl of Ephraim speaketh out, and telleth of a destruction.
Remembre the Heythen, and gyue Ierusalem warnyng, and preache vnto her, that watchers ouer her are commyng from far countryes. They haue cryed out agaynst the cities of Iuda.
And they haue beset her aboute in euery place lyke as the watchmen in the feld: For they haue prouoked me to wrath, sayth the Lorde.
Thy wayes and thy thoughtes, haue brought the vnto this, suche is thyne owne wyckednesse and disobedyence: and bycause it is a bytter thing, it hath striken the to the hert
Ah my bely, ah my bely, (shalt thou cry) how is my hert so sore? my hert panteth within me: I cannot be styll, for I haue herde the crying of the trompettes, and peales of warre.
They crye: murther vpon murther, the hole lande shal perish. Immediatlye, my tentes were destroyed, and my hangynges in the twynkelynge of an eye.
How longe shall I se the tokens of warre, and heare the noyse of the trompettes?
Neuerthelesse, this shall come vpon them, bycause my people is become foolysshe, and hath not knowen me. They are the children of foolysshnesse, and without any discretion. To doo euyll, they haue wyt ynoughe: but to doo well, they haue no wysdome.
I haue loked vpon the erth, and se: it was waste and voyde. I loked towarde heauen, and it had no shyne.
I behelde the mountaynes, and lo, they trembled, and all the hylles were in a feare.
I loked aboute me, and there was no bodye, and all the byrdes of the ayre were awaye.
I marked wel, and the plowed felde was become waste: yea, all theyr cyties were broken downe at the presence of the Lorde, and indignacion of his wrath.
For thus hath the Lorde sayd: The whole lande shalbe desolate, yet wil I not then haue done.
And therfore, shall the earth mourne, Ꟶ the heauen be sory aboue: for the thynge that I haue spoken to the Prophetes purposed and taken vpon me to do, shall not repent me, and I wil not go from it.
The hole lande shall flye, for the noyse of the horsemen and bowemen: they shal runne into tentes, into woddes, and clyme vp the stonye rockes. All the cyties shall be voyde, and noman dwellyng therin.
What wylt thou now do, thou beinge destroyed? For though thou clothest thy selfe with scarlet, Ꟶ deckest the wt golde: though thou payntest thy face with colours now, yet shalt thou trym thy selfe in vayne. For those that hytherto haue bene thy greate fauourers, shall abhorre the, and goo about to slaye the.
For I heare a noyse, lyke as it were of a woman trauaylynge, or one labourynge of her fyrst chylde: Euen the voyse of the doughter Syon, that casteth out her armes. and swowneth, saying: Ah woo is me, how sore vexed and faint is my hert, for feare of the murtherers?
Loke thorowe Ierusalem, beholde and se: Seke thorowe her stretes also within, if ye can fynde one man that doeth equall and ryght, or seketh for the truthe, and I shall spare that cytie (sayeth the Lorde)
For though they can saye: the Lorde lyueth, yet they sweare to disceyue.
Where as thou (O Lord) lokest onely vpon fayth and truthe. Thou hast scourged them, but they toke no repentaunce: thou hast corrected them for amendement, but they refused thy correction. They made theyr faces harder then a stone, and wolde not amende.
Therfore I thought in my selfe: peraduenture they are so symple and foolysshe, that they vnderstand nothing of the Lordes way, and iudgementes of our God.
Therfore, wyll I go vnto theyr heedes Ꟶ rulers, Ꟶ talke with them: yf they knowe the waye of the Lord and the iudgementes of oure God. But these (in lyke maner) haue broken the yocke, and burst the bondes in sondre.
Wherfore, a Lyon out of the woodde hath hurte them, and a wolfe in the euenynge shall destroye them. The Leoparde doth lye lurkynge by theyre cytyes, to teare in peces all them that come thereout. For theyr offences are multyplyed, and theyr departynge awaye is encreased.
Shulde I then for al this haue mercy vpon the? Thy chyldren haue forsaken me, and sworne by them that are no goddes. And albeit that I fed them to the ful yet they fall to aduoutrye, and haunt harlottes houses.
In the desyre of vnclenly lust they are become lyke the stoned horse euery man neyeth at his neyghbours wyfe:
Shulde I not correct this, sayth the Lorde? Shulde I not be auenged of euery people, that is lyke vnto this?
Clyme vp vpon theyr walles, beate them downe, but destroye them not vtterly, take away theyr foretresses, bycause they are not the Lordes:
For vnfaythfully hath the house of Israel and Iuda forsaken me, sayth the Lorde:
They haue denyed the Lorde, and sayde: it is not he that loketh vpon vs Tush, there shal no misfortune come vpon vs: we shall see nether swerde ner hunger.
As for the warnynge of the Prophetes they take it but for wynde, yea, there is none of these whiche wyll tell them, that such thinges shall happen vnto them.
Wherfore, thus sayth the Lorde God of hoostes: bycause ye speake suche wordes, beholde: The wordes that are in thy mouth wyl I turne to fyre, and make the people to be wood, that the fyre maye consume them.
Lo, I wyll bryng a people vpon you from farre, O house of Israel (sayeth the Lorde) a myghty people, an old people, a people whose speach thou knowest not, neyther vnderstandest what they saye.
Theyr arowes are sodayne death: yea, they them selues be verye gyauntes.
This people shal eate vp thy frute Ꟶ thy meate, yea, they shall deuoure thy sonnes Ꟶ thy doughters, thy shepe Ꟶ thy bulockes. They shall eate vp thy grapes, Ꟶ fygges. As for thy strong Ꟶ wel defensed cyties, wherin thou dyddest trust, they shall brynge to pouertie, and that thorowe the swerde.
Neuerthelesse I wyll not then haue done with you, sayth the Lorde.
But yf they saye: wherfore doth the Lorde our God all this vnto vs? Then auswer them: bycause, that lyke as ye haue forsaken me, and serued straunge goddes in your owne lande, euen so shall ye serue other goddes also in a straunge lande.
Preache this vnto the house of Iacob, and crye it out in Iuda, and saye thus:
Heare this (thou folish Ꟶ vndiscret people) ye haue eyes but ye se not: eares haue ye, but ye heare not.
Feare ye not me, sayth the Lorde? Are ye not asshamed to loke me in the face? whiche bynde the see with the sande, so that it cannot passe his boundes. For though it rage, yet can it do nothynge, and thoughe the waues therof do swell, yet maye they not go ouer.
But this people hath a false and obstinate hert, they are departed and gone away fro m
They thynke not in theyr hertes: O let vs feare the Lord our God, that giueth vs rayne earlye and late, when nede is: whiche kepeth euer styll the haruest for vs yerly.
Neuerthelesse, your mysdedes haue turned these from you, and your synnes haue robbed you hereof.
For amonge my people are founde wicked persones, that priuily lay snares Ꟶ wayte for men, to take them Ꟶ destroye them.
And lyke as a net is full of byrdes, so are theyr houses ful of that whiche they haue gotten with falshed and disceyte. Herof commeth theyr great substaunce and richesse,
herof are they fat and welthy, and are more mischeuous then any other. They mynistre not the lawe, they make no ende of the fatherlesse cause, yea, and they prospere: yet they iudge not the poore accordynge to equytie.
Shulde I not punish these thinges, sayth the Lord? shulde not I be auenged of all suche people as these be?
Horryble Ꟶ greuous thynges are done in the lande.
The prophetes teache falsely, and the preestes receyue gyftes, Ꟶ my people hath pleasure therin: What wil come therof at the last?
Come out of Ierusalem, ye stronge chyldren of BenIamin: blowe vp the trompettes ye Tecuytes, set vp a token vnto Bethcaran, for a plage and a greate myserye appeareth out from the North.
I wyll lyken the doughter Sion to a fayre and tendre woman, and to her shall come the shepherdes with theyr flockes.
Theyr tentes shall they pytche rounde about her, and euery one shall fede them that are vnder his hande.
Make battayle agaynst her (shall they saye) Aryse, let vs go vp, whyle it is yet daye. Alas, the daye goeth away, and the night shadowes fall downe:
Aryse: let vs go vp by nyght, Ꟶ destroye her stronge holdes,
for thus hath the Lorde of hoostes commaunded. Hewe downe her trees, and set vp bulworkes agaynst Ierusalem, for the tyme is come that this cytie must be punysshed: for in her is all maliciousnesse.
Lyke as a condyte spouteth oute waters, so she spouteth out her wickednesse. Robberye Ꟶ vnrightousnesse is herde in her sorowe and woundes are euer there in my syght.
Amend the (O Ierusalem) lest I withdrawe my hert from the, Ꟶ make the desolate: Ꟶ thy land also, that noman dwel in it.
For thus saith the Lorde of hoostes. The residue of Israel shalbe gathered, as the remnaunt of grapes. And therfore turne thyne hande agayne into the basket, lyke the grape gatherer.
But vnto whom shall I speake, whom shall I warne that he maye take hede? Their eares are so vncircumcised, that they maye not heare. Beholde, they take the worde of God but for a scorne, Ꟶ haue no lust therto.
And therfore, I am so full of thyne indignacyon, (O Lord) that I maye suffre no longer. But shede it out vpon the chyldren that are without, and vpon all yonge men. Yee, the man must be taken presoner with the wyfe, Ꟶ the aged wyth the crepel.
Theyr houses with theyr landes Ꟶ wyues shallbe turned vnto straungers, when I stretch out myne hande vpon the inhabitatours of this land, sayeth the Lorde.
For from the leest vnto the most, they hange all vpon couetousnesse, Ꟶ from the prophete vnto the prest, they go all aboute with falsheed and lyes.
And besyde that, they heale the hurt of my people with swete wordes, sayeng: peace, peace, when there is no peace at all.
Were they ashamed when they hadd commytted abhomynacyon? Trulye nay they be past shame? And therfore they shall fall amonge the slayne, Ꟶ in the houre when I shall vyset them, they shall be brought downe, sayeth the Lorde.
Thus sayeth the Lord: go into the streates, consydre Ꟶ make inquisicyon for the olde waye: and yf it be the good and ryght waye, then go therin, that ye maye fynde rest for youre soules. But they saye: we wyll not walcke therin,
and I wyll sett wacthmen ouer you, Ꟶ therfore take hede vnto the voyce of the trompett. But they saye: we wyll not take hede.
Heare therfore ye Gentyles, Ꟶ thou congregacyon shalt knowe, what I haue deuysed for them.
Heare thou earth also: behold, I will cause a plage to come vpon this people, euen the frute of their awne imaginacions. For they haue not bene obedient vnto my wordes Ꟶ to my lawe, but abhorred them.
Wherfore, bryng ye me incense from Saba, Ꟶ swete smellyng Calamus from farre countrees? Your burnt offerynges dysplease me, Ꟶ I reioyce not in your sacrifyces.
And therfore thus sayeth the Lorde: behold, I wyll make this people fall, and there shall fall from among them the father wt the chyldren, one neyghboure shall peryshe wyth another.
Thus sayeth the Lord, Beholde, there shal come a people from the North, Ꟶ a great people shal aryse from the endes of the earth,
with bowes and with dartes shall they be weapened. It is a rough Ꟶ fearce people, Ꟶ Ꟶ an vnmercyfull people, theyr voyce roareth lyke the see, they ryde vpon horses well apointed to the battaill agaynst the, O daughter Sion.
The crye of them haue we herde. Oure armes are feble, heuynesse Ꟶ sorowe is come vp on vs, as vpon a woman trauelyng with chylde.
Let no man go forth into the felde, let no man come vpon the hye strete: for the swearde and feare of the enemy is on euery syde.
Wherfore, gyrde a sack cloth aboute the (O thou daughter of my people) sprynkle thy selfe wt asshes, mourne Ꟶ wepe bitterly as vpon thy only beloued sonne. For the destroyer shal sodenly fall vpon vs.
The haue I set for a stronge tower (o thou prophete) Ꟶ a well fensed wall amonge my people, to seke out and to trye theyr wayes.
For they are all stubberne apostates and fallen awaye, walkinge disceitfully, they are cleane brasse Ꟶ yron, for they hurt Ꟶ destroye euery man.
The bellous are brent in the fyre, the leade is not molten, the melter melteth in vayne for the euell is not taken awaye from them.
Therfore do they call them naughty syluer, because the Lorde hath cast them out.
These are the wordes that God spake vnto Ieremye: sayenge.
Stande vnder the gate of the Lordes house, and crye out these wordes there wt a loude voyce, and saye. Heare the worde of the Lord all ye of Iuda, that go in at this dore, to worshyppe the Lorde.
Thus sayeth the Lord of Hostes the God of Israell. Amende youre wayes Ꟶ your councels, and I wyll let you dwell in this place.
Trust not in false lyenge wordes, sayeng: here is the temple of the Lord, here is the temple of the Lord, here is the temple of the Lorde.
But rather in deade amende your wayes and councels, and iudge ryght betwixte a man and his neyghbour:
oppresse not the straunger, the fatherles, Ꟶ the wyddowe: shede not innocent bloud in thys place: cleue not to straunge goddes to your awne destruccion:
then wyll I let you dwell in this place, yee, in the land that I gaue afore tyme vnto youre fathers for euer.
But take hede: ye trust in lyinge tales, that begyle you Ꟶ do you no good.
For when ye haue stollen, murthured, commytted aduoutry, Ꟶ periury. When ye haue offred vnto Baal, folowyng straunge Ꟶ vnknowne goddes shall ye be vnpunyshed?
Yet then come ye, Ꟶ stande before me in this house, (which hath my name geuen vnto it) Ꟶ saye. Tush, we are absolued quite, thoughe we haue done all these abhominacyons.
What? thyncke you this house that beareth my name, is a denne of theues? And yea I se what you thynke, sayeth the Lorde.
Go to my place in Siloh, wherunto I gaue my name a fore tyme, and loke well what I dyd to the same place for the wyckednes of my people of Israell.
And nowe, though ye haue done all these dedes (sayeth the Lorde) and I my self rose vp euer by tymes to warne you Ꟶ to comen with you, yet wolde ye not heare me. I called, ye wolde not answere.
And therfore, euen as I haue done vnto Siloh, so wyll I do to thys house, that my name is geuen vnto (Ꟶ that ye put youre trust in) ye vnto the place that I haue geuen to you and your fathers.
And I shal thrust you out of my syght, as I ha e cast out all youre brethren the whole sede of Ephraim.
Therfore, thou shalt not praye for thys people, thou shalt nether geue thanckes, nor byd prayer for them: thou shalt make no intercession to me for them, for in no wyse wyll I heare the.
Seyst thou not what they do in the cyties of Iuda, Ꟶ in the streats of Ierusalem.
The chyldren gather styckes, the fathers kyndle the fyre, the women kneade the dowghe, to bake cakes for the quene of heauen. They poure out drynckoffrynges vnto straunge goddes, to prouok me vnto wrath.
Howbeit they hurte not me (sayeth the lord) but rather confounde, Ꟶ shame them selues.
And therfore thus sayeth the Lord God: behold, my wrath Ꟶ my indignacion shalbe poured out vpon this place, vpon men Ꟶ catell vpon the trees in the felde Ꟶ frute of the lande, Ꟶ it shall burne so that no man maye quench it.
Thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israel: Heape vp your burnt offrynges wyth your sacrifyces, and eate the fleshe.
For when I brought youre fathers out of Egypt, I spake no worde vnto them of burnt offrynges Ꟶ sacryfyces:
but this I commaunded them, sayinge: herken Ꟶ obeye my voyce, and I shalbe youre God, and ye shall be my people: so that ye walcke in all the wayes, whych I haue commaunded you, that ye maye prospere.
But they were not obedient, they inclyned not theyr eares there vnto, but went after theyr awne ymagynacyons Ꟶ after the mocyons of theyr awne wycked herte, Ꟶ so turned them selues awaye, and conuerted not vnto me.
And this haue they done, from the tyme that youre fathers came out of Egypt, vnto thys daye. Neuertheles, I sent vnto you, all my seruauntes the prophetes. I rose vp early, Ꟶ sent you worde,
yet wolde they not herken, ner offre me theyr eares, but were obstynate, Ꟶ worse then theyr fathers.
And thou shalt now speake al these wordes vnto them, but they shall not heare the: thou shalt crye vpon them, but they shall not answere the.
Therfore, shalt thou saye vnto them: this is the people, that nether heareth the voyce of the Lorde theyr God, ner receaueth hys correccyon. Faythfulnesse and treuth is cleane roted out of theyr mouth.
Wherfore cut of thyne hearre O Ierusalem, Ꟶ cast it awaye, take vp a complaynte on hye, for the Lord hath cast awaye, and scatred the people that he is displeased withall.
For the chyldren of Iuda haue done euell in my syght, sayeth the Lord. They haue set vp theyr abhominacyons, in the house that hath my name, and haue defyled it.
They haue also buylded an aulter at Topheth, which is in the valley of the chyldren of Hennom: that they myght burne theyr sonnes Ꟶ daughters in fyre, which I neuer commaunded them, nether came it euer in my thought.
And therfore beholde, the dayes shall come (sayeth the Lorde) that it shall nomore be called Topheth, or the valley of the chyldren of Hennom, but the valley of slaughter, for in Topheth, they shalbe buried, because they shall els haue no rowme.
Yee, the deed bodyes of this people shalbe eaten vp of the foules of the ayre Ꟶ wylde beastes of the erth, and no man shall fraye them awaye.
And as for the voyce of myrth Ꟶ gladnes of the cytyes of Iuda, Ꟶ Ierusalem, the voyce of the brydegrome, and of the bryde. I wyll make them ceasse, for the lande shalbe desolate.
At the same tyme sayeth the Lorde, the bones of the kynges of Iuda, the bones of his prynces, the bones of the prestes Ꟶ prophetes, yee, Ꟶ the bones of the cytezins of Ierusalem, shall be brought out of theyr graues
Ꟶ layed agaynst the Sunne, the Moone Ꟶ all the heauenly hoost: whom they loued, whom they serued, whom they ranne after, whom they sought and worshypped. They shall nether be gathered together ner buryed, but shall lye as donge vpon the earth, to theyr shame and despysynge.
And all they that remayne of this wycked generacion, shall desyre rather to dye then to lyue: wheresoeuer they remaine, and whereas I scatre them, sayeth the Lord of hostes.
Thys shalt thou saye vnto them also. Thus sayeth the Lorde. Do men fall so, that they aryse not vp agayne? Or yf Israell repent, wyll not god turne ageyn to them?
Wherfore then is this people Ꟶ Ierusalem gone so farre backe, that they turne not agayne? They are euer the longer the more obstinat, and wyll not be conuerted.
For I haue loked, Ꟶ consydered: but there is no man that speaketh a good word: there is no man that taketh repentaunce for hys synne, that wyll so moch as saye: wherfore, haue I done thys? But euery man (as soone as he is turned backe) runneth forth styll, lyke a wylde horse in a battayll.
The Storke in the ayer knoweth hys apoynted tyme, the Turtle doue the Swalow Ꟶ the Crane consydre the tyme of theyr trauayll, but my people wyll not knowe the tyme of the punyshment of the Lorde.
How darre ye saye then, we are wyse, we haue the lawe of the Lorde amonge vs? Suerly in vayne hath he prepared his penne, Ꟶ vaynly haue the wryters wryten it:
therfore shall the wyse be confounded, they shalbe afrayed Ꟶ taken: for lo, they haue cast out the worde of the Lorde: what wysdome can then be amonge them?
Wherfore, I wyll geue theyr wyues vnto aleauntes, and theyr feldes to destroyers. For from the lowest vnto the hyest, they folowe all filthy lucre: Ꟶ from the Prophete vnto the preste, they deale all wt lyes.
Neuerthelesse, they heale the hurte of my people very slenderlye, sayenge: peace, peace, where there is no peace at all.
Fye for shame, how abhominable thynges do they? and yet they be not ashamed, yee, they knowe of no shame. Wherfore, in the tyme of theyr visytacion, they shall fall amonge the deed bodyes, Ꟶ be ouerthrowne sayeth the Lorde.
Moreouer, I wyll consume them in deade (sayeth the Lord) so that there shall not be one grape vpon the vyne, nether one fygg vpon the fyge tre, and the leaues shalbe plucte of. And the thynge that I haue gyuen them shall be taken from them:
why prolonge we the tyme? Let vs gather oure selues together, and go into the stronge cytie, there shall we be in rest. For the Lorde oure God hath put vs to sylence, Ꟶ geuen vs water mixte wt gall, to dryncke: because we haue synned agaynst hym.
We loked for peace, Ꟶ we fare not the better, we wayted for the tyme of health, Ꟶ lo, here is nothynge but trouble.
The noyse of his horsses is hearde from Dan, the whole lande is afrayed at the neyenge of his stronge horsses: for they are come in, Ꟶ haue deuoured the lande, wt all that is in it: the cyties, and those that dwell therin.
Moreouer, I wyll sende Cockatrices Ꟶ serpentes amonge you (which wyll not be charmed) Ꟶ they shall byte you, sayeth the Lorde.
I wolde haue had comforte agenst sorowe: but sorowe is come vpon me, and heuynes vexeth my hert:
for lo, the voyce of the cryenge of my people is herde for feare of them, that come from a farre countre. Is not the Lorde in Syon? Is not the Kyng, in her? Wherfore then haue they greued me (shall the Lorde saye) wt theyr ymages Ꟶ foolysh straunge fashyons of a foreyne god?
The haruest is gone, the Sommer hath an ende, Ꟶ we are not helped.
I am sore vexed, because of the hurte of my people. I am heuy Ꟶ abashed,
is ther no triacle at Gilead? Is ther no physycyon ther? Why then is not the helthe of my people recouered?
O who wyll geue my head water ynough, and a wel of teares for myne eyes: that I maye wepe night and daye: for the slaughter of my people?
Wolde God, that I had a cotage some where farre from folcke, that I myght leaue my people, and goo from them: for they be all aduoutrers Ꟶ a shrynckynge sorte.
They bende theyr tunges lyke bowes, to shote out lyes. They wax stronge vpon erthe. As for the trueth, they maye nothynge awaye with all in the worlde. For they go from one wyckednes to another, and wyll not knowe me, sayeth the Lorde.
Yee, one must kepe hym selfe from another, no man may safely trust his awne brother: for one brother vndermyndeth another, one neyghboure begileth another.
Yee one dissembleh wt another, and they deale wt no trueth. They haue practysed theyr tunges to lye, Ꟶ taken great paynes to do mischefe.
Thou syttest in the myddes of a dysceatfull people, which for very dissemblyng falshede, wyll not knowe me, sayeth the Lord.
Therfore, thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes: beholde, I wyll melte them, and trye them, for what shuld I els do to my people.
Theyr tunges are lyke sharpe arowes, to speake dysceate. Wyth theyr mouth they speake peaceably to theyr neyghboure, but preuely they laye wayte for hym.
Shulde I not punysh them for these thynges, sayeth the Lorde? Or shulde I not be auenged of any soche people as thys?
Upon the mountaines will I take vp a lamentacion Ꟶ a sorowful crie, Ꟶ a mourninge vpon the fayre playnes of the wildernesse. Namely, how they are so brente vp, that no man goeth there any moore. Yee, a man shall not heare one beaste crye there. Byrdes Ꟶ catell are all gone from thenc
I will make Ierusalem also an heape of stones, Ꟶ a denne of venymous wormes. And I will make the cyties of Iuda so waste, that no man shall dwell therin.
What man is so wyse, as to vndestande thys? Or to whom hath the Lord spoken by mouth, that he may shewe this, Ꟶ saye. O thou lande, why perishest thou so? Wherfore art thou so brent vp, Ꟶ lyke a wyldernes, that no man goeth thorow?
Yee, the Lorde hym selfe tolde the same vnto them, that forsoke hys lawe, Ꟶ kepte not the thynge that he gaue them in commaundement, nether lyued therafter:
but folowed the wickednes of theyr awne hertes, Ꟶ serued straunge Goddes, as theyr fathers taught them.
Therfore, thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes, the God of Israel. Beholde, I wyll fede this people wt wormwod, Ꟶ geue them gall to dryncke,
I wyll scatre them also among the Heathen, whom nether they ner theyr fathers haue knowne: Ꟶ I will sende a swearde amonge them, to persecute them, vntill I bryng them to naught.
Moreouer, thus sayeth the Lord of Hostes. Beware of the vengeaunce that hangeth ouer you: and cal for mourning wyues, Ꟶ sende for wyse wemen: that they come shortly,
and synge a mournynge songe of you: that the teares may fall out of oure eyes, and that our eye lyddes maye gusshe out of water.
For there is a lamentable noyse hearde of Sion. O how are we so sore destroyed? O how are we so pyteously confounded? We must forsake our awne naturall countre, Ꟶ we are shut out of oure awne lodgynges.
Yet heare the worde of the Lorde (O ye wemen) Ꟶ let youre eares regarde the wordes of his mouth: that ye may lerne youre daughters to mourne, Ꟶ that euery one may teach her neyghbouresse, to make lamentacyon.
Namely thus: Death is clymynge vp in at oure wyndowes, he is come into oure houses, to destroye the chylde before the dore, and the yonge man in the strete.
But tell thou playnely, thus sayeth the Lorde. The deed bodyes of men shall lye vpon the grounde, as the donge vpon the felde, Ꟶ as the heye after the mower, Ꟶ ther shalbe no man to take them vp.
Thus sayeth the Lorde. Let not the wyse man reioyse in his wysdome, ner the strong man in his strength, nether the ryche man in his rychesse.
But who so will reioyse, let hym reioyse in this, that he vnderstandeth, Ꟶ knoweth me: for I am the Lorde, which do mercy, equyte and ryghteousnesse vpon the earth. Therfore, haue I pleasure in soch thynges, sayeth the Lorde.
Beholde, the tyme commeth (sayeth the Lorde) that I wyll vyset all them, whose fore skynne is vncircumcysed.
The Egyptians, the Iewes, the Edomytes, the Ammonytes, the Moabites. and the shauen Madianytes, that dwell in the wyldernes. For all the Gentiles are vncircumcysed in the flesh, but all the house of Israell are vncircumcysed in the herte.
Heare the worde of the Lorde that he speaketh vnto the, O thou house of Israel.
Thus sayeth the Lorde. Ye shall not lerne after the maner of the Heathen, Ꟶ ye shall not be afrayed for the tokens of heauen: for the Heathen are afrayed of soch:
yee, al the customes and lawes of the Gentyles are nothynge, but vanyte. They hewe downe a tree in the wod with the handes of the worckeman, and fashyon it wt the axe:
they couer it ouer with golde or siluer, they fasten it with nayles Ꟶ hammers, that it moue not.
It standeth as styf as the palme tree, it can nether speake ner go one fote, but must be borne. Be not ye afrayed of soch, for they can do nether good ner euell.
But there is none lyke vnto the, O Lorde, Ꟶ great is the name of thy power.
Who wolde not feare the? O kyng of the Gentils for thyne is the domynion. For amonge all the wyse men of the Gentyles, and in all theyr kyngdomes, there is none that maye be lickened vnto the.
They are all together vnlerned Ꟶ vnwyse in this one thynge. All theyr connynge is but vanyte:
namely, wod, syluer, which is brought out of Tharsis, Ꟶ beaten to plates: and golde from Ophir, a worcke that is made with the hande of the craftesman Ꟶ the caster, clothed wt yelow sylck Ꟶ scarlet: euen so is the worcke of theyr wyse men all together.
But the Lorde is a true God, a lyuynge God, Ꟶ an euerlastynge kynge. If he be wroth, the earth shaketh: all the Gentyles maye not abyde his indygnacyon.
As for theyr goddes thus shall you saye to them: they are goddes, that made nether heauen ner earth therfore shall they perysh from the earth, and from all thynges vnder heauen.
But (as for oure God) He made the earth wt his power, and with his wysdome doth he order the whole compasse of the worlde, with his discrecyon hath he spred out the heauens.
At his voyce the waters gather togethe in the ayre, he draweth vp the cloudes from the vttemost partes of the earth: he turneth lyghtenyng to rayne, Ꟶ bryngeth forth the wyndes out of their treasures.
His wysdome maketh all men fooles. And confounded be all casters of ymages, for that they cast, is but a vayne thynge, Ꟶ hath no lyfe.
The vayne craftesmen wt their worckes, that they in their vanyte haue made, shall perysh one wt another in the tyme of visitacyon.
Neuertheles, Iacobs porcyon is no soch: but it is he, that hath made all thynges, Ꟶ Israel is the rodd of his inherytaunce. The Lorde of Hostes is his name.
Gather vp thy wares out of the land, thou that art in the stronge place.
For thus sayeth the Lord. Behold, I wyll now throwe as wt a stone slynge the inhabitours of this lande: at this once, and I wyll brynge trouble vpon them, that they shall proue trewe the wordes that I haue spoken by the prophetes.
Alas, how am I hurt? Alas how paynefull are my scourges vnto me? For I consydre this sorow by my self, and I must suffre it.
My tabernacle is destroyed, and all my coardes are broken. My chyldren are gone fro me, Ꟶ can no where be founde. Now haue I none to sprede out my tent, or to set vp my hangynges.
For the herdmen haue done folyshly, that they haue not sought the Lord. Therfore, haue they dealt vnwysely with theyr catell, Ꟶ all are scatred abrode.
Beholde, the noyse is harde at hand, Ꟶ great sedicyon out of the north: to make the cyties of Iuda a wyldernes, Ꟶ a dwellynge place for Dragons.
Now I knowe (O Lorde) that it is not in mans power to ordre hys awne wayes, or to rule his awne steppes Ꟶ goyngges.
Therfore, chasten thou vs, o Lord, but with fauoure Ꟶ not in thy wrath, bryng vs not vtterly to naught.
Poure out thyne indygnacyon rather vpon the Gentiles, that knowe the not, Ꟶ vpon the people that call not on thy name. And that because they haue consumed, deuoured and destroyed Iacob, and haue made his habytacyon waist.
Thys is another Sermon, whych the Lorde commaunded Ieremy for to preach, saying:
Heare the wordes of the couenaunt, Ꟶ speake vnto the men of Iuda, Ꟶ to all them that dwell at Ierusalem.
And saye thou vnto them. Thus sayeth the Lord God of Israell: Cursed be euery one that is not obedient vnto the wordes of this couenaunt:
whych I commaunded vnto youre fathers, what tyme as I broughte them out of Egipt, from the yron fornace, saying: Be obedient vnto my voyce, Ꟶ do acordynge to all that I commaunde you: so shall ye be my people, Ꟶ I wilbe youre God,
and wyll kepe my promyse, that I haue sworne vnto youre fathers. Namely, that I wolde geue them a lande which floweth wt mylck Ꟶ hony: as ye se, it is come to passe vnto this day. Then answered I, and sayd: Amen. Let it be euen so Lorde, as thou sayest.
Then the Lorde sayde vnto me agayne: Preache this in the cyties of Iuda Ꟶ rounde aboute Ierusalem, Ꟶ saye. Heare the wordes of this couenaunt, that ye maye kepe them.
for I haue diligently exhorted your fathers, euer sence the tyme that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, vnto this daye. I gaue them warnyng by tymes, saying: herken vnto my voyce.
Neuertheles, they wolde not obeye me, nor encline theyr eares vnto me, but folowed the wicked ymaginacions of theyr awne hertes. And therfore, I haue accused them as transgressours of all the wordes of this couenaunt, that I gaue them to kepe which they (notwithstandinge) haue not kepte.
And the Lorde sayde vnto me. It is founde out, that whole Israel and all these citezins of Ierusalem are gone backe.
They haue turned them selues to the blasphemyes of theyr forefathers, which had no lust to heare my worde. Euen lykewyse haue these also folowed straunge goddes, and worshypped them. The house of Israel Ꟶ Iuda haue broken my couenaunt, which I made with theyr fathers.
Therfore, thus sayeth the Lord. Behold, I wyll sende a plage vpon them, which they shall not be able to escape: Ꟶ thoughe they crye vnto me, I wyl not heare them.
Then shall the townes of Iuda Ꟶ the citezins of Ierusalem go, Ꟶ call vpon theyr goddes vnto whom they made theyr oblacyons: but they shall not be able to helpe them in tyme of theyr trouble.
For as many cyties as thou hast, O Iuda, so many goddes hast thou had also. And loke how many stretes there be in the, (O Ierusalem) so many shamefull aulters haue ye set vp, aulters I saye to offre vpon them vnto Baal.
Therfore, praye not thou for this people, byd nether prayse ner prayer for them, for though they crie vnto me in theyr trouble, yet will I not heare them.
What parte hath my beloued in my house, seinge he hathe worked abominacion seruynge many goddes? The holy fleash offringes in the temple ar goone from the O Iuda, and thou when thou hast done euell makest thy boast of ytt.
The Lorde called the a grene olyue tre, a fayre one, a frutefull one, a goodly one: but with greate clamor hath the enemy sett fyre vppon it and the branches of yt are destroyed.
For the Lorde of Hoostes that planted the, hath deuysed a plage for the (O thou house of Israell and Iuda) for the euell that ye haue done to prouoke hym to wrath, in that ye dyd seruyce vnto Baal.
This (O Lord) haue I lerned of the, and vnderstand it, for thou hast shewed me theyr ymaginacyons.
But I am (as a meke lambe an oxe) that is caryed awaye to be slayne, not knowynge, that they had deuysed soch a councell agaynst me, sayeng: We wyll destroye his meate with wodd, Ꟶ dryue him out of the land, of the lyuyng: that his name shall neuer be thought vpon.
Therfore, I will beseche the now (O Lord of hoostes) thou ryghteous iudge, thou that tryest the reynes Ꟶ the hertes: lett me se the auenged of them, for vnto the haue I committed my cause.
The Lorde therfore spake thus of the cytezins of Anathoth, that sought to slaye me, sayenge: Preache not vnto vs in the name of the Lord, or els thou shalt dye of our handes.
Thus (I saye) spake the Lorde of hoostes. Behold, I wyll vyset you. Youre younge men shall perysh with the swearde, your sonnes Ꟶ your daughters shall vtterly dye of honger,
so that none shall remayne. For vpon the cytezins of Anathoth will I bryng a plage, euen the yeare of theyr vysytacyon.
O Lorde, thou art more ryghteous, then that I shulde dispute wt the. Neuertheles, lett me talke with the in thynges reasonable. How happeneth it, that the waye of the vngodly is so prosperous? Ꟶ that it goeth so well with them, whych (wythout any shame) offende Ꟶ lyue in wickednes?
Thou plantest them, they take rote, they growe, Ꟶ brynge forth frute. They boast moch of the, yet art thou farre from ther reynes.
But thou Lorde (to whom I am well knowne) thou that hast sene, Ꟶ proued my herte, take them awaye, lyke as a flock is caryed to the slaughter house, and apointe them for the daye of slaughter.
How longe shall the lande mourne, and all the herbes of the felde perish, for the wyckednes of them that dwell therin. The catell and the byrdes are gone, yet say they tush, God wyll not destroye vs vtterly.
Seyng, thou art weery in runnyng with the fote men, how wilt thou then runne with horses? In a peaceable sure lande thou mayest be safe, but how wilt thou do in the furyous pryde of Iordane?
For thy brethren Ꟶ thy kynred haue all together despysed the, and cryed out vpon the in thyne absence. Beleue them not, though they speake fayre wordes to the.
As for me (I saye) I haue forsaken myne awne dwellyng place, Ꟶ left myne heritage. My lyfe also that I loue so wel, haue I geuen into the handes of myne enemies.
Myne heritage is become vnto me, as a Lyon in the wood. It cryed out vpon me, therfore, haue I forsaken it.
Myne herytage is vnto me, as a speckled byrde, a byrde of dyuerse coloures is vpon it. Come, Ꟶ gather ye to geather al the beastes of the felde. Come that ye maye eate it vp.
Diuerse herdmen haue broken downe my vyneyarde, and troden vpon my porcyon. Of my pleasaunt porcyon, they haue made a wyldernes and desert.
They haue layed it waste: Ꟶ now that it is waste, it sigheth vnto me. Yee, the whole land lyeth waste, Ꟶ no man regardeth it.
The destroyers come ouer the heeth euery waye, for the sweard of the Lorde doth consume from the one ende of the land to the other, Ꟶ no flesh hath rest.
They haue sowen wheate, Ꟶ reaped thornes. They haue taken herytage in possessyon, but it doth them no good. And the prophets were ashamed of your frutes, because of the great wrath of the Lorde.
Thus sayeth the Lorde vpon all myne euell neyghbours, that laye hande on myne herytage, whych I haue possessed, euen my people of Israell. Beholde, I wyll plucke them (namely Israel) out of their lande, and put out the house of Iuda from among them.
And when I haue roted them out, I wylbe at one with them agayne, Ꟶ I wyll haue mercy vpon them: Ꟶ brynge them agayne, euery man to his awne herytage, and into his lande.
And yf they (namely that trouble my people) wyll lerne the wayes of them, to sweare by my name. The Lord lyueth (lyke as they learned my people to sweare by Baal) then shal they be rekened among my people.
But yf they wyll not obeye, then wyll I rote out the same folke, Ꟶ destroye them, sayth the Lord.
Thus sayth the Lord vnto me: go thy waye, Ꟶ get me a lynnen breche, Ꟶ gyrde it aboute thy loynes, Ꟶ let it not be wet.
Then I got me a breche, accordynge to the commaundement of the Lorde, and put it aboute my loynes.
After this the seconde tyme, the Lorde spake vnto me agayne.
Take the breche that thou hast prepared Ꟶ put about the, Ꟶ get the vp, Ꟶ go vnto Euphrates Ꟶ hyde it in a hole of the rock.
So went I, Ꟶ hydd it at Euphrates, as the Lord commaunded me.
And it happened longe after this, that the Lorde spake vnto me. Up, Ꟶ get the to Euphrates, and fet the breche from thence, which I commaunded the to hyde there.
Then went I to Euphrates, Ꟶ dygged vp, Ꟶ toke the breche from the place where I had hyd it: Ꟶ beholde, the breche was corrupt, so that it was profitable for nothynge.
Then sayde the Lorde vnto me.
Thus sayeth the Lorde. Euen so wyll I corrupte the pryde of Iuda, Ꟶ the hye mynde of Ierusalem.
This people is a wicked people, they wyll not heare my worde, they folowe the wicked ymaginacyons of their awne herte, Ꟶ hange vpon straunge Goddes, them they serue Ꟶ worshyppe: Ꟶ therfore they shalbe as this breche, that serueth for nothynge.
For as straytely as a breche lyeth vpon a mans loynes, so straytely dyd I bynde the whole house of Israel, and the whole house of Iuda vnto me, sayeth the Lorde: that they myght be my people: that they myght haue a glorious name: that they myght be in honour: but thei wold not obeye me.
Therfore laye this rydle before them, Ꟶ saye: Thus sayeth the Lorde God of Israell: Euery pot shalbe fylled wt wyne. And they shal saye: thynckest thou we knowe not, that euery pot shalbe fylled wt wyne?
Then shalt thou saye vnto them. Thus sayeth the Lord: Behold, I shall fyll all the inhabitours of thys lande wt dronckennes, the kynges that syt vpon Dauids stole, the prestes Ꟶ prophetes, wt all that dwell at Ierusalem.
And I wyll sett them one agaynst another, ye, the fathers agaynst the sonnes, sayeth the Lorde. I wyll not pardon them, I wyll not spare them, ner haue pytie vpon them: but destroye them.
Be obedient, geue eare, take not disdayne at it, for it is the Lord him selfe that speaketh.
Honoure the Lord your God here in, or he take hys lyght from you, Ꟶ or euer youre fete stomble in darcknesse at the hyll: lest when ye loke for the lyght, he turne it into the shadowe Ꟶ darcknesse of death,
But yf ye wyll not heare me, that geue you secrete warnyng, I wyll mourne from my whole hert for youre stubburnes. Pyteously wyll I wepe, Ꟶ the teares shall gusshe out of myne eyes. For the Lordes flocke shall be caryed awaye captyue.
Tell the kynge Ꟶ the quene: Humble youre selues, sett you downe lowe, for your dignytye shall be throwne downe Ꟶ the crowne of your glory shall fall from youre head.
The cyties towarde the south shalbe shut vp, Ꟶ no man shall open them. All Iuda shallbe caryed awaye captyue, so that none shall remayne.
Lyft vp your eyes, Ꟶ beholde them that come from the North wher is the flocke (o thou lande) that was gyuen the. And wher are thy fatt Ꟶ ryche sheape.
To whom wylt thou make thy mone, when the ennemy shall come vpon the? for thou hast taught them thy selfe, Ꟶ made them masters ouer the. Shall not sorowe come vpon the, as on a woman trauayllyng wt child?
And yf thou woldest saye them in thyne herte. Wherfore come these thynges vpon me? Euen for the multytude of thy blasphemyes, shal thy hynder partes Ꟶ thy fete be discouered.
For lyke as the man of Iude maye chaunge his skynne, Ꟶ the cat of the mountayne her spottes: so maye ye that be excercysed in euell, do good.
Therfore wyll I scatre them, lyke as the stoble that is taken awaye wyth the south wynde.
Thys shall be youre porcion, Ꟶ the porcion of your measure, wherwith ye shalbe rewarded of me, sayeth the lorde: because ye haue forgotten me, Ꟶ put youre trust in dysceatfull thynges.
Therfore shall I turne thy clothes ouer thy heade, Ꟶ discouer thy thyghes, that thy preuyties maye be sene,
thy aduoutry, thy deedly malyce, thy beastlinesse, Ꟶ thy shamefull whordome. For vpon the feldes and hylles I haue sene thy abhominacyons. Wo be vnto the (o Ierusalem) when wylt thou euer be clensed eny more?
The worde of the Lorde shewed vnto Ieremy, concernynge the derth of the frutes.
Iuda hath mourned, his gates are desolate: they are broughte to heuynesse euen vnto the grounde, Ꟶ the crye of Ierusalem goeth vp.
The lordes sent theyr seruauntes to fetch water, Ꟶ when they came to the welles, they dyd fynde no water, but caried their vessels home emptie. They be ashamed Ꟶ confounded, Ꟶ couer theyr heades.
For the grounde is dryed vp, because there commeth no rayne vpon it. The plowmen also be ashamed, Ꟶ couer theyr heades.
The Hynde also forsoke the yonge fawne, that he brought forth in the felde, because there was no grasse.
The wylde Asses dyd stande in the hye places, and drewe in theyr wynde lyke the dragons, theyr eyes dyd fayle for want of grasse.
Doutles oure awne wyckednes doth rewarde vs. But lorde do thou accordyng to thy name, though oure transgressyons Ꟶ synnes be many, and agenst the haue we synned.
For thou art the comfort Ꟶ helpe of Israel in the tyme of trouble. Why wilt thou be as a straunger in the lande, Ꟶ as one that goeth ouer the felde, Ꟶ commeth in only to remayne for a nyght?
Why wilt thou make thy selfe a cowarde, Ꟶ as it were a gyaunt that yet maye not helpe? For thou (O Lorde) art in the myddest of vs, Ꟶ thy name is called vpon of vs: forsake vs not.
Thus hath the Lord sayd vnto this people: seyng they haue had suche a lust to wander abrode, Ꟶ haue not refrayned theyr fete, Ꟶ therfore displeased the Lord: but he wyll now bringe agayne to remembraunce all their mysdedes, Ꟶ ponyshe all theyr synnes.
Yee, euen thus sayde the Lorde vnto me: Thou shalt not praye to do thys people good.
For though they fast, I wil not heare their praiers and though thei offre burntoffringes Ꟶ sacrifyces, yet wyll not I accepte them. For I will destroye them with the sweard, honger Ꟶ pestilence.
Then answered I: O Lorde God, the prophetes saye vnto them: Tush, ye shall nede to feare no sweard Ꟶ no honger shall come vpon you, but the Lorde shall geue you contynuall rest in this place.
And the Lorde sayde vnto me: The prophetes preach lyes in my name, where as I haue not sent them, nether gaue I them eny charge, nether dyd I speake vnto them: yet they preach vnto you false visions, charming, vanite, Ꟶ disceatfulnes of their awne herte.
Therfore, thus sayeth the Lord. As for those prophetes that preach in my name (whom I neuerthelesse haue not sent) Ꟶ that saye: Tush, there shall no swerde ner honger be in this land. With swearde Ꟶ with honger shall those prophetes perysh,
Ꟶ the people to whom they preache shalbe cast out of Ierusalem, dye of honger, Ꟶ be slayne wt the swearde, (Ꟶ there shalbe no man to burye them) both they Ꟶ theyr wyues, theyr sonnes and theyr daughters. For thus wyll I poure theyr wyckednesse vpon them.
Thys shalt thou say also vnto them. Myne eyes shall wepe without ceassynge daye Ꟶ nyght. For my people shalbe destroyed wt greate harme, Ꟶ shall perysh with a greate plage.
For yf I go into the felde, lo, it lyeth all full of slayne men. If I come into the cytie, lo, they be all famyshed of honger. Yee, theyr prophetes also Ꟶ prestes shalbe led into an vnknowne lande.
Hast thou then vtterly forsaken Iuda? Dost thou so abhorre Syon? Or hast thou so plaged vs, that we can be healed nomore? We loked for peace, and there commeth no good: for the tyme of health, and lo, here is nothing but trouble.
We knowledge (o Lorde) all our mysdedes, Ꟶ the synnes of our fathers, that we haue offended the.
Be not displeased, (O Lorde) for thy names sake, forget not thy louing kyndnesse. Remembre the throne of thyne honoure, breake not the couenaunt, that thou hast made wt vs.
Are there eny amonge the goddes of the Gentyles, that sende rayne or geue the showers of heauen? Or may the heuens drope rayne without thy commaundement? Dost not thou it, O Lorde our God, in whom we trust? Yee Lorde, thou dost all these thynges.
Then spake the Lord vnto me: Thoughe Moses Ꟶ Samuell stode before me, yet haue I no hearte to thys people. Driue them awaye, that they maye go out of my syght.
And yf they say vnto the. Whyther shall we go? Then tell them: The lord gyueth you thys answere. Some vnto death, some the swearde, some to honger, some into captyuyte.
For I will bryng foure plages vpon them, sayeth the Lorde. The swearde shall sleye them, the dogges shall teare them in peaces, the foules of the ayre, Ꟶ beastes of the earth shall eate them vp, and destroye them.
I wyll scatter them aboute also in all kyngdomes and landes to be plaged because of Manasseh the sonne of Hezekia kynge of Iuda, for the thynges that he dyd in Ierusalem.
Who shall then haue pyte vpon the, O Ierusalem? Who shall be sory for the? Or who shall make intercession, to optayne peace for the?
seynge thou goest fro me, Ꟶ turnest backwarde, sayeth the Lorde? Therfore, I dyd stretch out myne hande agaynst the, to destroye the, Ꟶ I haue bene sorye for the so longe that I am werye.
I haue scatred them abrode wt the fanne on ouery syde of the land. I haue wasted my people Ꟶ destroyed them. Yet they haue had no lust to turne from theyr awne wayes
I haue made theyr wyddowes mo in nombre, then the sandes of the see. Upon the mothers of their chyldren dyd I brynge a destroyer in the none daye. Sodenly and vnawarres dyd I sende a feare vpon theyr cyties.
She that hath borne seuen chyldren, hath noone, her herte is full of sorowe. The Sunne doth fayle her in the cleare daye, she is confounded and fayntie for very heuynesse. As for those that remayne, I wyll delyuer them vnto the swearde before theyr enemyes, sayth the Lorde.
O mother, alas that euer thou dydest beare me, a brawler Ꟶ rebuker of the whole lande: Thoughe I neuer lente ner receaued vpon vsury, yet all men speake euell vpon me.
And the Lorde answered me: Uerely thy remnaunte shall haue welthe. Come not I to the, when thou art in trouble: and helpe the, when thyne enemy oppresseth the?
Doth one yron hurte another or one metall that commeth from the North, another?
As for thy richesse and treasure, I wyll geue them out into a praye, not for eny money, but because of all thy synnes, that thou hast done in all thy coastes.
And I wyll brynge the with thyne enemyes into a land, that thou knowest not: for the fyre that is kyndled in my indignacyon, shall burne you vp.
O Lord, thou knowest: therfore remembre me, Ꟶ vyset me, delyuer me fro my persecuters. Take me not from this lyfe in the tyme of the longe pacyence, thou knowest, that for thy sake I suffer rebuke.
When I had founde thy wordes, I dyd eate them vp gredely: they haue made my herte ioyfull Ꟶ glad. For thy name was called vpon me, O Lorde God of Hostes.
I dwell not amonge the scorners, nether is my delyte therin: but I dwell only in the feare of thy hand, for thou hast fylled me with bytternes.
Shall my heuynes endure for euer? Are my plages then so greate, that they maye neuer be healed? Wilt thou be as one that is false Ꟶ as a water, that falleth, and cannot continue?
Upon these wordes, thus sayde the Lorde vnto me. If thou wilt turne agayne, I shall sett the in my seruice: and yf thou wilt take out the thynges that is precious from the vile, thou shalt be euen as myne awne mouth. They shall conuerte vnto the, but turne not thou vnto them:
Ꟶ so shall I make the a stronge brasen wall agaynst this people. They shall fight agaynst the, but they shall not preuayle. For I my selfe will be wt the, to helpe the, and deliuer the, sayeth the Lorde.
And I wyll ryd the out of the handes of the wicked, and delyuer the out of the hande of tirauntes.
Thus sayde the Lord vnto me.
Thou shalt take the no wyfe, ner beget chyldren in this place,
For of the chyldren that are borne in this place, of theyr mothers that haue borne them, and of their fathers that haue begotten them in this lande thus sayeth the Lorde.
They shall dye an horrible deeth, no man shall mourne for them ner bury them, but they shall lye as donge vpon the earth. They shall perishe thorow the swearde and honger, and theyr bodyes shall be meate for the foules of the ayre, and beastes of the earth.
For thus saieth the Lorde: Go not thou in vnto them ner come to mourne and wepe for them: for I haue taken my peace from thys people (sayeth the Lorde) yee my fauoure Ꟶ my mercy.
And in this lande shall they dye, olde and yonge, and shall not be buried: no man shall bewepe them, no man shall clyppe or shaue him selfe for them.
There shal not one viset another, to mourne wyth them for their deed, or to comforte them. One shal not offre another the cuppe of consolacyon, to forget theyr heuynes for father and mother.
Thou shalt not go into theyr feast house, to syt downe, to eate or drincke with them.
For thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israell: Beholde, I shall take awaye out of this place, the voyce of myrth and gladnesse, the voyce of the brydegrome and of the bryde: yee, and that in youre dayes, that ye maye se it.
Now when thou shewest this people all these wordes, Ꟶ they saye vnto the. Wherfore hath the Lorde deuysed all thys greate plage for vs? Or what is the offence Ꟶ synne, that we haue done agaynst the Lorde our God?
Then make thou them this answere: Because youre fathers haue forsaken me (sayeth the Lorde) and haue walked after straunge goddes, whom they haue honoured and worshypped: but me haue they forsaken, and haue not kepte my lawe.
And ye with your shamefull blasphemyes, haue exceaded the wyckednes of youre fathers. For euery one of you hath folowed the frowarde and euell ymaginacion of his awne herte, and is not obedient vnto me.
Therfore wyll I cast you oute of thys lande, into a lande that ye and youre fathers knowe not: and there shall ye serue straunge goddes daye and nyght, there wyll I shewe you no fauoure.
Beholde therfore (sayeth the Lorde) the dayes are come, that it shall nomore be sayde: The Lorde lyueth, which brought the children of Israel out of the lande of Egypte:
but, it shall be sayde, the Lorde lyueth, that brought the children of Israell from the North, and from all landes where he had scatred them. For I wyl brynge them agayne into the lande, that I gaue vnto theyr fathers.
Beholde (sayeth the Lorde) I wyl sende out many fyshers to take them, and after that wyll I sende out many hunters to hunte them out, from all mountaynes and hylles and out of the caues of stone.
For myne eyes beholde al theyr wayes, and they cannot be hyd fro my face, nether can theyr wycked dedes be kepte close out of my syghte.
But first wyll I sufficiently rewarde their shamefull blasphemies and synnes, because they haue defyled my lande: Namely with theyr stincking Idols Ꟶ with the carayns of their abhominacions, wherwith they haue filled myne herytage.
O Lorde, my strength, my power, and refuge in tyme of trouble. The Gentyles shall come vnto the from the endes of the worlde, and saye: Uerely our fathers haue cleaued vnto lyes, their Idols are but vayne Ꟶ vnprofitable.
How can a man make those his goddes, whyche are not able to be goddes?
And therfore I will once teach them, sayeth the Lorde, I wyll shewe them my hande Ꟶ my power, that they maye knowe, that my name is the Lorde.
Youre synne (O ye of the trybe of Iuda) is written in the table of your hertes, and grauen so vpon the edges of your aulters with a penne of yron and wyth an adamant clawe:
that as the fathers thyncke vpon their chyldren so thincke you also vpon your aulters, woddes, thicke trees, hye hylles, mountaynes Ꟶ feldes.
Wherfore, I wil make my mounte that standeth in the felde all your substaunce Ꟶ treasure be spoyled, for the great synne that ye haue done vpon youre hye places thorowe out all the coostes of youre lande.
Ye shall be cast out also from the heritage, that I gaue you. And I wil subdue you vnder the heuy bondage of your enemies, in a lande that ye knowe not. For ye haue ministred fyre to my indignacion, which shal burne euermore.
Thus sayth the Lord. Cursed be the man that putteth his trust in man, and that taketh fleshe for his arme: and he, whose herte departeth from the Lorde:
He shall be lyke the heath, that groweth in the wyldernes. As for the good thyng that is for to come, he shall not se it: but dwel in a drye place of the wyldernes, in a salt and vnoccupyed lande.
O blessed is the man, that putteth his trust in the Lorde, and whose hope is the Lorde him selfe.
For he shalbe as a tre, that is planted by the water syde: whyche spredeth out the rote vnto moystnesse, whom the heate cannot harme, when it commeth, but his leaffe shalbe grene. And though there growe but lytle frute because of drouth, yet is he not carefull, but he neuer leaueth of to brynge forth frute.
Amonge all thynges, man hath the most disceatfull and stubberne herte. Who shall then knowe it?
Euen I the Lorde searche out the grounde of the herte, and trye the reynes, Ꟶ rewarde euery man accordynge to his wayes, and accordynge to the frute of his workes.
The partriche maketh a nest of egges, whych she layde not. He commeth by ryches, but not ryghteouslye. In the myddest of his lyfe must he leaue them behynde him, and at the last be founde a very foole.
But thou (O Lorde) whose trone is most glorious, excellent and of most antyquite, which dwellest in the place of our holy rest:
Thou art the comforte of Israell. All they that forsake the, shalbe confounded: al they that departe from the, shalbe wrytten in earth for they haue forsaken the Lorde the very condyte of the waters of lyfe.
Heale me, O Lorde, and I shall be whole: saue thou me, and I shalbe saued, for thou art my prayse.
Beholde, these men saye vnto me. Where is the worde of the Lorde (Lett it come now.)
Where as I neuertheles obediently folowed the as a shepherde, and haue not vncalled taken this office vpon me, this knowest thou well. My wordes also were ryght before the.
Be not now terrible vnto me, O Lorde for thou art he in whome I hope, when I am in parell.
Let my persecuters be confounded, but not me, let them be afrayed, and not me. Thou shalt bryng vpon them the tyme of theyr plage, and shalt destroye them ryght sore.
Thus hath the Lorde sayde vnto me: Go and stande vnder the gate, where thorowe the people and the kynges of Iuda go out and in, yee vnder all the gates of Ierusalem,
and saye vnto them. Heare the worde of the Lorde, ye kynges of Iuda, and all thou people of Iuda, and all ye cytesyns of Ierusalem, that go thorowe thys gate.
Thus the Lorde commaundeth. Take hede for youre lyues, that ye carye no burthen vpon you in the Sabboth, to brynge it thorowe the gates of Ierusalem:
ye shall beare no burthen also out of youre houses in the Sabboth. Ye shall do no laboure therin, but halowe the Sabboth, as I commaunded youre fathers.
Howbeit, they obeyed me not, nether herkened they vnto me: but were obstynate and stubburne, Ꟶ nether obeyed me: nor receaued my correccion.
Neuertheles, yf ye will heare me (sayeth the Lord) and beare no burthen into the cytie thorowe this gate vpon the Sabboth: Yf ye wyll halowe the Sabboth, so that ye do no worcke therin:
then shal there go thorowe the gates of thys cytye, kynges and prynces, that shall syt vpon the throne of Dauid: They shall be caryed vpon charettes, Ꟶ ryde vpon horses, both they and their prynces. Yee, whole Iuda Ꟶ all the cytesyns of Ierusalem shall goo here thorow, and this cytie shal euer be the more and more inhabited.
There shall come men also from the cyties of Iuda, from about Ierusalem, and from the lande of Beniamin, from the playne feldes, from the mountaynes Ꟶ from the wyldernes: which shall bringe burntofferynges, sacrifices, oblacions, and incense, and offre vp thanckesgeuyng in the house of the Lorde.
But yf ye wyll not be obedient vnto me, to halowe the Sabboth, so that ye will beare your burthens thorow the gates of Ierusalem vpon the Sabboth. Then shall I set fyre vpon the gates of Ierusalem, and it shall burne vp the houses of Ierusalem, and no man shall be able to quench it.
This is another communicacion, that God had with Ieremy, saying:
Aryse, and goo downe into the Potters house, and there shall I tell the more of my mynde.
Now when I cam to the Potters house, I founde hym makynge his worcke vpon a whele.
The vessell that the Potter made of claye, brake amonge his handes: So be beganne a new, and made another vessel accordynge to his mynde.
Then sayde the Lorde thus vnto me.
Maye not I do with you, as this Potter doth, O ye house of Israel, sayeth the Lorde? Beholde, ye house of Israel: ye are in my hande, euen as the claye in the Potters hande.
When I take in hande to rote out, to destroye, or to waste awaye eny people or kyngdom
yf that people (agaynst whom I haue thus deuysed) conuerte from theyr wyckednes: I repente of the plage, that I deuysed to brynge vpon them.
Agayne, when I take in hande, to buylde, or to plante a people or a kyngdom:
yf the same people do euell before me, and heare not my voyce: I repente of the good, that I deuise to do for them:
Speake now therfore vnto whole Iuda: and to them that dwell at Ierusalem. Thus sayeth the Lorde: Beholde, I am deuisyng a plage for you, and am takynge a thing in hande agaynst you. Therfore let euery man turne from his euell waye, take vpon you the thynge that is good, and do right.
But they sayde. Nomore of this we wyll folowe oure awne ymaginacions, and do euery man accordynge to the wylfulnesse of his awne mynde.
Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde. Aske amonge the Heathen, yf eny man hath herde soch horryble thynges, as the daughter of Sion hath done.
Shall not the snowe (that melteth vpon the stony rockes of Libanus) moysten the feldes? Or maye the sprynges of waters be so grauen awaye, that they runne nomore, geue moystnesse, ner make frutefull?
But my people hath so forgotten me, that they haue made sacryfyce vnto vayne Goddes. And theyr prophetes make them fal in theyr wayes from the auncyent pathes, and to go into a fote waye not vsed to be troden of iust men.
Where thorowe they haue brought their lande into an euerlastyng wildernesse Ꟶ scorne. So that whosoeuer trauayleth therby, shalbe abashed, Ꟶ wagge theyr heades.
With an East wynde wyll I scatre them, before their enemie. And when their destruccion commeth, I wyll turne my backe vpon them, but not my face.
Then sayde they come, let vs ymagen somthynge agaynst this Ieremye. For the prestes shall not be destitute of the lawe, nether shall the wysemen de destitute of councel, ner the prophetes destitute of the worde of God. Come, and let vs smyte him with the tong, and let vs marke all his wordes.
Consydre me, O Lord, and heare the voyce of myne enemies
shall they recompence euell for good? for they haue digged a pit for my soule. Remembre, howe that I stode before the, to speake good for them, Ꟶ to turne awaye thy wrath from them.
Therfore let their children dye of hunger, and let them be oppressed wyth the swearde. Let their wiues be robbed of their children, and become wyddowes: let their husbandes be slayne, let their yonge men be kylled with the swearde in the felde.
Lett the noyse be herde out of their houses, when the murtherer commeth sodenly vpon them. For they haue dygged a pyt to take me, Ꟶ layed snares for my fete.
Yet Lorde, thou knowest all their councell, that they haue deuised, to slaye me. Forgeue not their wyckednes, and let not their sinne be put out of thy syght: but let them be iudged before the as the gyltie: This shalt thou do vnto them in the tyme of thy indignacion.
Thus sayde the Lorde: Go thy waye and bye the an earthen pytcher, and bryng forth the Senatours and chefe prestes
into the valley of the chyldren of Hennom, which lieth before the dore that is made of brycke, and shewe them there the wordes, that I shall tell the,
and saye thus vnto them. Heare the worde of the Lorde, ye kynges of Iuda, and ye cytesyns of Ierusalem. Thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israell: Beholde I wyll bring soche a plage vpon this place, that the eares of all that heare it shal glowe.
And that because they haue forsaken me, and vnhalowed this place, Ꟶ haue offred in it vnto straunge goddes: whome nether they, theyr fathers, ner the kynges of Iuda haue knowne. They haue fylled thys place also with the bloude of innocentes
for they haue sett vp an aulter vnto Baal, to burne their children for a burntoffering vnto Baal, which I nether commaunded, ner charged them, nether thought once there vpon.
Beholde therfore the tyme commeth (sayeth the Lorde) that this place shall nomore be called Topheth, ner the valley of the chyldren of Hennom, but the valley of slaughter:
For in this place will I slaye the Senatours of Iuda Ꟶ Ierusalem, and kyll them downe with the swearde in the syght of theyr enemies, and of them that seke their lyues. And their deed carcases will I geue to be meate for the foules of the ayre, and beastes of the felde.
And I will make this citie so desolate and despysed: that who so goeth ther by, shall be abashed and ieast vpon her, because of all her plages.
I wyll fede them also with the flesh of their sonnes and their daughters. Yee, euery one shall eate vp another in the besegynge and straytnesse, wherwith their enemyes (that seke their lyues) shal kepe them in.
And the pitcher shalt thou breake in the sight of the men, that shalbe with the, Ꟶ saye vnto the:
Thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes: Euen so wyll I destroye this people and cytie: as a man breaketh an earthen vessell, that cannot be made whole agayne. In Topheth shal they be buried, for they shall haue none other place.
Thus wyl I do vnto this place also, sayeth the Lord, and to them that dwel therin: yee, I wil do to this citie as vnto Topheth
(For the houses of Ierusalem and the houses of the kynges of Iuda shalbe defyled, lyke as Topheth) because of all the houses, in whose parlers they dyd sacryfyce vnto all the hooste of heauen and powred drinke offeringes vnto straunge goddes.
And so Ieremy cam from Topheth, where the Lorde had sent him to prophecie, and stode in the court of the house of the Lorde, and spake to all the people:
Thus saieth the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israel: Beholde, I wyl brynge vpon this citie and vpon euery towne aboute it, all the plages that I haue deuised against them: for they haue bene obstinate, and wolde not obeye my warnynges.
When Phashur the preste, the sonne of Emer, chefe in the house of the Lorde, herde Ieremy preache so stedfastly:
he smote Ieremy Ꟶ put him in the stockes, that are by the hye gate of Ben Iamin, in the house of the Lorde.
The nexte daye folowynge Phashur brought Ieremy out of the stockes agayne. Then sayd Ieremy vnto him. The Lorde shall call the nomore Phashur (that is excellent and increasynge) but Magor (that is fearfull Ꟶ afrayed) euery where.
For thus sayeth the Lorde: beholde, I wyll make the afrayed, euen thy selfe, Ꟶ all that fauoure the: which shall perish with the swearde of their enemies, euen before thy face. And I wyll geue whole Iuda vnder the power of the kynge of Babylon, which shal carye some vnto Babylon presoners, Ꟶ slaye some with the swearde.
Moreouer, al the substaunce of this lande, all their precious and gorgeous worckes, all costlynes, and all the treasure of the kynges of Iuda: wyl I geue into the handes of their enemies, which shall spoyle them, and carie them vnto Babilon.
But as for the (O Phashur) thou shalt be caried vnto Babilon with all thine housholde, Ꟶ to Babylon shalt thou come, where thou shalt dye, and be buried: thou and al thy fauourers, to whom thou hast preached lyes.
O Lorde, Yf I am disceaued, then hast thou disceaued me: thou hast dealt strongly, and hast preuayled, and makest me stronge agayne. All the daye longe am I despised, Ꟶ laughed to scorne of euery man:
because I haue now preached longe agaynst malycious Tyranny, and shewed them of destruccion. For the whyche cause they cast the word of the Lorde in my teeth, and take me euer to the worst.
Wherfore, I thought from hence forth, not to speake of him, ner to preache eny more in his name. But the worde of the Lorde was a very burnynge fyre in my hert and in my bones, whiche when I wolde haue stopped, I myght not.
For why I herde so many derisions and blasphemies on euery syde of me: complayne vpon him, saye they, and we will tell his tale, yee euen of myne awne companions, and soch as were conuersant with me: went about to murther me, saying vpon him, we shall one waye or other begyle him and preuayle agaynst him, and be auenged of hym.
But the Lord stode by me, lyke a myghtie giaunt: therfore my persecutours fell, Ꟶ coulde do nothing. They shalbe sore confounded, for they haue done vnwysely, they shal haue an euerlastinge shame.
And now, O Lorde of Hostes, thou ryghteous searcher (which knowest the reynes and the very hertes:) let me se them punished, for vnto the I commytte my cause.
Synge vnto the Lorde, and prayse him, for he hath deliuered the soule of the oppressed, from the hande of the violent.
Cursed be the daye, wherin I was borne, vnhappie be the daye, wherin my mother brought me forth.
Cursed be the man, that brought my father the tydinges to make him glad, saying: thou hast gotten a sonne.
Let it happen vnto that man, as to the cyties which the Lord turned vp syde downe. Lett him heare cryenge in the mornynge, and at none daye lamentable howlynge.
Why slewest thou not me, as sone as I cam out of my mothers wombe? O that my mother had bene my graue her self, that the byrth myghte not haue come out, but remayned styll in her.
Wherfore cam I forth of my mothers wombe? To haue experience of laboure and sorowe? and to lead my lyfe with shame?
These are the wordes that the Lorde spake vnto Ieremy what tyme as kyng zedekiah sent vnto him Phashur the sonne of Melchias, and Sophonias the sonne of Maasias preste, sayinge.
Aske councell at the Lorde (we praye the) of our behalfe, for Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babilon besegeth vs, yf the Lorde (peraduenture) will deale with vs, accordynge to his maruelous power, Ꟶ take him from vs.
Then spake Ieremy. Geue zedekias this answere.
Thus sayeth the Lorde God of Israel: beholde, I wil turne backe the weapens that ye haue in youre handes, wherwith ye fyght agaynst the kynge of Babylon Ꟶ the Caldees, which besege you round aboute the walles, and I will bringe them together into the myddest of this cytie,
Ꟶ I my selfe wyll fyght against you, with an outstretched hande, Ꟶ with a myghtie arme, in great displeasure and terrible wrath:
Ꟶ wyll smyte them, that dwel in this citie: yee, both men and catell shall dye of a great pestilence.
And after this (sayeth the Lorde) I shal deliuer zedekias the kinge of Iuda, and his seruauntes, his people (and soch as are escaped in the citie, from the pestilence, swearde and honger) into the power of Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babylon: yee, into the handes of theyr enemyes, into the handes of those that folowe vpon their lyues, which shall smyte them with the swearde, they shal not pytie them, they shall not spare them, they shall haue no mercy vpon them.
And vnto this people thou shalt saye. Thus sayeth the Lorde: beholde, I laye before you the waye of lyfe Ꟶ deeth.
Who so abydeth in this cytie, shall perish: ether with the swearde, wyth honger, or wyth pestilence. But who so goeth out to holde on the Chaldees parte, that besege it, he shall saue hys lyfe Ꟶ shall wynne his soule for a pray.
For I haue set my face agaynst this cytie (sayeth the Lorde) to plage it, and to do it no good. It must be geuen into the hande of the king of Babylon, and be brent with fyre.
And vnto the house of the kyng of Iuda, saye thus: Heare the worde of the Lord
(O thou house of Dauid) for thus saith the Lord: Minister ryghteousnes, and that soone, delyuer the oppressed from violent power or euer my terryble wrath breake out lyke a fyre, and burne so, that no man maye quench it, because of the wyckednes of youre ymaginacions.
Beholde (sayeth the Lorde) I will come vpon you, that dwell in the valleyes, rockes and feldes, and saye. Tush: who will make vs afrayed? or who will come into oure houses?
For I wyll vyset you (saieth the Lorde) because of the wickednes of your inuencions, and wyll kyndle soche a fyre in youre wood, as shall consume al that is aboute you.
Thus sayde the Lorde, Go downe into the house of the kynge of Iuda, Ꟶ speake there these wordes,
and saye: Heare the worde of the Lorde, thou king of Iuda that syttest in the kyngly seat of Dauid: thou and thy seruauntes and thy people that go in and out at this gate.
Thus the Lorde commaundeth: kepe equyte and righteousnesse, deliuer the oppressed from the power of the violent: do not greue ner oppresse the straunger, the fatherlesse ner the wyddow. and shed no innocent bloude in this place.
And yf ye kepe these thynges faythfully then shal there come in at the dore of this house kinges, to sit vpon Dauids seate: they shalbe caried in Charettes and ryde vpon horses both they and their seruauntes, and theyr people.
But yf ye will not be obedient vnto these commaundementes, I sweare by myne awne selfe (sayeth the Lorde) thys house shal be waste.
For thus hath the Lorde spoken vpon the kynges house of Iuda. Thou Gilead art vnto me the head of Libanus. Shall I not make the so waste (Ꟶ thy cyties also) that no man shall dwell therin?
I wil prepare a destroyer with his weapens for the, to hewe downe thy speciall Cedre trees, and to cast them in the fyre.
And all the people that go by this cytie, shal speak one to another. Wherfore hath the Lorde done thus vnto this noble cytie?
Then shall it be answered: because they haue broken the couenaunt of the Lorde theyr God, and haue worshypped Ꟶ serued straunge goddes.
Mourne not ouer the deed, and be not wo for them, but be sory for hym that departeth awaye: for he commeth not agayne, and seeth his natiue countre no more.
For thus sayeth the Lorde, as touchynge Selum the sonne of Iosias kynge of Iuda, which raygned after his father, and is caried out of this place, he shal neuer come hyther agayne,
for he shal dye in the place, wher vnto he is led captiue, and shall se this lande nomore.
Wo worth him, that buyldeth hys house with vnrighteousnes, and his parlers with the good that he hath gotten by vyolence: which neuer recompenseth his neyghbours laboure, ner payeth him his hyre.
He thyncketh in him selfe. I wyll buylde me a wyde house, Ꟶ gorgeous parlers. He causeth windowes to be hewen therin, and the sylynges and ioystes maketh he of Cedre, and paynteth them with Synaper.
Thynckest thou to raygne, now that thou prouokest me to wrath with the Cedre trees? Dyd not thy father eate and drincke, and prospere well, as longe as he dealt wt equite and righteousnesse?
Yee, when he helped the oppressed and poore to their right, then prospered he well. From whence came thys, but onely because he had me before hys eyes, sayeth the Lorde?
Neuertheles, as for thyne eyes and thyne herte, they loke vpon coueteousnesse, to shed innocent bloude, to do wronge Ꟶ violence.
And therfore, thus sayeth the Lorde agaynst Iehoakim, the sonne of Iosias kyng of Iuda. They shall not mourne for him (as they vse to do) alas brother, alas syster. Nether shal they saye vnto him: Alas syr, alas for that noble prince.
But as an Asse shall he be buryed, corrupte and be cast without the gates of Ierusalem.
Clyme vp the hyll of Libanus (O thou daughter Sion) lyft vp thy voyce vpon Basan, crye from all partes: for all thy louers are destroyed.
I gaue the warnynge, whyle thou wast yet in prosperyte. But thou saydest: I wyll not heare. And this maner hast thou vsed from thy youth, that thou woldest neuer heare my voyce.
All thy herdmen shalbe driuen with the wynde, and thy derlynges shalbe caryed awaye into captiuite. Then shalt thou be brought to shame Ꟶ confusion because of al thy wickednes:
thou that dwellest vpon Libanus, Ꟶ makest thy nest in the Cedre trees O how litle shalt thou be regarded when thy sorowes Ꟶ pangues come vpon the, as a woman trauelynge with chylde.
As truly as I lyue (sayeth the Lorde:) Though Conanias the sonne of Iehoakim kynge of Iuda were the sygnet of my right hande, yet will I plucke him of.
And I will geue the into the power of them that seke to slaye the, and into the power of them that thou fearest: into the power of Nabuchodonosor the Kynge of Babylon, and into the power of the Caldees.
Moreouer, I wyll sende the, and thy mother that bare the into a straunge lande, where ye were not borne, and there shall ye dye.
But as for the lande that ye wyll desyre to returne vnto, ye shal neuer come at it agayne.
This man Conanias shall be lyke an ymage robbed Ꟶ torne in peces, which pleaseth noman, for all hys apparell. Wherfore both he and his sede shalbe sent awaye, and cast out into a lande, that they knowe not.
O thou earth, earth, earth: heare the worde of the Lorde. Thus sayeth the Lorde:
Wryte this man amonge the outlawes, for no prosperite shall this man haue all his lyfe longe. Nether shall eny of his sede be so happie, as to syt vpon the seat of Dauid, and to beare rule in Iuda.
Wo be vnto the shepherdes, that destroye, and scatre my flocke, sayeth the Lorde.
Wherfore this is the commaundement of the Lorde God of Israel, vnto the shepeherdes that fede my people: Ye scatre Ꟶ thrust out my flocke, Ꟶ loke not vpon them. Therfore now wyll I vyset the wickednes of youre ymagynacions, sayeth the Lorde.
And wyll gather together the remnaunt of my flocke, from all landes that I had dryuen them vnto, and will brynge them agayne to their pastures, that they maye growe and increase.
I wyll set shepherdes also ouer them, which shall fede them. They shall nomore feare and drede, for there shall none of them be lost, saieth the Lorde.
Beholde, the tyme commeth, sayeth the Lorde, that I wyll rayse vp the ryghteous braunche of Dauid, which kynge shall beare rule, and he shall prosper with wysedome, Ꟶ shall set vp equite Ꟶ righteousnes agayne in the erth.
In this tyme shall Iuda be saued, and Israell shall dwell without feare. And this is the name that they shal call him: euen the Lorde oure ryghteousnesse.
And therfore beholde, the tyme commeth, sayeth the Lorde that it shall nomore be sayde: the Lorde lyueth, which brought the chyldren of Israell out of the lande of Egypte:
But the Lorde lyueth, which brought forth, and led the sede of the house of Israel, out of the North lande, and from all countrees where I had scatred them, and they shall dwell in their awne lande agayne.
My herte breaketh in my body because of the false prophetes, al my bones shake: I am become lyke a droncken man (that by the reason of wyne can take no rest) for verye feare of the Lorde, and of his holy wordes:
Because the lande is full of aduouterers Ꟶ thorowe swering it mourneth Ꟶ the pleasaunt pastures of the deserte are dryed vp. Yee, the waye that men take, is wicked, and theyr gouernaunce is nothinge lyke the holy worde of the Lorde.
For prophetes and the prestes them selues are polluted ypocrites, and theyr wyckednes haue I founde in my house, saieth the Lorde.
Wherfore, their way shall be slyppery in the darcknesse, where in they maye stacker Ꟶ fall. For I wyll bryng a plage vpon them, euen the yeare of theyr visitacion saieth the Lorde.
I haue sene foly amonge the Prophetes of Samaria, that they preached for Baall, and disceaued my people of Israell.
I haue sene also amonge the Prophetes of Ierusalem foule aduoutry, and presumpteous lyes. They take the most shamefull men by the hande, flattringe them, so that they cannot returne from theyr wyckednes. All these wt their cytesyns are vnto me, as Sodome, and as the inhabitours of Gomorre.
Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes concernynge the prophetes: Beholde, I will fede them with wormwod, and make them drincke the water of gall. For from the prophetes of Ierusalem is ypocrisye come into all the lande.
And therfore the Lorde of Hostes geueth you this warninge. Heare not the wordes of the prophetes, that preach vnto you, and disceaue you: surely they teache you vanyte for they speake the meanynge of their awne herte, Ꟶ not out of the mouth of the Lorde.
They saye vnto them that despyse me: The Lorde hath spoken it: Tush: ye shal prospere ryght well. And vnto all them, that walcke after the lust of theyr awne hert, they saye: Tush, there shall no misfortune happen you.
For who hath sytten in the councell of the Lorde, that he hath herde Ꟶ vnderstande, what he is aboute to do: Who hath marcked hys deuyce, and herde it?
Beholde, the stormy wether of the Lorde (that is, his indignacion) shall go forth, and a vyolent whirlwynde shall fal downe vpon the heade of the vngodly.
And the wrath of the Lorde shall not turne agayne, vntyll he perfourme and fulfyl the thought of hys herte. And in the latter dayes ye shall knowe his meanynge.
I haue not sent these prophetes (saieth the Lorde) Ꟶ yet they ranne. I haue not spoken to them, and yet they preached.
But yf they had continued in my councell they had opened to my people my wordes Ꟶ they had turned my people from their euell wayes Ꟶ wycked ymagynacions.
Am I then God that seyth but the thinge, whiche is nye at hande, and not that is farre of? sayeth the Lorde.
Maye eny man hyde hym self so, that I shall not se hym? sayeth the Lorde. Do not I fulfyll heauen and earth? sayeth the Lorde.
I haue herde well ynough, what the prophetes saye that preache lyes in my name, sayeng: I haue dreamed, I haue dreamed.
How longe wyll this continue in the prophetes hert to tell lyes, and to preache the crafty sotylte of their awne hert?
Whose purpose is (with the dreames that euery one tell) to make my people forget my name, as theyr forefathers dyd, when Baall came vp.
The prophet that hath a dreame let hym tell it and he that vnderstandeth my worde, let hym shewe it faythfully. For what hath chaffe and wheate to do together? sayeth the Lorde.
Is not my worde lyke a fyre, sayeth the Lorde, and Lyke an hammer, that breaketh the harde stone.
Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde: beholde, I wyll vpon the prophetes, that steale my worde priuely from euery man:
Beholde, here am I (sayeth the Lorde) agaynst the prophetes, that make tunges tender to speake, Ꟶ saye: The Lorde hath sayde it.
Beholde, here am I (sayeth the Lorde) agaynst those prophetes, that darre prophecy lyenge dreames, and disceaue my people with their vanyties, and myracles, whom I neuer sent, ner commaunded them. They shall do this people greate harme, sayeth the Lorde.
Yf this people, ether eny prophet or preste aske the and saye: what is the burthen of the Lorde? Thou shalt saye vnto them: what burthen? Therfore wyll I cast you fro me, (sayeth the Lorde) because ye your selues a
And the prophet, preste or people that vseth this terme (the burthen of the Lorde) hym wyll I viset, and his house also.
But thus shall ye saye, euery one to another, Ꟶ euery man to his brother. What answere hath the Lord geuen? or what is the Lordes commaundement?
And as for the burthen of the Lorde, ye shal speake nomore of it: for euery mans awne worde is his burthen because ye haue altered the wordes of the lyuynge God the Lorde of Hostes our God.
Thus shall euery man saye to the Prophetes: what answere hath the Lorde geuen the? Or, what sayth the Lorde?
And not once to name the burthen of the Lorde. Therfore thus saieth the Lorde. For so moche as ye haue vsed thys terme (the burthen of the Lorde) where as I notwithstandynge sent vnto you, and forbade you to speake of the Lordes burthen.
Beholde therfore, I wyll repute you as a burthen, and will cast you out of my presence: yee, and the citie also, that I gaue you and your fathers:
and will bryng you to an euerlastinge confusion, and into soch a shame, as shall neuer be forgotten.
The Lorde shewed me a vysion: Beholde, there stode two maundes of fygges before the temple of the Lorde, after that Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babylon had led awaye captiue Iechonias the sonne of Iehoakim kynge of Iuda the myghtie men also of Iuda, with the worckmasters, and connynge men of Ierusalem, vnto Babilon.
In the one maunde were very good fygges, euen lyke as those that be first ripe. In the other maunde were very naughty fygges, which might not be eaten, they were so euell.
Then sayde the Lorde vnto me: what seyst thou Ieremy? I sayde fygges, wherof some be very good, and some so euel, that no man maye eate them.
Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto me, after this maner:
Thus saieth the Lorde the God of Israell: lyke as thou knowest the good figges, so shall I knowe the men led awaye, whom I haue sent out of this place into the lande of the Caldees, for theyr profyte:
and I will set myne eyes vpon them for the best, for I wyll brynge them agayne into this lande: I wyll buylde them vp, and not breake them downe: I will plante them, and not rote them out.
And I wyll geue them an herte, to knowe how that I am the Lorde. They shalbe my people, Ꟶ I will be their God, for they shall returne vnto me with their whole herte.
And lyke as thou knowest the naughtie figges, which maye not be eaten, they are so euell: Euen so wyll I (sayeth the Lorde) let zedekias the Kynge of Iuda, (ye and all his princes, Ꟶ the residue of Ierusalem that remayne ouer in thys lande, and them also that dwell in Egipte) to be vexed and plaged in all kyngdomes and landes.
And wyll make them to be a reprofe, a comen by worde, a laughynge stocke and shame, in all the places, where I shall scatre them.
I wil sende the swearde, honger Ꟶ pestilence amonge them, vntyll I haue cleane consumed them out of the lande, that I gaue vnto them and theyr fathers.
A sermon that was geuen vnto Ieremy, vpon all the people of Iuda. In the fourth yeare of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosias kynge of Iuda that was in the fyrst yeare of Nabuchodonosor kyng of Babilon.
Which sermon, Ieremy the prophet made vnto all the people of Iuda, and to all the inhabitours of Ierusalem, on this maner.
From the thyrtene yeare of Iosias the sonne of Amon kynge of Iuda, vnto thys present daye (that is euen .xxiii. yeare) the worde of the Lorde hath bene committed vnto me. And so I haue spoken to you, I haue rysen vp early, I haue geuen you warnynge in season, but ye wolde not heare me.
Though the Lorde hath sent hys seruauntes, all the prophetes vnto you in season. Yet wolde ye not obeye, ye wolde not enclyne youre eares to heare.
He sayde turne agayne euery man from his euell waye, and from your wicked ymaginacions, and so shall ye dwell for euer in the lande, that the Lorde promised you Ꟶ youre forefathers.
And go not after straunge goddes, serue them not, worship them not, and angre me not wyth the worckes of your handes: then wyl not I punish you.
Neuertheles ye wolde not heare me (sayth the Lord:) but haue defied me with the worckes of your handes, to your awne greate harme.
Wherfore thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes: Because ye haue not herkened vnto my worde,
lo, I wyll sende out, Ꟶ call for all the people, that dwell in the North, sayeth the Lorde, and will prepayre Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babylon my seruaunt, and will brynge them vpon this lande, and vpon all that dwell therin, and vpon all the people that are aboute them, and wyll vtterly rote them oute. I will make of them a wildernesse, a mockage, and a continuall deserte.
Moreouer, I wyll take from them the voyce of gladnesse and solace, the voyce of the brydegrome and the bryde, the voyce of the anoynted, with the creshettes:
and thys whole lande shall become a wyldernes, and these nacions shall serue the kynge of Babylon, threscore yeares and ten.
When the .lxx. yeares are expired, I wyll vyset also the wyckednesse of the kynge of Babylon and his people sayeth the Lorde: yee, and the lande of the Caldees, and wyll make it a perpetuall wyldernes,
and wyll fulfyll all my wordes vpon that lande, which I haue deuised agaynst it: yee, all that is written in this boke, which Ieremy hathe prophecyed of all people:
so that they also shall be subdued vnto diuers nacions Ꟶ great kynges for I wyll recompense them, accordynge to theyr dedes and worckes of theyr awne handes.
For thus hath the Lorde God of Israel spoken vnto me: Take this wyne cuppe of indignacion fro my hande, that thou mayest cause all the people, to whom I send the, for to dryncke of it:
that when they haue droncken therof, they maye be mad, Ꟶ out of their wyttes, when the swearde commeth, that I wyll sende amonge them.
Then toke I the cuppe from the Lordes hande, and made all people to dryncke therof, vnto whome the Lorde had sent me.
But fyrst the cytie of Ierusalem, Ꟶ all the cyties of Iuda, their kynges and prynces, to make them desolate, wast, despysed, and hyssed at, and cursed, accordynge as it is come to passe this daye.
Yee, and Pharao the kinge of Egypte, his seruauntes, his princes and his people all together one wyth anoth
Ꟶ all kynges of the lande of Hus, all kynges of the Philistines lande, Ascalon, Azah, Accaron and the remnaunt of Asdod,
the Edomites, the Moabites and the Ammonites
al the kynges of Tirus Ꟶ Sidon: the kinges of the Iles that are beyonde the see:
Dedan, Thema, Buz Ꟶ all them that dwell in the vttermost partes of the worlde:
all the kinges of Araby and (generally) all the kynges that dwel in the deserte:
al the kinges of zamri, al the kynges of Elam, all the kinges of the Medees,
all kynges towarde the North, whether they be farre or nye, euery one agaynst his neyghbours: Yee, and all the kyngdomes that are vpon the whole earth. The kynge of Sezach sayde he shall dryncke with them also.
Therfore saye thou vnto them: Thys is the commaundement of the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israel: Drincke and be droncken, spewe and fall, that ye neuer ryse, and that thorowe the swearde, whych I wyll sende amonge you.
But yf they will not receaue the cuppe of thy hande, and dryncke it, then tell them: Thus doth the Lorde of Hostes threaten you: dryncke it ye shall, and that shortely.
For lo, I begynne to plage the cytye, that my name is geuen vnto: thincke ye then that I wyll leaue you vnpunished? Ye shal not go quyte, for why, I call for a swearde vpon all the inhabitours of the earth, sayeth the Lorde of Hostes.
Therfore tell them all these wordes and saye vnto them. The Lorde shall crye from aboue, and let his voyce be herde from hys holy habytacion. With a great noyse shall he crye from hys courte regall. He shall geue a great voyce, lyke the grape gatherers, and the sounde ther of shalbe hearde vnto the endes of the worlde.
For the Lorde hath a iudgement to geue vpon all people, Ꟶ will holde his court of iustice with all flesh, and punish the vngodly, sayth the Lorde.
For thus sayth the Lord of hostes: Beholde, a miserable plage shall goo from one people to another, and a greate stormy water shall aryse from all the endes of the earth.
And the same daye shall the Lorde him selfe sleye them, from one ende of the earth to another. There shall no mone be made for eny of them, none gathered vp, none buryed: but shall lye as dunge vpon the grounde.
Mourne, O ye shepherdes, and crye: sprinkle youre selues with ashes, O ye rammes of the flocke: for the tyme of youre slaughter is fulfylled, that ye shall sleye one another, and you shalbe scatred, and ye shall fall lyke vessels connyngly made.
The shepherdes shall haue no waye to fle, and the rammes of the flocke shall not escape.
Then shall the shepherdes crye horryly, and the rammes of the flocke shall mourne? for the Lorde hath consumed their pasture,
and theyr best feldes lye deed because of the horryble wrath of the Lord.
They haue forsaken theyr foldes lyke as a lyon. For theyr lande is waste, because of his furiouse crueltye, and of his fearfull indignatyon.
In the begynninge of the raygne of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosiah kyng of Iuda, came thys worde from the Lorde, sayinge:
Thus sayeth the Lorde: Stande in the court of the Lordes house, and speake vnto all them which (oute of the cyties of Iuda) come to do worshyp in the Lordes house, all the wordes that I commaunde the to saye. Loke that thou kepe not one worde backe,
yf peraduenture they wyll herken, and turne euery man from hys wycked waye: that I maye also repente of the plage, which I haue determyned to brynge vpon them, because of theyr wicked inuencyons.
And after thys maner shalt thou speake vnto them: Thus sayth the Lorde: yf ye will not obey me, to walke in my lawes, which I haue geuen you,
and to heare the wordes of my seruauntes the prophetes, whom I sent vnto you, rysynge vp tymely, and styll sendynge. If ye wyll not folowe them (I saye)
then I wyll do to thys house as I dyd vnto Siloh, and wyll make thys citye to be abhorred of all the people of the earth.
And the preastes, the prophetes and all the people hearde Ieremy preache these wordes, in the house of the Lorde.
Nowe when he had spoken out all the wordes that the Lorde commaunded him to preach vnto the people, then the prestes, the prophetes and all the people toke holde vpon him, and sayde: thou shalt dye.
Howe darest thou be so bolde, as to saye in the name of the Lorde, it shall happen to thys house as it dyd vnto Siloh: and thys citye shalbe so waste, that no man shall dwell therin?
And when all the people were gathered about Ieremy in the house of the Lorde, the princes of Iuda hearde of this rumour, and they came soone oute of the kynges palace, into the house of the Lord: and sat them downe before the newe dore of the Lorde.
Then spake the prestes and the prophetes vnto the rulers and to all the people, these wordes: Thys man is worthy to dye, for he hath preached agaynst thys citye, as ye youre selues haue hearde with your eares.
Then sayde Ieremy vnto the rulers and to all the people: The Lorde hath sent me to preache agaynst this house and agaynst this cytie all the wordes that ye haue heard.
Therfore amende youre wayes, and youre aduysementes, and be obedient vnto the voyce of the Lorde youre God: so shall the Lorde repente of the plage, that he hath deuised agaynst you.
Nowe as for me: I am in your handes, do with me, as ye thynke expedient and good.
But this shall ye knowe: yf ye put me to death, ye shall make youre selues, thys citye and all the inhabytours therof, gyltye of innocent bloude. For thys is of a trueth that the Lorde hath sent me vnto you, to speake all these wordes in youre eares.
Then sayde the rulers and the people vnto the prestes and prophetes: This man maye not be condempned to death, for he hath preached vnto vs in the name of the Lorde oure God.
The elders also of the lande stode vp, and saide thus vnto all the people:
Micheah the Morasthite, which was a prophet vnder Ezekiah kynge of Iuda, spake to all the people of Iuda. Thus sayeth the Lorde of hostes: Syon shalbe plowed lyke a felde, Ierusalem shalbe an heape of stones, and the hyll of the Lordes house shalbe turned to an hye wod.
Dyd Ezekiah the kynge of Iuda, and the people of Iuda put hym to death for this? No verely: but rather feared the Lord, and made theyr prayer vnto hym. For the which cause also the Lorde repented of the plage, that he had deuysed agaynst them. Shulde we then do soch a shamefull dede agaynst oure soules?
There was a prophete also, that preached styfly in the name of the Lorde, called Uriah the sonne of Semeiah of Cariathiarim: this man preached also agaynst this citye and agaynst this lande, according to all as Ieremy sayth.
Nowe when Iehoakim the kinge with all the estates Ꟶ prynces had hearde hys wordes, the kynge went about to slaye hym. When Uriah perceaued that, he was afrayed, and fledd, and departed into Egipte.
Then Iehoakim the kinge sent seruauntes into the lande of Egypt, namely Elnathan the sonne of Achbor, and certayne men with hym into Egipt,
which fetched Uriah out of Egipt, and brought him vnto kynge Iehoakim, that slewe him with the sweard, and cast hys deed bodye into the comen peoples graue.
But Ahikam the sonne of Saphan helped Ieremye, that he came not into the handes of the people to be slayne.
In the begynninge of the reygne of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosiah kyng of Iuda, came this word vnto Ieremy from the Lorde, which spake thus vnto me:
Make the bondes and chaynes, and put them about thy necke,
and send them to the kynge of Edom, to the kynge of Moab, to the kynge of Ammon, to the king of Tirus, and to the kynge of Sidon: and that by the messengers, which shall come to Ierusalem vnto zedekiah the kinge of Iuda:
and byd them saye vnto theyr masters: Thus sayth the Lorde of hostes the God of Israel: speake thus vnto your masters:
I am he that made the earth, the men and the catell that are vpon the grounde, with my great power and outstretched arme, and haue geuen it vnto whom it pleased me.
And now will I delyuer all these landes into the power of Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon my seruaunt. The beastes also of the felde shall I geue hym to do hym seruyce.
And all people shall serue hym, Ꟶ hys sonne, and his childers children, vntill the tyme of the same lande become also: yee, many people and great kinges shall serue him.
Moreouer, that people and kyngdome, which wyll not serue Nabuchodonosor, and that wyll not putt theyr neckes vnder the yocke of the kyng of Babilon: the same people wyll I vyset with the swearde, with honger, with pestilence, vntyll I haue consumed them in hys handes, sayeth the Lorde.
And therfore, folowe not your prophetes, sothesayers, expounders of dreames, charmers and wytches: which saye vnto you: ye shall not serue the kynge of Babylon.
For they preache you lyes: to brynge you farre from your lande, and that I might cast you out, and destroye you.
But the people that put theyr neckes vnder the yock of the king of Babylon, and serue hym, those I will let remayne styll in their awne lande, sayth the Lorde, and they shall occupye it, and dwell therin.
All these thynges tolde I zedekiah the king of Iuda, and sayde: Put your neckes vnder the yocke of the king of Babilon, and serue him and his people, that ye maye lyue.
Why wylt thou and thy people perysh with the swearde, with honger, with pestylence: lyke as the Lorde hath deuysed for all people, that wyll not serue the kynge of Babylon?
Therfore, geue no eare vnto those prophetes, that tell you: ye shall not serue the kyng of Babylon: for they preache you lies:
nether haue I sente them, sayeth the Lorde. Howbeit they are bolde, falsely to prophecy in my name: that I myght the sooner dryue you out, and that ye myght peryshe with yor preachers.
I spake to the prestes also, and to all the people. Thus sayth the Lorde: Heare not the wordes of those prophetes, that preache vnto you, and saye: Beholde, the vesselles of the Lordes house shall shortlye be brought hyther agayne from Babilon. For they prophecye lyes vnto you.
Heare them not, but serue the kynge of Babylon, that ye maye lyue. Wherfore wyll ye make thys citye to be destroyed?
But yf they be true prophetes in very dede, and yf the worde of the Lorde be committed vnto them, then let them praye the Lorde of hostes, that the remnaunt of the ornamentes (which are in the house of the Lorde, and remayne yet in the house of the kynge of Iuda and at Ierusalem) be not caryed to Babylon also.
For thus hath the Lorde of hoostes spoken concernynge the pyllers, the lauer, the seate and the resydue of the ornamentes that yet remayne in thys citye,
which Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babylon toke not, when he caryed awaye Iechoniah the sonne of Iehoakim king of Iuda with all the power of Iuda and Ierusalem, from Ierusalem vnto Babylon, captyue.
Yee, thus hath the Lorde of hoostes the God of Israel spoken, as touchynge the resydue of the ornamentes of the Lordes house, of the kynge of Iudaes house, and of Ierusalem.
And thys was done in the same yeare, euen in the begynnynge of the raygne of zedekiah kynge of Iuda.
But in the .iiij. yeare of the raygne of zedekiah kinge of Iuda, in the .v. moneth, it happened that Hananiah the sonne of Assur the prophet of Gibeon, spake to me in the house of the Lorde, in the presence of the prestes, Ꟶ of all the people, and sayde:
Thus sayth the Lorde of hoostes the God of Israel: I haue broken the yock of the king of Babilon,
Ꟶ after two yeare will I brynge agayne into this place: all the ornamentes of the Lordes house, that Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon caried awaye from this place vnto Babilon.
Yee, I wyll bringe agayne Iechoniah the sonne of Iehoakim the kinge of Iuda hym selfe, with all the presoners of Iuda (that ar caryed vnto Babilon) euen into thys place, sayth the Lorde: for I wyll breake the yock of the kinge of Babylon.
Then the prophet Ieremy gaue answere vnto the prophet Hananiah, before the prestes and before all the people that were present in the house of the Lord.
And the prophete Ieremy sayde: Amen, the Lorde do that, and graunte the thyng which thou hast prophecyed: that he maye bryng agayne all the ornamentes of the Lordes house, and restore all the presoners from Babylon into this place.
Neuerthelesse, herken thou also, what I wyll saye, that thou and all the people maye heare.
The prophetes that were before vs in tyme past, which prophecyed of warre, or trouble, or pestilence,
ether of peace, vpon many nacyons and great kingdomes, were proued by thys (yf God had sende them in very dede) when the thynge came to passe, which that prophete tolde before.
And Hananiah the prophet toke the chayne from the prophete Ieremyes necke, and brake it,
and with that sayde Hananiah, that all the people might heare. Thus hath the Lorde spoken: Euen so will I breake the yock of Nabuchodonosor king of Babilon, from the neck of all nacions: yee, and that within this two yeare. And so the prophet Ieremye went his waye.
Nowe after that Hananiah the prophete had taken the chayne from the prophete Ieremyes necke, and broken it. The worde of the Lorde came vnto the prophete Ieremy, saieng:
Go, and tell Hananiah thes wordes. Thus sayth the Lorde. Thou hast broken the chayne of wodd: but in steade of wodd thou shalt make cheynes of yron.
For thus sayth the Lord of hostes the God of Israel: I wyll put a yock of yron vpon the neck of all this people, that they maye serue Nabuchodonosor the king of Babilon: yee, and so shall they do. And I wyll geue hym the beastes in the felde.
Then sayde the prophet Ieremy vnto the prophet Hananiah: heare me Hananiah: The Lorde hath not sent the but thou bringest this people into a false belefe.
And therfore thus sayth the Lorde: beholde, I wyll sende the out of the lande, and within a yeare thou shalt dye, because thou hast falsely spoken agaynst the Lorde.Ier
These are the wordes of the boke, that Ieremy the prophet sent from Ierusalem vnto the presoners, the senatoures, prestes, prophetes, Ꟶ all the people, whom Nabuchodonosor had led vnto Babilon:
after that time that king Iechoniah and his quene, his chamberlaynes, the princes of Iuda and Ierusalem, the worckemasters of Ierusalem were departed thyther.
Which boke Elasah the sonne of Saphan, and Gamariah the sonne of Helkiah dyd beare, whom zedekiah the kyng of Iuda sent vnto Babilon to Nabuchodonosor the kinge of Babilon: these were the wordes of Ieremyes boke.
Thus hath the Lorde of hoostes the God of Israel spoken vnto all the presoners, that were led from Ierusalem vnto Babylon:
buylde you houses to dwel therin: plante you gardens, that ye maye enioye the frutes therof:
take you wyues, to beare you sonnes Ꟶ daughters, prouyde wyues for your sonnes and husbandes for your daughters that they maye get sonnes and daughters, and that ye maye multiplye there. Laboure not to be fewe,
but seke after peace and prosperite of the citye, wherin ye be presoners, Ꟶ praye vnto God for it. For in the peace therof, shall yor peace be.
For thus sayth the Lorde of hostes the God of Israel. Let not these prophetes and sothsayers that be among you disceaue you: Ꟶ beleue not your awne dreames.
For why? they preache you lyes in my name, and I haue not sent them, sayth the Lorde.
But thus sayth the Lorde. When ye haue fulfylled .lxx. yeares at Babylon, I wyll brynge you home, Ꟶ of myne awne goodnes I wyll carye you hyther agayne into thys place.
For I know what I haue deuised for you, sayth the Lorde. My thoughtes are to geue you peace, and not trouble (which I geue you all ready) and that ye myght haue hope againe.
Ye shall crye vnto me, ye shall go and call vpon me, and I shall heare you.
Ye shall seke me and fynde me. Yee, yf so be that ye seke me with your whole hert,
I wil be founde of you, sayth the Lorde, and wyll delyuer you oute of preson, and gather you together agayne out of all places, wherin I haue scatered you, sayeth the Lorde, and wyll brynge you agayne to the same place, from whence I caused you to be caried awaye captiue.
But where as ye saye, that God hath raised you vp prophetes at Babilon.
Thus hath the Lorde spoken to the kinge that sytteth in the throne of Dauid, and to all the people that dwell in this citye, youre brethren that are not gone with you into captiuytie.
Thus (I saye) speaketh the Lord of hostes: Beholde, I wyll sende a swearde, honger and pestilence vpon them, and wyll make them lyke vntimely fygges, that maye not be eaten for bitternes.
And I will persecute them with the swearde, with honger, and pestilence. I will delyuer them vp to be vexed of all kingdomes, to be cursed, abhorred, laughed to scorne, and put to confusyon of all the people, amonge whom I haue scatered them:
and that because they haue not bene obedient vnto my commaundementes, sayth the Lorde, which I sente vnto them by my seruauntes the prophetes. I stode vp early, and sent vnto them: but they wolde not heare, sayeth the Lorde.
Heare therfore the worde of the Lorde, all ye presoners, whom I sente from Ierusalem vnto Babilon.
Thus hath the Lorde of hostes the God of Israel spoken of Ahab the sonne of Colaiah, and of zedekiah the sonne of Maasiah, which prophecye lyes vnto you in my name. Beholde, I wyll deliuer them into the hande of Nabuchodonosor the kyng of Babilon, that he maye slaye them before youre eyes.
And all the presoners of Iuda, that are in Babilon shall take vpon thys terme of cursynge, and saye: Nowe God do vnto the, as he dyd vnto zedekiah and Ahab, whom the king of Babilon rosted in the fyer,
because they synned shamefully in Israel. For they haue not onely defiled their neyghbours wyues, but also preached lyinge wordes in my name, which I haue not commaunded them. This I testifye, and assure, sayth the Lorde.
But as for Semeiah the Nehelamite thou shalt speake vnto hym.
Thus sayth the Lord of hostes the God of Israel: Because thou hast sealed letters vnder thy name vnto all the people that is at Ierusalem, and to Sophoniah the sonne of Maasiah the preste: yee, Ꟶ sent them to all the prestes: wherein thou wrytest thus vnto hym:
The Lorde hath ordeyned the to be preste in the stead of Iehoiada the preste: that thou shuldest be the chefe in the house of the Lord aboue all prophetes, and preachers, and that thou mightest set them vpon the pillery, or in the stockes.
Howe happeneth it then, that thou hast not reproued Ieremye of Anathoth, which neuer leaueth of his prophecienge.
And besyde all thys, he hath sent vs worde vnto Babilon, and tolde vs playnely, that oure captiuite shall longe endure: that we shulde buylde vs houses to dwell therin: Ꟶ to plante vs gardens that we maye enioye the frutes therof.
Which lettre Sophoniah the preaste redde, and let Ieremy the prophete heare it.
Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto Ieremy, sayinge:
Sende worde to all them that be in captiuyte, on thys maner: Thus hath the Lorde spoken concerning Semeiah the Nehelamite: Because that Semeiah hath prophecyed vnto you without my commyssion, Ꟶ brought you into a fals hope,
therfore thus the Lorde dothe certifye you: Beholde, I will viset Semeiah the Nehelamite, and his seede: so that none of hys shall remayne amonge this people, and none of them shall se the good, that I will do for this people, sayth the Lorde. For he hath preached falsely of the Lorde.
These are the wordes, that the Lord shewethe vnto Ieremye, sayinge:
Thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel: Wryte vp diligently all the wordes, that I haue spoken vnto the, in a booke.
For lo, the tyme commeth, sayth the Lorde, that I wyll bryng agayne the presoners of my people of Israel and Iuda, sayth the Lord. For I wyll restore them vnto the lande, that I gaue to theyr fathers, Ꟶ they shall haue it in possession.
Agayne, these wordes spake the Lorde, concerning Israel and Iuda:
Thus sayth the Lorde: We haue hearde a terrible crye, feare and disquietnes.
For what elles do thys signifye, that I se? Namely, that all stronge men smyte, euery man hys hande vpon hys loynes, as a woman in the paine of her trauayle. Who euer sawe a man trauayle with childe? Enquyre therafter, and se. Yee, all their faces are maruelous pale.
Alas for this daye, which is so dredefull that none maye be likened vnto it: and alas for the tyme of Iacobs trouble, from the which he shall yet be delyuered.
For in that daye, sayth the Lorde, I will take his yocke from of thy neck, Ꟶ breake thy bondes: And strangers shall nomore serue hym:
but they shall do seruice vnto God theyr Lorde, and to Dauid theyr kynge, whom I wyll rayse vp vnto them.
And as for the, O my seruaunt Iacob, feare not, sayth the Lorde, and be not afraied, O Israel. For lo, I wyll helpe the also from farre, and thy seed from the lande of their captiuytie. And Iacob shall turne agayne, he shalbe in rest, and haue a prosperous lyfe, Ꟶ no man shall make him afrayed.
For I am with the to helpe the, sayth the Lorde. And though I shall destroie all the people, amonge whom I haue scatered the, yet wyll I not destroye the, but correcte the, and that with discretion. For I knowe that thou art in no wyse without faute.
Therfore thus sayth the Lord: Thy brosinges are peryllous, Ꟶ thy woundes ready to cast the in to sicknes.
Ther is no man to medle with thy cause, or to lay plaster vpon the, or to bynde vp thy woundes: there maye no man helpe the.
All thy louers haue forgotten the, and care nothynge for the. For I haue geuen the a cruell stroke, and chastened the roughly: and that for the multitude of thy mysdedes: for thy synnes haue had the ouer hande.
Why makest thou mone for thy harme? in dede, thou art sore wounded Ꟶ in ieopardye: but for the multitude of thy mysdedes and synnes, I haue done this vnto the.
And therfore, all they that deuoure the, shalbe deuoured: and all thyne enemies shalbe led into captiuite. All they that make the wast, shalbe wasted them selues, Ꟶ all those that robbe the, wyll I make also to be robbed.
For I wyll geue the thy health agayne and make thy woundes whole, sayeth the Lorde: because they reuyled the, as one cast awaye and despised, Syon (sayde they) is she whom no man regardeth.
For thus sayth the Lorde: Beholde, I will bring agayne the captiuytie of Iacobs tentes, and defende his dwelling place. The citye shalbe buylded in her olde estate, and the houses shall haue their ryght foundacion,
And out of them shall go thankesgeuing, and the voyce of ioye. I will multiplye them, and they shall not be fewe. I shall endue them with honoure, Ꟶ no man shall subdue them.
Theyr chyldren shalbe as a fore tyme, and their congregacion shall continue in my syght. And all those that vexe them, wyll I vyset.
A captayne also shall come of them: and a prynce shall springe out from the myddest of them: hym will I chalenge to my selfe, and he shall come vnto me. For what is he, that geueth ouer his hert to come vnto me? sayth the Lorde.
Ye shalbe my people also, and I wilbe youre God.
Beholde, on the other syde shall the wrath of the Lorde breake out as a stormy water as a mighty whirle winde: and shall fall vpon the heades of the vngodly.
The terrible displeasure of the Lorde shall not leaue of, vntyll he haue done, and perfourmed the intent of hys herte, which in the latter dayes ye shall vnderstande.
At the same tyme, sayth the Lord, shall I be the God of all the generatyons of Israel, and they shalbe my people.
Thus sayeth the Lorde: The people of Israel, which escaped in the wildernesse from the swearde, founde grace to come into theyr rest.
Euen so shall the Lorde now also apeare vnto me from farre, and saye: I loue the with an euerlasting loue, therfore, by my mercye I haue drawen the to me.
I will repayre the agayne, O thou daughter of Israel, that thou mayest be fast and sure. Thou shalt take thy tabrettes agayne, and go forth with them, that leade the daunce.
Thou shalt plante vynes agayne vpon the hylles of Samaria, and the grape gatherers shall plante, and commenly eate of it.
For the dayes shall come when the watchemen vpon the mount of Ephraim shall crye: aryse, let vs go vp vnto Sion to our Lorde God,
for thus sayth the Lorde: Reioyce with gladnes because of Iacob, crie vnto the head of the Gentils: speake out, syng, and saye: O Lorde saue thy people, the remnaunt of Israel, and make them whole.
Beholde, I wyll bringe them agayne from out of the north lande, and gather them from the endes of the worlde, with the blynde and lame that are amonge them, with the wemen that be great with chylde, and soch as be also delyuered: and the company of them that come agayne, shalbe greate.
They shall come weping and with mercyfull pitye wyll I bring them hyther agayn. I wyll leade them to the ryuers of water in a strayght waye, where they shall not stomble. For I am Israels father, Ꟶ Ephraim is my fyrst borne.
Heare the worde of the Lorde, O ye Gentiles, preach in the yles, that lye farre of, and saye: he that hath scatered Israel, shall gather hym together agayne, Ꟶ shall kepe hym as a shepherde doth his flocke.
For the Lord hath redemed Iacob, and ryd hym from the hande of the violent.
And they shall come, Ꟶ reioyce vpon the hyll of Sion, and shall haue plenteousnes of goodes, which the Lorde shall geue them. Namely, wheate, wyne, oyle, yonge shepe Ꟶ calues. And theyr conscience shalbe as a well watred garden, for they shall nomore be hongrye.
Then shall the mayde reioyce in the daunce, yee, both yonge and olde folkes. For I wyll turne their sorowe into gladnesse, and wyll conforte them from theyr sorowes and make them ioyfull.
I wyll powre plenteousnesse vpon the hertes of the prestes, and my people shalbe satisfyed with my goodnesse, sayth the Lord
Thus sayth the Lorde: The voyce of heuynes, weping and lamentation was heard on hye: euen of Rachel mournyng for her children, and wolde not be conforted, because they were awaye.
But nowe, sayth the Lorde, leaue of from wepynge and crienge, witholde thyne eyes from teares, for thy laboure shalbe rewarded, sayth the Lorde. And they shall come agayne out of the lande of their enemies:
Yee, euen thy posterite shall haue consolation in this, sayth the Lorde, that thy chyldren shall come agayne into their awne lande.
Moreouer, I heard Ephraim, that was led awaye captiue, complayne on this maner: O Lorde, thou hast correct me, Ꟶ thy chastenynge haue I receaued, as an vntamed calfe. Conuerte thou me, and I shalbe conuerted: for thou art my Lorde God:
Yee, assone as thou turnest me, I shall refourme my selfe: and when I vnderstande, I shall smyte vpon my thyghe. For verely I haue commytted shamefull thinges. For I haue borne the reprofe and confusion of my youth.
Upon this complaynte, I thought thus by my selfe: is not Ephraim my deare sonne? Is he not the childe, with whom I haue had all myrth and pastyme? For sens the time that I first commened with hym, I haue him euer in remembraunce: therfore, my very hert dryueth me vnto him, gladly and louynglye wyll I haue mercy vpon him, sayth the Lord.
Get the watchmen, prouyde teachers for the, set thyne hert vpon the ryght waye, that thou shuldest walke, and turne agayn, O thou daughter of Israel, turne agayne to these cityes of thyne.
Howe longe wilt thou go astraye, O thou shrynking daughter? For the Lord wyll worke a newe thing vpon earth. A woman shall compasse a man.
For thus sayth the Lorde of hoostes the God of Israel: It wyll come therto, that when I haue brought Iuda out of captiuite, these wordes shalbe heard in the lande and in hys cityes. The Lorde, which is the fayre brydegrome of ryghteousnes, make the frutefull, O thou holy hyll.
And there shall dwell Iuda, and all her cityes, the shepherdes, and husbandemen.
For I shall fede the hongrye soule, and refresh all faynte hertes.
When I hearde thys, I came agayne to my selfe, I mused, lyke as I had bene waked oute of a swete slepe.
Beholde, sayth the Lorde, the dayes come, that I wyll sowe the house of Israel, Ꟶ the house of Iuda, with men and with catell.
Yee, it shall come therto, that lyke as I haue gone about in tymes past to rote them out, to scatre them, to breake them downe, to destroye them, and chasten them. Euen so wyll I also go diligently aboute, to buylde them vp agayne, Ꟶ to plante them, sayth the Lorde.
Then shall it nomore be sayde: the fathers haue eaten a sower grape, and the chyldrens teeth are set on edge:
for euery one shall dye for hys awne mysdede, so that whoso eateth a sowre grape, hys teeth shalbe set on edge.
Beholde, the dayes come, sayth the Lorde, that I wyll make a newe couenaunt wt the house of Israel, and wt the house of Iuda:
not after the couenaunt that I made wt their fathers, when I toke them by the hande: and led them out of the lande of Egypt: which couenaunt they bracke: yee, euen when I as an husbande had rule ouer them, sayeth the Lorde.
But this shalbe the couenaunt that I wyll make with the house of Israel after those dayes, sayth the Lorde. I will plante my lawe in the inward partes of them, and wryte it in their hertes, Ꟶ wilbe their God, and they shalbe my people.
And from thens forth, shall no man teach his neyghbour or his brother, Ꟶ saye: knowe the Lorde. But they shall all knowe me from the lowest vnto the hyest, sayth the Lorde. For I will forgeue their mysdedes, and will neuer remembre their synnes eny more.
Thus sayth the Lorde, which gaue the sunne to be a lyght for the daye, and the moone and starres to shyne in the night: which moueth the see, so that the floudes therof waxe fearce: his name is the Lorde of hoostes.
Like as this ordinaunce shall neuer be taken oute of my syght, sayth the Lorde. So shall the sede of Israel neuer ceasse, but allwaye be a people before me.
Moreouer, thus sayth the Lorde: lyke as the heauen aboue cannot be measured, Ꟶ as the foundacions of the earth beneth maye not be sought out. So wyll I also not cast out the whole seede of Israel, for that they haue commytted, sayeth the Lorde.
Beholde, the dayes come, sayth the Lord, that the citye of the Lorde shalbe enlarged from the towre of Hananeel, vnto the gate of the corner wall:
From thens shall the ryght measure be taken before her vnto the hyll toppe of Gareb, Ꟶ shal come about Gaath,
and the whole valley of the deed carkases, and of the ashes, and all the feldes vnto the broke of Cedron: and vnto the corner of the horsgate towarde the east, where as the sanctuary of the Lorde also shalbe set. And when it is nowe buylded, and set vp of thys fasshyon, it shall neuer be be broken, nor cast downe any more.
These wordes spake the Lorde vnto Ieremy, in the .x. yeare of zedekiah king of Iuda: which was the .xviij. yeare of Nabuchodonosor,
what tyme as the kyng of Babylons hoost layed seage vnto Ierusalem. But Ieremy the prophet laye bounde in the courte of the preson, which was in the king of Iudas house:
where zedekiah the kyng of Iuda caused hym to be layed, because he had prophecyed of this maner: Thus sayeth the Lorde: Beholde, I wyll delyuer this citye into the handes of the kyng of Babilon, which shall take it.
As for zedekiah the kynge of Iuda: he shall not be able to escape the Chaldees: but surely he shall come into the handes of the kyng of Babylon: which shall speake wt him mouth to mouth: and one of them shall loke another in the face.
And zedekiah shalbe caryed vnto Babylon, and there shall he be, vntyll the tyme that I viset hym, sayth the Lorde. But yf thou takest in hande to fyght agaynst the Chaldees, thou shalt not prospere.
And Ieremy sayde: thus hath the Lorde spoken vnto me:
Behold, Hananeel the sonne of Selum thyne vncles sonne, shall come vnto the, and requyre the to redeme the lande that lyeth in Anathoth vnto thy selfe: for by reason of kynred it is thy right to redeme it, and to bye it out.
And Hananeel myne vncles sonne came to me in the court of the preson, accordynge to the worde of the Lorde, and sayde vnto me: Bye my lande, I praye the, that lieth in Anathoth in the contrey of Beniamin: for by heritage thou haste ryght to loose it oute for thy selfe, therfore redeme it. Then I perceaued that thys was the commaundement of the Lorde,
and so I bought the lande from Hananeel of Anathoth, myne vncles sonne, and weied him there the moneye: euen seuen syckles and ten syluer pence.
I caused hym also to make me a writing and to seale it: and called recorde therby, and weyed hym there the money vpon the wayghtes.
So I toke the euidence with the copye, when it was orderlye sealed and redde ouer,
and I gaue the euidence vnto Baruch the sonne of Neriah the sonne of Maasiah in the syght of Hananeel my cosyne, and in the presence of the witnesses, that be named in the euidence: and before all the Iewes that were therby in the courte of the preson:
I charged Baruch also before them sayinge:
The Lord of hostes the God of Israel commaundeth the, to take thys sealed euydence with the copie: and to laye it in an earthen vessell, that it maye longe continue.
For the Lorde of hoostes the God of Israel hath determyned that houses, feldes, and vyneyardes shalbe possessed agayne in this lande.
Now when I had deliuered the euidence vnto Baruch the sonne of Neriah, I besought the Lorde, saying:
O Lord God, it is thou that hast made heauen and earth with thy greate power and hie arme, and there is nothyng hyd from the.
Thou shewest mercy vpon thousandes, thou recompencest the wickednes of the fathers, into the bosome of the children that come after them.
Thou art the greate and mightye God, whose name is the Lorde of hoostes: greate in councell, and excellent in worcke. Thyne eyes loke vpon all the wayes of mens chyldren, to reward euery one after his waye: Ꟶ according to the frutes of his inuencions.
Thou haste done greate tokens and wonders in the lande of Egypte, as we se thys daye, vpon the people of Israel and vpon those men: to make thy name greate, as it is come to passe thys daye.
Thou hast brought thy people of Israel oute of the land of Egipt, with tokens, with wonders, with a myghtye hande, with a stretched out arme and wt greate terriblenes:
and hast geuen them this lande, lyke as thou haddest promysed vnto their fathers. Namely, that thou woldest geue them a lande, that floweth with mylke and honye.
Nowe when they came therin, and possessed it, they folowed nott thy voyce, and walcked not in thy lawe, but all that thou commaundedest them to do, that haue they not done, and therfore come all these plages vpon them.
Beholde, there are bullworckes made now agaynst the citye, to take it: and it shalbe wonne of the Chaldees that besege it, with swearde, with honger and death, and looke what thou hast spoken, that same shall come vpon them. For lo, all thynges are present vnto the.
Yet (saist thou vnto me, O Lorde God) and commaundest me, that I shall loose a pece of lande vnto my selfe, and take witnesses therto: and yet in the meane season the citye is delyuered into the power of the Chaldees.
Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto me, sayinge:
Beholde, I am the Lorde God of all fleshe, is there eny thynge then to hard for me?
Therfore thus saith the Lorde: beholde, I shall delyuer thys citye into the power of the Chaldees, and into the power of Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babylon, they shall take it in.
For the Chaldees shall come, and wynne thys citye, and sett fyer vpon it, and burne it: with the gorgeouse houses, in whose parlers they haue made sacrifyce vnto Baal, and powred drynckofferynges vnto straunge Goddes, to prouoke me vnto wrath.
For seyng the chyldren of Israel, and the children of Iuda haue wrought wickednes before me euer from theyr youth vp, what haue they els done, but prouoked me wt the workes of their awne handes? sayth the Lorde.
Or, what hath this citye bene elles but a prouoking of my wrath, euer sence the daye that they buylded it, vnto thys houre wherin I cast it out of my sight,
because of the great blasphemyes of the children of Israel Ꟶ Iuda, which they haue done to prouoke me: yee, they, their kynges, their prynces, their prestes, their prophetes, the men of Iuda, and the cytesyns of Ierusalem.
When I stode vp early, and taught them and instructed them, they turned their backes to me, and not theyr faces.
They wolde not heare, to be refourmed and correct: but set their ydols in the house, that is halowed vnto my name, to defyle it.
They haue builded hye places for Baal in the valley of the chyldren of Hennom, to vowe theyr sonnes and daughters vnto Moloch: which I neuer commaunded them: nether came it euer in my thoughte, to make Iuda synne with soch abhominatyon.
And nowe therfore, thus hath the Lorde God of Israel spoken, concernynge this cytie, which (as ye youre selues confesse) shalbe delyuered into the hande of the kynge of Babylon, when it is wonne with the swearde, with honger and with pestilence.
Beholde, I will gather them together from all landes, wherin I haue scatered them in my wrath in my fearfull and great displeasure: and wyll bring them agayne vnto thys place, where they shall dwell safely.
And they shalbe my people, and I wilbe their God.
And I wyll geue them one hert and one waye, that they maye feare me all the daies of their lyfe, that they and their chyldren after them maye prospere.
And I wyll sett vp an euerlastyng couenaunt with them. Namelye, that I wyll neuer ceasse to do them good, and that I wyll put my feare in their hertes, so that they shall not runne awaye from me.
Yee, I will haue a lust and pleasure to do them good, and faythfully to plante them in this lande with my whole hert and with all my soule.
For thus sayth the Lorde: lyke as I haue brought all this great plage vpon this people, euen so wyll I also bring vpon them all the good, that I haue promised them.
And men shall haue their possessions in this lande, wherof ye saye nowe, that it shall nether be inhabited of people ner of catell: but be deliuered into the handes of the Chaldees.
Yee, lande shalbe bought for money, Ꟶ euidences made therupon, and sealed before witnesses in the countrey of Beniamin, and rounde aboute Ierusalem, in the cities of Iuda, in the cities that are vpon the mountaynes, and in them that lye beneth: yee, and in the cityes that are in the south. For I wyll brynge their presoners hither agayne, sayth the Lorde.
Moreouer, the worde of the Lorde came vnto Ieremy on thys maner, when he was yet bound in the court of the preson.
Thus sayth the Lorde, which fulfilleth the thing that he speaketh: the Lorde which perfourmeth the thing that he taketh in hand: euen he, whose name is the Lorde:
crye vnto me, Ꟶ I wyll answere, and shewe the great and hye thinges, which were vnknowen vnto the.
Thus (I saye) spake the Lorde God of Israel, concerninge the houses of thys citye, and the houses of the kinges of Iuda, that they are broken thorowe the ordinaunce and the sweard.
Because the enhabitours of this citie haue come to fight against the Chaldees: and they are fylled with the deed karcases of men, whom I haue sleyne in my wrath and displeasure: when I turned my face from thys citye, because of all her wickednes.
Behold, sayth the Lord, I wyll repayre Ꟶ heale their woundes, and make them whole: I will open them the large treasure of peace and trueth.
And I will returne the captiuytie of Iuda and Israel: and wyll set them vp agayne as they were afore.
From all mysdedes, wherin they haue offended agenst me, I will clense them. And all their blasphemyes which they haue done agaynst me, when they regarded me not, I will forgeue them.
And thys shall get me a name, a prayse, Ꟶ honoure among all the people of the earth, which shall heare all the good, that I wyll shewe vnto them: yee, they shall be afrayed and astonyed at all the good dedes and benefytes that I wyll do for them.
Moreouer, thus sayth the Lorde: In this place, wherof ye saye that it shalbe a wyldernes, wherin nether people ner catell shall dwell: in like maner in the cityes of Iuda Ꟶ without Ierusalem (which also shalbe so voyde, that nether people ner catell shall dwell there)
shall the voyce of gladnes be hearde agayne, the voyce of the brydegrome Ꟶ of the bryde, the voyce of them that shall singe: Prayse the Lorde of hoostes, for he is louynge and hys mercy endureth for euer: and the voyce of them that shall offer vp giftes in the house of the Lorde. For I will restore the captiuitie of this lande, as it was afore, sayth the Lorde.
Thus sayeth the Lorde of hoostes: It shall come yet therto, that in thys lande, which is voyde from men and catell, and in all the cityes of the lande, there shalbe set vp shepherdes cotages:
in the cityes vpon the mountaynes: and in the cyties that lye vpon the playne, and in the cyties of the southe. In the lande of BenIamin, in the feldes of Ierusalem, and in the cyties of Iuda shall the shepe be nombred agayne, vnder the hande of hym, that telleth them, sayeth the Lord
Beholde, the tyme commeth, sayeth the Lorde, that I will perfourme that good thynge, which I haue promised vnto the house of Israel and to the house of Iuda.
In those dayes and at the same tyme, I wyll bring forth vnto Dauid, the braunche of ryghtuousnes, Ꟶ he shall do equytie Ꟶ righteousnesse in the lande.
In those dayes shall Iuda be helped and Ierusalem shall dwell safe, and he that shall call her is euen God oure ryghteousnesse.
For thus the Lorde promyseth. Dauid shall neuer want one, to syt vpon the throne of the house of Israel:
nether shall the prestes and Leuites want one to offre allwaye before me burntofferinges, to kyndle the meatofferynges, and to prepare the sacrifyces.
And the worde of the Lord came vnto Ieremy after this maner.
Thus sayeth the Lord: maye the couenaunt which I haue made wt daye and nyght be broken, that there shulde not be daye and nyght in due season?
Then maye my couenaunt also be broken, which I made wt Dauid my seruaunte, and so he not to haue a sonne to reygne in hys throne. so shall also the prestes Ꟶ Leuites neuer fayle, but serue me.
For lyke as the starres of heauen maye not be nombred, nether the sande of the see measured: so wyll I multiplye the sede of Dauid my seruaunt, Ꟶ the Leuites my ministers.
Moreouer, the worde of the Lorde came to Ieremy, saying:
Consydrest thou not what this people speaketh? Two kynreddes (saye they) had the Lorde chosen, Ꟶ those same two hath he cast awaye. For so they haue despised my people Ꟶ they reputed them as though they were no people,
Therfore thus saieth the Lorde: If I haue made no couenaunt with daye Ꟶ nyght, Ꟶ geuen no statute vnto heauen Ꟶ earth:
then will I also cast awaye the sede of Iacob Ꟶ Dauid my seruaunt: so that I will take no prince out of his sede, to rule the posteritie of Abraham, Isaac Ꟶ Iacob. But yet I wil turne agayne their captiuitie, Ꟶ be mercyfull vnto them.
These are the wordes which the Lord spake vnto Ieremy what tyme as Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babylon, Ꟶ all his Hostes (out of all the kingdomes that were vnder his power) Ꟶ all hys people, fought agaynst Ierusalem and all the cyties therof.
Thus sayeth the Lorde God of Israel: Goo, Ꟶ speake to zedekiah the kynge of Iuda, and tell hym. The Lorde sendeth the thys worde: Beholde, I wyll delyuer thys cytie into the hande of the kyng of Babylon, he shall burne it,
and thou shalt not escape hys handes, but shalt be led awaye presoner, and deliuered into his power. Thou shalt loke the kynge of Babylon in the face, and he shal speake with the, mouth to mouth and then shalt thou goo to Babilon.
Yet heare the worde of the Lorde, O zedekiah thou kynge of Iuda: Thus sayeth the Lorde vnto the. Thou shalt not be slayne with the swearde,
but shalt dye in peace. Lyke as thy fore fathers the kynges, thy progenitours, were brente: so shalt thou be brent also, and in thy mourninge they shall saye: oh Lord. For thus haue I determyned, sayeth the Lorde.
Then spake Ieremy the prophet all these wordes vnto zedekiah kynge of Iuda in Ierusalem:
what tyme as the kynge of Babylons hooste beseged Ierusalem, and the remnaunt of the cyties. Namely, Lachis and Azecach, which yet remayned of the stronge defensed cyties of Iuda.
These are the wordes that the Lord spake vnto Ieremy the prophete, when zedekiah was agreed with all the people at Ierusalem, that there shulde be proclamed a libertie:
so that euery man shuld let his seruaunt Ꟶ handmayde go fre, Hebrue and Hebruesse, and no Iewe to holde hys brother as a bonde man.
Nowe as they had consented, all the princes and all the people which had gathered vnto this agrement that euery man shulde set at lybertie his bonde seruaunte and bonde woman and no longer to holde them bonde euen so they were obedient, Ꟶ let them go free.
But afterwarde they repented, and toke agayne the seruauntes and hande maydens, whom they had lett go free, and so made them bonde againe.
For the which cause the worde of the Lorde came vnto Ieremye from the Lorde hym selfe, sayinge:
Thus sayeth the Lord God of Israel: I made a couenaunt with youre fathers, when I brought them out of Egypt, (that they shulde no more be bondmen) sayinge.
When seuen yeares are oute, euery man shall let hys bought seruaunte an Hebrue go fre, yf he haue serued hym syxe yeares. But youre fathers obeyed me not Ꟶ herkened not vnto me.
As for you, ye were nowe turned, Ꟶ did right before me, in that ye proclamed, eueryman to let his neighboure go free, and in that ye made a couenaunt before me, in the temple that beareth my name.
But yet ye haue turned youre selues agayne, and blasphemed my name. In this, that euery man hath requyred his seruaunt Ꟶ handmayden agayne, whom ye had let go quyte and fre, Ꟶ compelled them to serue you agayne, and to be youre bonde men, and bondwemen.
And therfore thus sayeth the Lorde: ye haue not obeyed me, euery man to proclame fredome vnto his brother Ꟶ neyghboure: wherfore, I wyll call you vnto a fredome, sayeth the Lord: euen vnto the swearde, to the pestilence, Ꟶ to honger, Ꟶ will make you to be plaged in all the kyngdomes of the earth.
Yee, those men that haue broken my couenaunt, Ꟶ not kepte the wordes of the appoyntement, which they made before me: when they hewed the calfe in two, Ꟶ when there wente thorowe the two halfes therof:
The Prynces of Iuda, the Princes of Ierusalem, the gelded men, the Prestes and all the people of the lande, which wente thorowe the two sydes of the calfe.
Those men wyll I geue into the power of theyr enemies, Ꟶ into the handes of them that folowe vpon theyr lyues. And their deed bodies shalbe meate for the foules of the ayre, Ꟶ beastes of the felde.
As for zedekiah the kynge of Iuda and hys Prynces, I wyll delyuer them into the power of their enemyes, and of them that desyre to slaye them, and into the hande of the kynge of Babylons hoste which nowe is departed from you:
But thorow my commaundement (sayeth the Lorde) they shal come agayne before thys cytye, they shall fyght agaynst it, wynne it, and burne it: Moreouer, I wyll laye the cyties of Iuda so waste, that no man shall dwell therin.
The wordes whyche the Lorde spake vnto Ieremy, in the raynge of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosiah kyng of Iuda, are these:
Go vnto the house of the Rechabites, Ꟶ call them out, and bringe them to the house of the Lorde into some commodyous place, and geue then wyne to dryncke.
Then toke I Iazaniah the sonne of Ieremy the sonne of Habaziniah, and his brethren, Ꟶ all his sonnes, and the whole housholde of the Rechabytes:
and brought them to the house of the Lorde into the closet of the chyldren of Hanan the sonne of Iegedaliah the man of God: which was by the closet of the Princes that is aboue the closet of Maasiah the sonne of Selum, which is the treasurer.
And before the sonnes of the kynred of the Rechabytes, I set pottes full of wyne, and cuppes, Ꟶ sayde vnto them: Drincke wyne.
But they sayde: we wyll dryncke no wyne for Ionadab the sonne of Rechab oure father commaunded vs, saying: ye and youre sonnes shall neuer dryncke wyne buylde no houses, sowe no sede, plante no vynes,
yee, ye shal haue no vineyardes: but for all youre tyme ye shall dwell in tentes, that ye maye lyue longe in the lande wherin ye be straungers.
Thus haue we obeyed the commaundement of Ionadab the sonne of Rechab oure father in all that he hath charged vs, Ꟶ so we drynke no wyne all oure lyfe longe: we, nor oure wyues, our sonnes and oure daughters.
Nether builde we any house to dwell therin, we haue also amonge vs nether vineyardes, ner cornelande to sowe:
but we dwell in tentes, we obeye, and do accordynge vnto all, that Ionadab oure father commaunded vs.
But now that Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon came vp into the lande, we sayde, come, lett vs go to Ierusalem, that we maye escape the hooste of the Caldees and the Assyrians: and so we dwell now at Ierusalem.
Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto Ieremy saying.
Thus sayeth the Lord of hoostes the God of Israel: Go and tell the men of Iuda and the inhabitours of Ierusalem: Will ye not be refourmed, to obey my wordes saieth the Lorde?
The wordes which Ionadab the sonne of Rechab commaunded his sonnes, that they shulde drynke no wyne, are fast and surely kept: for vnto thys daye they dryncke no wyne, but obeye their fathers commaundement. But as for me, I haue stand vp early, I haue spoken vnto you, Ꟶ geuen you earnest warnynge: Ꟶ yet haue ye not bene obedient vnto me.
Yee, I haue sent my seruauntes, all the prophetes vnto you, I rose vp early, Ꟶ sent you worde, sayinge: O turne you, nowe euery man from his wycked waye: amende youre lyues, and go not after straunge goddes, to worshyppe them: that ye maye continue in the lande, which I haue geuen vnto you Ꟶ youre fathers, but ye wolde nether heare me, ner folowe me.
The chyldren of Ionadab Rechabs sonne haue stedfastly kepte their fathers commaundement, that he gaue them, but this people is not obedient vnto me.
And therfore thus sayeth the Lorde of hoostes the God of Israel: Beholde, I will bringe vpon Iuda Ꟶ vpon euery one that dwelleth in Ierusalem, all the trouble that I haue deuysed agaynst them. For I haue spoken vnto them, but they wold not folowe. I haue called vnto them, neuertheles they wold geue me no answere.
Ieremy also spake vnto the housholde of the Rechabites: Thus sayeth the Lord of Hostes the God of Israell: For so moche as ye haue obeyed the commaundement of Ionadab youre father, and kepte all hys preceptes, and done accordyng vnto all that he hath bydden you:
Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes, the God of Israel: Ionadab the sonne of Rechab shall not fayle, but haue one out of his stocke to stande alwaye before me.
In the fourth yeare of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosiah Kynge of Iuda, came the worde of the Lord vnto Ieremy, sayinge.
Take a boke, and wryte therin all the wordes, that I haue spoken to the, agaynst Israel agaynst Iuda, and agaynst all the people, from the tyme that I beganne for to speake vnto the (in the raygne of Iosiah) vnto thys daye.
That when the house of Iuda heareth of the plage, which I haue deuysed for them, they maye peraduenture turne, euery man from hys wycked waye, that I maye forgeue theyr offences and synnes.
Then dyd Ieremy call Baruch the sonne of Neriah, and Baruch wrote in the boke at the mouth of Ieremy, all the wordes of the Lorde, which he had spoken vnto hym.
And Ieremy commaunded Baruch, sayinge: I am in preson, so that I maye not come into the house of the Lorde:
therfore go thou thyther, and reade the boke, that thou hast wryten at my mouth: Namely, the wordes of the Lord and rede them in the Lordes house vpon the fastynge daye, that the people, whole Iuda, and all they that come out of the cities, maye heare.
Peraduenture they wyll praye mekely before the face of the Lorde, Ꟶ turne euery one from hys wycked waye. For greate is the wrath and displeasure, that the Lorde hath taken agaynst this people:
So Baruch the sonne of Neriah dyd, accordinge vnto all that Ieremy the Prophete commaunded him, readinge the wordes of the Lorde out of the boke in the Lordes house.
And this was done in the fyft yeare of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosiah kynge of Iuda, in the .ix. moneth when it was commaunded, that all the people of Ierusalem shulde fast before the Lord, and they also that were come from the cyties of Iuda vnto Ierusalem.
Then redde Baruch the wordes of Ieremy out of the boke with in the house of the Lord out of the treasury of Gamariah the sonne of Saphan the Scribe, which is besyde the hyer lofte of the newe dore of the Lordes house: that all the people myght heare.
Nowe when Micheah the sonne of Gamariah the sonne of Saphan had hearde all the wordes of the Lorde out of the boke,
he wente downe to the kynges palace into the Scrybes chambres, for there all the Prynces were set. Elysama the Scribe, Dalaiah the sonne of Semei, Elnathan the sonne of Achbor, Gamariah the sonne of Saphan, zedekiah the sonne of Hananiah, with all the Prynces.
And Micheah tolde them all the wordes, that he hearde Baruch reade out of the boke before the people.
Then all the princes sent Iehudi the sonne of Nathaniah, the sonne of Selamiah, the sonne of Chusi, vnto Baruch, saying. Take in thyne hande the boke, wherout thou hast red before all the people, and come. So Baruch the sonne of Neriah toke the boke in his hande, Ꟶ came vnto them.
And they sayd vnto him. Syt downe, Ꟶ rede the boke that we maye heare also. So Baruch redd that they might here.
Nowe when they had hearde all the wordes, they were abashed one vpon another, and sayde vnto Baruch. We wyll certifye the kinge of all these wordes.
And they examyned Baruch, sayinge: tell vs, howe dydest thou write all these wordes out of hys mouth?
Then Baruch answered them: He spake all these wordes vnto me with his mouth, Ꟶ I wrote them in the boke.
Then sayde the princes vnto Baruch: Go thy waye, Ꟶ hyde the with Ieremy, so that no man knowe where ye be.
And they went into the kyng to the courte. But they kept the boke in the chambre of Elisama the Scribe, Ꟶ tolde the kyng all the wordes that he myght heare.
So the kyng sent Iehudi to fetch him the boke which he brought out of Elysama the Scribes chambre. And Iehudi red in it, that the kynge and all the prynces, which were aboute him, myght heare.
Nowe the kynge sat in the wynter house, for it was in the .ix. Moneth Ꟶ there was a fyre before him.
And when Iehudi had redde thre or foure leaues therof, he cut the boke in peces with a penne knyfe, and cast it into the fyre vpon the harth, vntyll the boke was all brente in the fyre vpon the harth.
Yet no man was abashed therof, or rente his clothes: nether the kynge hym selfe, ner his seruauntes, though they hearde all these wordes.
Neuerthelesse Elnathan, Dalaiah, Ꟶ Gamariah besought the kynge, that he wolde not burne the boke: not withstandynge the kynge wolde not heare them,
but commaunded Ierahmael the sonne of Amalech, Saraiah the sonne of Ezriel Ꟶ Selamiah the sonne of Abdiel, to laye handes vpon Baruch the Scrybe, and vpon Ieremy the Prophete: but the Lorde kepte them out of syght.
After nowe that the kynge had brent the boke, Ꟶ the sermons which Baruch wrote at the mouth of Ieremy: The worde of the Lord came vnto Ieremye, sayinge.
Take another boke, and wryte in it all the forsayde sermons: that were wryten in the fyrst boke, which Iehoakim the kynge of Iuda hath brente.
And tell Iehoakim the kynge of Iuda: thus sayeth the Lorde: thou hast brente the boke, Ꟶ thoughtest within thy selfe. Why hast thou wryten therin, that the kynge of Babylon shall come, and make thys lande waste: so that he shall make both people and catell to be out of it?
Therfore thus the Lorde sayeth of Iehoakim the kyng of Iuda. There shall none of hys generacyon syt vpon the throne of Dauid. Hys deed corse shalbe cast oute, that the heate of the daye, and the frost of the nyght maye come vpon hym.
And I wyll vyset the wyckednes of hym, of his sede, Ꟶ of hys seruauntes, Moreouer, all the euell that I haue promysed them (though they herde me not) wyll I bringe vpon them, vpon the inhabitoures of Ierusalem, and vpon all Iuda.
Then toke Ieremy another boke, and gaue it Baruch the Scribe the sonne of Neriah, whiche wrote therin out of the mouth of Ieremy: all the sermons that were in the fyrst boke, which Iehoakim the kyng of Iuda dyd burne. And there were added vnto them many mo sermons, then before.
zedekiah the sonne of Iosiah which was made kynge thorowe Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babylon, reigned in the lande of Iuda, in the steade of Cononiah the sonne of Iehoakim.
But nether he, ner hys seruauntes, ner the people in the lande wolde obeye the wordes of the Lorde, which he spake by the Prophet Ieremy.
Neuerthelesse, zedekiah the kyng sent Iehucal the sonne of Selemiah Ꟶ Sophoniah the sonne of Maasiah the Prest to the Prophet Ieremy, saying: O praye thou vnto the Lorde oure God for vs
Nowe Ieremy walked fre amonge the people at that tyme, and was not put in preson as yet.
Pharaos hoste also was come out of Egypte: which when the Caldees that beseged Ierusalem perceaued, they departed from thence.
Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto Ieremy the Prophet, sayinge:
Thus sayeth the Lorde God of Israel, thys answere shall ye geue to the kynge of Iuda, that sent you vnto me for councell: Beholde, Pharaos hoste which is come forth to helpe you, shall returne to Egypte into his awne lande:
but the Caldees shall come agayne, and fyght agaynst thys cytie, wynne it, and sett fyre vpon it.
For thus sayeth the Lorde, disceaue not youre awne myndes, thynckinge on this maner: tush, the Caldees go now their waye from vs. No, they shall not go theyr waye.
For though ye had slayne the whole hoste of the Caldees, that besege you, and euery one of the slayne laye in his tente, yet shulde they stande vp, and set fyre vpon thys cyte.
Now when the hoste of the Caldees was broken vp from Ierusalem, for feare of the Egypcyans armye,
Ieremye went out of Ierusalem towarde the lande of BenIamin, to get hym from amonge the people.
And when he came vnder BenIamyns porte, there was a porter, called Ieriah, the sonne of Selemiah the sonne of Hananiah, which fell vpon him, and toke him sayinge: thy mynde is to runne to the Caldees.
Then sayde Ieremy: It is not so, I go not to the Caldees. Neuertheles, Ieriah wolde not beleue hym, but brought Ieremy bounde before the Princes.
Wherfore the princes were angrye with Ieremy, and smote him, and layed hym in preson in the house of Ionathas the scribe. For he was the rular of the preson.
Thus was Ieremy put into the dongeon and preson, and so laye there a longe tyme.
Then zedekiah the kyng sent for him, and called him, and asked hym quyetly in his awne house, sayinge: thynkest thou this busynes (that now is in hande) commeth of the Lorde? Ieremy answered: yee, that it doth: and thou (sayed he) shalt be delyuered into the kynge of Babylons power.
Moreouer, Ieremy sayde vnto kynge zedekiah. What haue I offended agaynst the, against thy seruauntes, or agaynst thys people, that ye haue put me in preson?
Where are youre prophetes which haue prophecyed vnto you, Ꟶ sayde, that the kynge of Babylon shulde not come agaynst you Ꟶ this lande?
And therfore heare nowe, O my Lorde the kynge: let my prayer be accepte before the, and sende me nomore into the house of Ionathas the Scrybe, that I dye not there.
Then zedekias the kynge commaunded to put Ieremy in the fore entrye of the preson, and dayly to be geuen hym a cake of bread out of the bakers streate vntyll all the bread in the cytie was eaten vp. Thus Ieremy remayned in the fore entry in the preson.
Saphatiah the sonne of Mathan, Godoliah the sonne of Phasphur, Iucal the sonne of Semeliah, and Phashur the sonne of Melchiah perceaued the wordes, that Ieremy had spoken vnto all the people, namely on thys maner:
Thus sayeth the Lord: Who so remayneth in thys cytie, shal perish, ether with the swearde, with honger or with the pestylence. But who so falleth vnto the Caldees, shall escape winnynge his soule for a praye, Ꟶ shall lyue.
For thus sayeth the Lorde: Thys cytie (no doute) must be delyuered into the power of the kynge of Babylon, and he also shall wynne it.
Then sayde the prynces vnto the kynge: Syr, we beseche you let thys man be put to death. For thus he discorageth the handes of the soudiers that be in thys cytie, and the handes of all the people, when he speaketh soche wordes vnto them. This man verely laboureth not for peace of the people, but myschefe.
zedekiah the kynge answered Ꟶ sayde: lo, he is in youre handes, for the kyng maye denye you nothinge.
Then toke they Ieremy, and cast hym into the dongeon of Melchiah the sonne of Hamelech, that dwelt in the fore entrie of the preson. And they lett downe Ieremy with coardes into a dongeon, where there was no water, but myre.
So Ieremy stack fast in the myre. Now when Abedmelech the Morian beynge a chamberlayne in the kynges courte, vnderstode, that they had cast Ieremy into the dongeon:
he went out of the kynges house, and spake to the kynge, (which then sat vnder the porte of BenIamin) these wordes:
My Lorde the kynge, where as these men medle with Ieremye the prophet, they do hym wronge: Namely, in that they haue put him in preson, there to dye of honger, for there is no more bread in the cytie.
Then the kynge commaunded Abedmelech the Morian and sayde: Take from hence .xxx. men whom thou wylt, Ꟶ drawe vp Ieremy the prophet out of the dongeon, before he dye.
So Abedmelech toke the men wt him, and went to the house of the kynge, and there vnder the treasurie gatt olde ragges Ꟶ worne cloutes, and lett them downe by a coarde, into the dongeon to Ieremy.
And Abedmelech the Morian sayde vnto the prophet Ieremy: O, put these ragges and cloutes vnder thyne arme holes, betwyxte them and the coardes: Ꟶ Ieremy dyd so.
So they drewe vp Ieremy with coardes Ꟶ toke him out of the dongeon, Ꟶ he remayned in the fore entrye of the preson.
Then zedekiah the kynge sent Ꟶ caused Ieremy the prophete to be called vnto him, into the thyrde entrye, that is in the house of the. Lord. And the kinge sayd vnto Ieremy: I will aske the somewhat but hyde nothynge fro me.
Then Ieremy answered zedekiah: Yf I be playne vnto the, thou wilt cause me to suffre death: If I geue the councell, thou wylt not folowe me.
So the king swore an ooth secretly vnto Ieremy, sayinge. As truly as the Lorde lyueth that made vs these soules, I wyll not slaye the, ner geue the into the handes of them that seke after thy lyfe.
Then sayde Ieremy vnto zedekiah. Thus sayeth the Lord of hoostes the God of Israel If case be, that thou wylt go forth vnto the kynge of Babylons prynces, thou shalt saue thy lyfe, and thys cytie shalt not be brent yee, both thou and thy housholde shall escape with youre lyues.
But yf thou wylt not go forth to the kynge of Babylons princes, then shall thys cytie be delyuered into the handes of the Caldees, which shall set fyre vpon it, and thou shalt not be able to escape them.
And zedekiah sayde vnto Ieremy. I am afrayde for the Iewes, that are fled vnto the Caldees, lest I come in theyr handes, and so they to haue me in derisyon.
But Ieremy answerde: No, they shall not betraye the: O herken vnto the voyce of the Lord (I beseche the) which I speake vnto the so shalt thou be well, and saue thy lyfe.
But yf thou wilt not go forth, the Lorde hath tolde me this playnely:
Beholde, all the wemen that are left in the kynge of Iudaes house, shalbe led forth out to the kynge of Babilons princes. And they shal saye, that thou art disceaued: and that they whom thou didest put thy trust, haue gotten the vnder, Ꟶ sett thy fete fast in the myre, and gone their waye from the.
Therfore all thy wyues with their chyldren shall they leade forth vnto the Caldees, and thou shalt not escape their handes, but shalt be the kyng of Babilons presoner, Ꟶ this cytie shalt thou cause to be brent.
Then sayde zedekiah vnto Ieremye: loke that no body knowe of these wordes, and thou shalt not dye.
But yf the princes perceaue, that I haue talked with the and come vnto the, saying: O speake, what sayde the king to the? hyde it not from vs, Ꟶ we wyll not put the to death. Tell vs (we praye the) what sayde the kynge to the?
Se thou geue them thys answere: I haue humbly besought the kynge, that he wyll lett me lye nomore in Iehonathans house, that I dye not there.
Then came all the princes vnto Ieremy, and asked hym. And he tolde them, after the maner as the kynge bad him. Then they helde theyr peace, and let hym alone for they perceaued nothinge.
So Ieremy abode styll in the fore entrie of the preson, vntyll the daye that Ierusalem was wonne.
Nowe when the cytie of Ierusalem was taken (for in the .ix. yeare of zedekiah Kynge of Iuda in the tenth Moneth, came Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon Ꟶ all his hoste, and beseged Ierusalem Ꟶ foughte agenst it.
And in the .xi. yeare of zedekiah in the fourth Moneth the .ix. daye of the Moneth, he brake into the cytie.)
Then all the princes of the king of Babylon, came in, Ꟶ sat them downe vnder the porte: Neregel, Sarezer, Samgarnebo, Sarsachim, Rabsaris, Neregel, Sarezer, Rabmag, wt all the other princes of the Kynge of Babylon.
And when zedekiah the Kynge of Iuda with hys soudiers sawe them, they fled, and departed out of the cytie by nyght thorowe the kynges garden, Ꟶ thorowe the porte that is betwene the two walles, and so they wente towarde the wyldernesse.
But the Caldees Hoste folowed faste after them, and toke zedekiah in the felde of Iericho, and brought hym presoner to Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babylon vnto Reblath, that lyeth in the land of Hemath where he gaue iudgement vpon him.
So the kyng of Babylon caused the chyldren of zedekiah and all the nobles of Iuda be slayne, before hys face at Reblath.
And made zedekias eyes to be put out, and bounde him with two chaynes, and sent him to Babylon.
Moreouer, the Caldees brent vp the kynges palace, with the other houses of the people, and brake downe the walles of Ierusalem.
As for the remnaunt of the people that were in the cytie, and soch as were come to helpe them (whatsoeuer was left of the comen sorte) Nabuzaradan the chefe captayne caryed them to Babylon.
But Nabuzaradan the chefe captayne let the rascall people (Ꟶ those that had nothinge) dwell styll in the lande of Iuda, and gaue them vineyardes Ꟶ corne feldes at the same tyme.
Nabuchodonosor also the kynge of Babylon gaue Nabuzaradan the chefe captayne a charge, concernynge Ieremy, sayinge:
take and cherish hym, and make moche of him: se thou do hym no harme, but intreate him after his awne desyre.
So Nabuzaradan the chefe captayne, Nabusazban Rabsares, Nergal Sarezer Rabmag and all the kynge of Babylons Lordes sent for Ieremy
and caused hym to be fet out of the fore entrye of the preson, Ꟶ committed him vnto Godoliah the sonne of Ahikam the sonne of Saphan: that he shulde carye him home, and so he dwelt amonge the people.
Now whyle Ieremy laye yet bounde in the fore entrie of the preson, the worde of the Lord came vnto him, sayinge:
Goo and tell Abedmelech the Morian: Thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israel: Beholde, the cruell and sharpe plage that I haue deuysed for this cytie, will I bringe vpon them, that thou shalt se it:
but I wyll delyuer the (sayeth the Lorde) and thou shalt not come in the handes of those men, whom thou fearest.
For doutles I wyll saue the, so that thou shalt not perish wt the swearde: but thy lyfe shalbe saued, and that because thou hast put thy trust in me, sayeth the Lorde.
Thys is the worde that the Lord spake vnto Ieremy, when Nabuzaradan the chefe Captayne had let him go fre from Ramah, whyther he had led him bounde amonge all the presoners, that were caryed from Ierusalem and Iuda vnto Babylon.
The chefe captayne called for Ieremy, and sayde vnto hym. The Lorde thy God spake myghtely before of the mysery vpon thys place:
Nowe the Lorde had sent it, and perfourmed it as he had promysed. For ye haue synned agaynst the Lord, and haue not bene obedient vnto his voyce, therfore commeth thys plage vpon you.
Beholde, I lowse the bondes from thy handes thys daye: yf thou wilt nowe go with me vnto Babylon, vp then: for I wyll se to the, Ꟶ prouyde for the. But yf thou wylt not go with me to Babylon, then remayne here. Beholde, all the lande is at thy wyll, loke wher thou thynkest conuenient and good for the to abyde, there dwell.
For as yet he was not gone backe againe to Godoliah therfore he sayde to him: Go backe to Godoliah the sonne of Ahicam, the sonne of Saphan: whom the kynge of Babylon hath made gouernoure ouer the cyties of Iuda, Ꟶ dwell with hym amonge the people, or remayne where soeuer it pleaseth the. So the chefe Captayne gaue him hys expenses with a rewarde, and let him go.
Then wente Ieremy vnto Godoliah the sonne of Ahikam to Mizpa, and dwelt there with hym among the people that were left in the lande.
Nowe when the captaynes of the Hoste of Iuda (which wt their felowes were scatred abrode on euery syde in the lande) vnderstode that the kynge of Babylon made Godoliah the sonne of Ahicam gouernoure in the land, and the man, wyfe and childe, yee, and the poore men in the lande (that were not led captyue to Babylon) shulde be vnder his iurisdiccion:
They came to Godoliah vnto Mizpa: Namely, Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah, Iohanan and Ionathan the sonnes of Careah, Sareah the sonne of Thanhometh, the sonnes of Ophai the Netophathite, Iesaniah the sonne of Maachati, with theyr companyons.
And Godaliah the sonne of Ahicam, the sonne of Saphan, swore vnto them and theyr felowes in this maner Be not afrayed to serue the Caldees, dwell in the lande, and do the kyng of Babylon seruice, so shall ye prospere.
Beholde, I dwell at Mizpa to be an officer in the Caldees be halfe, and to satisfye soche as come to vs. Therfore gather you wyne, corne and oyle, and kepe them in your ware houses, and dwell in youre cyties that ye haue in kepynge.
Yee, all the Iewes also that dwelt in Moab vnder the Ammonites, in Idumea and in all the countreys, when they herde, that the kinge of Babylon had made Godoliah the sonne of Ahicam the sonne of Saphan, gouernoure vpon them that were left in Iuda.
All the Iewes (I saye) returned oute of all places where they were fled vnto: and came into the lande of Iuda to Godoliah vnto Mizpa, Ꟶ gathered wyne Ꟶ other frutes, Ꟶ that very moche.
Moreouer, Iohanan the sonne of Careah and all the captaynes of the Hoste, that were scatred on euery syde in the lande, cam to Godoliah in Mizpa, Ꟶ sayde vnto him.
knowest thou not that Baalis kynge of the Ammonites hath sent Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah, to slaye the? But Godoliah the sonne of Ahicam beleued them not.
Then sayde Iohanan the sonne of Careah vnto Godoliah in Mizpa these wordes secretly: Let me go, I praye the, and I will slaye Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah, so that no body shall knowe it. Wherfore will he kyll the, that all the Iewes which resorte vnto the, might be scatred and the remnaunt in Iuda peryshe.
And Godoliah the sonne of Ahikam sayde to Iohanan the sonne of Careah. Thou shalt not do it, for they are but lyes, that thou sayest, of Ismael.
But in the seuenth Moneth it happened, the Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah the sonne of Elisama (one of the kynges bloude) came with them that were greatest aboute the kynge, Ꟶ ten men that were sworne with him: vnto Godoliah the sonne of Ahicam to Mizpa, Ꟶ they dyd eate together.
And Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah with those ten men that were sworne to him, starte vp, and smote Godoliah the sonne of Ahicam the sonne of Saphan with the swearde, and slewe him, whom the kynge of Babylon had made gouernoure of the lande.
Ismael also slewe all the Iewes that were with Godoliah at Mizpa, and all the Caldees that he founde there waytynge vpon hym and those that were able to fyght they slewe with hym.
The nexte daye after that he had slayne Godoliah (the matter was yet vnknowne)
Ꟶ there came certayne men from Sichem, from Siloh and Samaria, to the nombre of .lxxx. which had shauen theyr beardes, rent theyr clothes, and were all heuye, bringynge meatoffringes, Ꟶ incense in their handes to offre it in the house of the Lorde.
And Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah went forth of Mizpa wepinge, to mete them. Nowe when he met them, he sayde: Go youre waye to Godoliah the sonne of Ahicam.
And when they came in the myddest of the cytie, Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah (wt them that were sworne vnto him) slewe them, euen at the myddest of the pyt.
Amonge these .lxxx. men there were ten, that sayde vnto Ismael: Oh slaye vs not, for we haue yet a great treasure in the felde, of wheate barley, oyle and hony. So he spared them, Ꟶ slewe them not with theyr brethren.
Nowe the pyt wherin Ismael dyd cast the deed bodies of the men (whom he slewe because of Godoliah) had kynge Asa caused to be made, for feare of Baasa the kyng of Israel, and the same pyt dyd Ismael fyll with slayne men
As for the remnaunt of the people, the kynges daughters and all the people that were yet left at Mizpa, vpon whom Nabusaradan the chefe Captayne had made Godoliah the sonne of Ahicam gouernoure: Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah caryed them awaye presoners towarde the Ammonites.
But when Iohanan the sonne of Careah Ꟶ all they which had bene captaynes ouer the kynges Hoste with hym, herde of all the wyckednes that Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah had done:
they toke theyr companions, Ꟶ went out for to fyght wt Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah, and founde him by the greate waters that are in Gibeon.
Nowe when all the people, whom Ismael led captiue, sawe Iohanan the sonne of Careah and all the other Captaines of the Hoste, they were glad.
So all the people that Ismael had caryed awaye from Mizpa, were brought agayne. And when they returned, they came to Iohanan the sonne of Careah.
But Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah fled from Iohanan with eyght of hys sworne companyons, Ꟶ wente to the Ammonites.
Then Iohanan the sonne of Careah and all the captaynes of the Hoste that were with him, toke all the remnaunt of the people, whom Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah had led a waye. (When he had slayne Godoliah the sonne of Ahicam) whom they also had rescued from hym: fyghtinge men, wemen Ꟶ chyldren, Ꟶ gelded men, whom they brought agayne from Gibeon:
and wente from thence, Ꟶ sat them downe at Geruth Camaam, whiche lyeth besyde Bethlehem that they myght go into Egypte for feare of the Caldees:
of whome they were afrayed, because that Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah had slayne Godoliah Ahikams sonne whom the kynge of Babylon had made gouernoure in the lande.
So all the captaynes, Ꟶ Iohanan the sonne of Kareah, Iezaniah the sonne of Osayah came with all the people from the leest vnto the most,
and sayde vnto Ieremy the prophete. O heare oure peticion, that thou mayest praye for vs vnto the Lorde thy God, namely, for all the remnaunt, wherof there be very fewe of vs left of many, as thou seest vs:
that the Lorde, thy God may shew vs a waye to go in, Ꟶ tell vs, what we shulde do.
Then Ieremy the prophet sayde vnto them: I haue herde you. Behold I will praye vnto God youre Lorde as ye haue requyred me: and loke what answere the Lord geueth you, I shall certifye you therof, and kepe nothynge back from you.
And they sayde vnto Ieremy. The Lord of trueth Ꟶ faithfulnes be oure recorde, that we wyll do all that the Lorde thy God commaundeth vs,
whether it be good or euell. We wyll herken vnto the voyce of oure Lorde God to whom we sende the, that we maye prospere, when we haue folowed the voyce of the Lorde oure God.
And after ten dayes came the worde of Lorde vnto Ieremy.
Then called he Iohanan the sonne of Kareah, Ꟶ all the captaynes of the people that were with him: yee, and all the people from the leest to the moost,
and sayde vnto them: Thus sayeth the Lorde God of Israel vnto whom ye sent me, to laye forth your prayers before him:
If ye wyll dwell in this lande, I shall buylde you vp, and not breake you downe: I shall plante you, and not rote you out: for I repent, as concernynge the trouble that I haue done to you.
Feare not the kynge of Babylon, of whom ye stand in awe, O, be not afrayed of him, sayeth the Lorde: for I wyll be wt you, to helpe you, and delyuer you from his hande.
I wyll pardon you, I wyll haue mercy vpon you, and cause him to pytie you, Ꟶ bringe you agayne into youre awne lande.
Neuertheles, yf ye purpose not to dwell in this lande, ner to folowe the voyce of the Lorde youre God:
but wyll saye thus, we will not dwell here, but go into Egypt: where we shal nether se warre, heare the noyse of the trompe, ner suffre honger, there wyll we dwell.
Wherfore, heare nowe the worde of the Lord, O ye remnaunt of Iuda. Thus sayeth the Lorde of hoostes the God of Israel: If ye be wholy purposed to go into Egypte, Ꟶ ye entre ther to dwell as straungers:
the swearde that ye feared shall ouer take you in Egypte and the honger wherof ye be here afrayed shall hange vpon you Ꟶ folowe you into Egypte, and there ye shall dye.
And all they, that of sett purpose vndertake to go into Egipte to soiourne there, shall perysh with the swearde, with honger and pestilence: not one of them shall remayne, there shall none escape the plage, that I wyll brynge vpon them.
For thus sayeth the Lorde of hoostes the God of Israel: lyke as my wrath and indygnacyon is moued agaynst the inhabitatours of Ierusalem, so shall my displeasure be kyndled agaynst you also, yf ye go into Egypte: Ꟶ there ye shalbe reuyled, abhorred, brought to shame and confusyon: and as for thys place, ye shall neuer se it more.
The Lorde forbyddeth you, O ye remnaunt of Iuda, that ye shall not go into Egypte. And forget not that I haue warned you earnestly this daye,
for ye haue dissembled wt me. For ye sent me vnto the Lorde youre God, and sayde: O praye thou the Lord oure God for vs: and loke what answere the Lorde oure God geueth the, that bryng vs agayne, and we shall do therafter.
Nowe haue I shewed, and declared vnto you, but you haue not obeyed the voyce of the Lord youre God, for the whych cause he hath sent me to you.
Nowe therfore, If ye wyll not folowe it, be sure, that ye shall perishe with the swearde, with honger and pestilence: euen in the same place, where youre lust is to go, and dwell.
Nowe when Ieremy had ended all the wordes of the Lord his God vnto the people which to declare the Lorde theyr God had sent hym to them, (euen all thes wordes I saye)
Azariah the sonne of Osaiah, and Iohanan the sonne of Kareah with all the stubborne personnes, sayde vnto Ieremy: Thou lyest; the Lorde oure God hath not sent the to speake vnto vs, that we shulde not go into Egypte, and dwell there:
But Baruch the sonne of Neriah prouoketh the agaynst vs, that he myght brynge vs into the captiuyte of the Caldees: that they might slaye vs, and carye vs awaye presoners vnto Babylon.
So Iohanan the sonne of Kareah, and all the captaynes of the hooste, and all the people folowed not the commaundement of the Lorde: Namely, to dwell in the lande of Iuda.
But Iohanan the sonne of Kareah, and all the captaynes of the hooste, caried awaye all the remnaunt in Iuda, that were come together agayne from all the Heythen (among whom they had bene scatred) to dwell in the lande of Iuda:
Men, wemen, chyldren, the kynges daughters, all those that Nabuzaradan the chefe captayne had lefte with Godoliah the sonne of Ahikam, the sonne of Saphan. They caryed awaye also the prophete Ieremy, Baruch the sonne of Neriah,
and so came into Egypte: for they were not obedyent, vnto the commaundement of God. Thus came they to Taphnis.
And in Taphnis the worde of the Lorde happened vnto Ieremy, saying:
Take great stones in thyne hande, and hyde them in the bryck wall, vnder the dore of Pharaos house in Taphnis, that all the men of Iuda maye se,
and saye vnto them: Thus sayth the Lorde of hoostes the God of Israel. Beholde, I wyll sende and call for Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babylon my seruaunt, and wyll sett his seate vpon these stones that I haue hyd, and he shall sprede his tente ouer them.
And when he commeth, he shall smyte the lande of Egypte, some with slaughter, some with presonment, and some with the swearde.
He shall set fyre vpon the temples of the Egypcians goddes, and burne them vp, Ꟶ take them selues presoners. Moreouer, he shall araye him selfe with the lande of Egypte, lyke as a shepherde putteth on hys cote, and shall departe his waye from thence in peace.
The pylers also of the temple of the Sunne that is in Egypte: shall he breake in peces, and burne the tempels of the Egypcians goddes.
This is the worde that was shewed to Ieremy, concernyng all the Iewes: which dwelt in Egypte: at Migdol, at Taphnis, at Noph, Ꟶ in the lande of Patures.
Thus sayethe the Lorde of hostes, the God of Israel: Ye haue sene all the misery, that I haue brought vpon Ierusalem, and vpon the cityes of Iuda: so that thys daye they are desolate, and no man dwellynge therin:
and that because of the greate blasphemies which they committed, to prouoke me vnto anger. In that they went backe to do sacrifyce and worship vnto straunge goddes: whom nether ye, ner youre fathers haue knowne.
Howebeit, I sent vnto them my seruauntes all the prophetes. I rose vp early, I sent vnto them, and gaue them warnyng. O do no soche abhominable thynges, Ꟶ thynges that I hate.
But they wolde not folowe ner herken, to turne from their wickednes, Ꟶ to do nomore sacrifyces vnto straunge goddes.
Wherfore myne indignation and wrath was kyndled, and it brente vp the cytyes of Iuda, the feldes with the stretes of Ierusalem, so that they were made waste and desolate, as it is come to passe thys daye.
Nowe therfore, thus sayth the Lorde of hoostes, the God of Israel: Howe happeneth it, that ye do so greate euyll vnto youre awne soules: thus to destroye the men and wemen, chyldren and babes of Iuda? so that none of you is lefte,
because ye prouoke me vnto wrathe with the worckes of youre awne handes: when ye offer vnto straunge goddes in the lande of Egipt, where as ye be gone to dwell. That ye myght vtterly peryshe, and that ye myght be reuyled and shamefully intreated of all natyons.
Or haue ye nowe forgotten the wickednes of your forefathers, the wickednes of the kinges of Iuda and their wyues, the wyckednes that ye youre selues and youre wyues haue done in the lande of Iuda, in the cytie and in the lande of Ierusalem.
Yet are ye not sory vnto this daye, ye feare not, nether walke ye in my lawe and in my commaundementes, that I haue geuen vnto you and youre forefathers.
Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde of hoostes, the God of Israel: I am stedfastly aduised and determyned to punysshe you, Ꟶ to rote out all Iuda.
As for the remnaunt of Iuda, that purposly wente into Egipt, ther to dwell, I wyll take them, and they shall all be destroyed. In the lande of Egypt shall they perysshe, beynge consumed with the swearde and with honger. For from the leest vnto the moost, they shall perysshe with the swearde and with honger. Moreouer, they shalbe reuyled, abhorred, shamed, and confounded.
For I wyll viset them that dwell in Egypte, as I haue visyted Ierusalem, with the swearde, with honger and with pestilence.
So that none of the remnaunt of Iuda, which are gone to dwell in Egipte, shall be left to come agayne into the lande of Iuda all though they thynke to come thyther agayne, and to dwell there. For none shall come agayne, but soch as are fledd awaye.
Then all the men which knewe that their wyues had offred vnto straunge goddes, and a greate sorte of wyues that stode there, yee, and all the people that dwelt there in Egipt in the cytie of Patures, answerde Ieremye, and sayde:
As for the wordes that thou hast spoken vnto vs, in the name of the Lorde, we wyll in no wyse heare them:
but whatsoeuer goeth out of oure awne mouthe, that we wyll do. We wyll do sacrifyce and offer oblatyons vnto the quene of heauen, lyke as we and our forefathers, oure kynges and oure heades haue done in the cytie of Iuda, and in the stretes and feldes of Ierusalem. For then had we plenteousnes of vitayles, then were we in prosperyte, and no mysfortune came vpon vs.
But sens we left to burne incense, and to do sacrifyce vnto the quene of heauen, we haue had scarcenesse of all thynges, and perisshe with the swearde and honger.
Last of all, when we wemen dyd sacrifyce and offered vnto the quene of heauen, dyd we make her cakes and poure vnto her drinckofferinges, euen to that ymage dyd we sacrifyce and seruice, without oure husbandes wylles?
Then sayde Ieremy vnto all the people, to the men, to the wemen, and to all the folke, which had geuen him that answere:
Dyd not the Lorde remember the sacrifyces that ye, youre forefathers, youre kynges and rulers, with all the people, haue offered in the cyties of Iuda, in the stretes and lande of Ierusalem? and hath he not consydered thys in his mynde?
In somoch that the Lorde might no longer suffer the wyckednes of youre inuencyons, and the abhomynable thynges, which ye dyd? Is not youre lande desolate and voyde: yee, abhorred and accursed, so that no man dwelleth therein eny more, as it is come to passe thys daye?
Dyd not all thys happen vnto you, because ye made soch sacrifyces to ydols, and synned agaynst the Lorde. Ye haue not folowed hys voyce, to walke in hys lawe, in his ordynaunces and statutes. Yee, this is the cause, that all misfortune happened vnto you, as it is come to passe this daye.
Moreouer, Ieremy spake vnto all the people and to all the wemen. Heare the worde of the Lorde all Iuda, ye that be in the lande of Egipt.
Thus sayth the Lord of hoostes the God of Israel. Ye and your wyues haue spoken with youre awne mouth, the thinge that ye haue fulfylled in dede. Yee, thus haue ye sayde: We wyll nott fayle, but perfourme the vowes that we haue vowed, we will do sacrifyce Ꟶ powre out drinckofferinges to the quene of heauen. Purposly wyll ye set vp your awne meanynges and perfourme your vowes.
And therfore, heare the wordes of the Lorde, all Iuda, ye that dwell in the lande of Egipte. Beholde, I haue sworne by my greate name, sayth the Lorde: that my name shall not be rehearsed thorowe eny mans mouthe of Iuda, in all the lande of Egipte, to saye: The Lorde God lyueth,
for I wyll watche, to plage them, and not for theyr wealthe. And all the men of Iuda that be in the lande of Egypte shall peryshe with the swearde, and with honger, vntyll they be vtterly destroyed.
Neuertheles, those that fledd awaye for the swearde, shall come agayne into the lande of Iuda: but there shall be very feawe of them. And all the remnaunt of Iuda, that are gone into Egypte, there to dwell, shall knowe whose wordes shall be founde true: theyrs or myne.
Take thys for a token that I wyll viset you in this place, sayth the Lord: and that ye maye knowe that I (without doubte) will perfourme my purpose vpon you to punyshe you.
Beholde, sayth the Lorde, I wyll delyuer Pharao Hophrea kynge of Egipte into the handes of his enemyes that seke after his lyfe: euen as I gaue zedekias the king of Iuda, into the handes of Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babilon hys enemye which sought after his lyfe.
These are the wordes that Ieremye the prophete spake vnto Baruch the sonne of Neriah. after that he had wrytten these sermons in a boke at the mouth of Ieremy: In the fourth yeare of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosias kynge of Iuda, sayinge.
Thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel vnto the, O Baruch.
In somoche as thou thoughtest thus, when thou wast writtyng, Wo is me, the Lorde hath geuen me sorowe vpon sorowe. I haue weryed my selfe with syghing, and haue founde no rest.
Therfore tell hym, O Ieremye, that the Lorde sayth thus: Beholde, the thing that I haue buylded, wyll I breake downe agayne and rote out the thinge that I haue planted: yee, this whole lande.
And sekest thou yet promotion? Loke not for it, and desyre it not. For I wyll brynge a miserable plage vpon all fleshe, sayeth the Lorde. But thy lyfe wyll I geue the for a praye in all places, wheresoeuer thou goest.
Here folowe the wordes of the Lorde to the prophete Ieremye, which he spake agaynst all the Gentyles.
These wordes folowing preached he to the Egipcyans concerninge the hoost of Pharao Necho kynge of Egypte: when he was in Charcamis, besyde the water of Euphrates: what tyme as Nabuchodonosor the king of Babilon slewe him, in the fourth yeare of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosias king of Iuda.
Make ready buckler and shylde, and go forth to fyght:
harnes your horses, and sett your selues vpon them: set your salettes fast on, bring forth speares, scoure youre sweardes, and put on your breste plates.
But alas, howe happeneth it, that I se you so afrayde? why shryncke ye backe? Theyr worthyes are slayne. Yee, they runne so fast awaye, that none of them looketh behynde him. Fearfulnes is fallen vpon euerychone of them, sayth the Lorde.
The lightest of fote shall not fle awaye, and the worthies shal not escape. Towarde the north by the water of Euphrates, they dyd stomble and fall.
But what is he this, that swelleth vp, as it were a floude, roaringe and ragynge lyke the streames of water?
It is Egipte that ryseth vp lyke the floude, and casteth out the waters with so greate noyse. And he sayde: I will go, and wyll couer the earth, I will destroye the citye with them that are therin.
Gett you vp ye horses, rolle forth ye charettes, come forth worthies: ye Morians, ye Libeans with youre bucklers, ye Lideans with your bowes.
This daye of the Lorde God of hostes, is a daye of vengeaunce, that he maye auenge hym of hys enemyes. The swearde shall deuoure, it shalbe satisfyed, and bathed in theyr bloude. For the Lorde God of hostes shall haue a slayne offering towarde the north, by the water of Euphrates.
Go vp, O Gilead, and brynge triacle vnto the daughter of Egypt. But in vayne shalt thou go to surgery: for thy wounde shall not be stopped.
The Heythen haue hearde of thy shame, and the lande is full of thy confusion: for one stronge man dyd stomble vpon another, and they are fallen both together.
These are the wordes that the Lorde spake to the prophete Ieremy concerning the comming of Nabuchodonosor the kinge of Babilon, which was sent to destroye the lande of Egipt.
Preach out thorowe the lande of Egipt: Ꟶ cause it to be proclamed at Migdol, Noph and Taphnis, and saye: Stande styll, make the ready, for the swearde shall consume the rounde aboute.
Howe happeneth, it that thy mightye worthies are fallen? why stode they not fast? Euen because the Lord thrust them downe.
The slaughter was greate, for one fell euer still vpon another. One cryed vpon another. Up, let vs go agayne to oure awne people, and to oure awne naturall contrey from the cruell swearde.
They dyd crye euen there, O Pharao kyng of Egipt thou trobulous king: the tyme wil bring sedityon.
As truly as I lyue, sayth the king, whose name is the Lorde of hostes, it shall come as the mount of Thabor, and as Libanus yf it stode in the see.
O thou daughter of Egipte make ready thy geer to flyt. For Noph shalbe voyde and desolate, so that no man shall dwell therin.
The lande of Egipt is lyke a goodly fayre calfe: but destruccyon shall come out of the north I saye it commeth.
Her waged soudyers that ben with her, are like fat calues. They also shall fle awaye together, and not abyde: for the daye of theyr slaughter, and the tyme of their visytation shall come vpon them.
The crye of them shall make a noyse, as the blast of a trompete. For they shall enter in with their hostes, and come with axes, as it were hewers downe of wodde.
And they shall cut downe her wodde, sayth the Lorde. They shalbe innumerable: for they shalbe mo in nomber then the greshoppers, so that no man shalbe able to tell them.
The daughter of Egipte is confounded, and deliuered into the handes of the people of the north.
Thus sayth the Lorde of hostes the God of Israel. Beholde, I wyll viset that restles people of Alexandria, Pharao and Egypte: yee, bothe theyr goddes and theyr kynges: euen Pharao, and all them that putt theyr trust in hym.
Yee, I wyll delyuer them into the handes of those, that seke after theyr lyues. Namely into the power of Nabuchodonosor the kyng of Babilon, and into the power of hys seruauntes. And after all these thynges it shalbe inhabyted as afore tyme, sayth the Lorde.
But be not thou afrayed (O my seruaunt Iacob) feare not thou, O Israel. For lo, I wyll helpe the from farre, and thy seede from the lande of theyr captiuite. Iacob also shall come agayne, and be in rest: he shall prospere and no man shall do him harme.
Feare thou not (O Iacob my seruaunt) sayth the Lord, for I am with the: and wyll destroye all nacyons, amonge whom I haue scatered the. Neuerthelesse, I wyll not consume the: but chasten the and correcte the: yee, and that wt discrecyon: nether will I spare the as one that were fautlesse.
These are the wordes, that the Lord spake vnto Ieremye the prophete, agaynst the Philistines, before that Pharao smote the citye of Azah.
Thus sayth the Lorde: Beholde, there shall waters aryse out of the north: Ꟶ shall growe to a greate floude, runnynge ouer and couerynge the lande, the cyties, and them that dwell therin. And the men shall crye, and all they that dwell in the lande, shall mourn
at the noyse and stampinge of theyr stronge barbed horses, at the shakyng of theyr charettes and at the romblynge of the wheles. The fathers shall not loke to their chyldren, so feable and wery shall their handes be:
at the same tyme when he shall be there, to destroye the whole lande of the Philistines. He shall make waste both Tirus, Sidon, and all other that are sworne vnto them. For the Lorde wyll destroye the Philistines, the remnaunt of the yle of Caphto
Baldenesse is come vpon Azah, Ascalon with her other valleys shall kepe her peace. Howe longe wilt thou slaye,
O thou swearde of the Lorde? Whan wylt thou ceasse? Turne agayne into thy swete reste, and leaue of.
But howe can it cease, when the Lorde hym selfe hath geuen him a charge agaynste Ascalon, and raysed it vp agaynst the cityes of the see coast?
Thus sayeth the Lorde of hoostes the God of Israel agaynst Moab: wo be to the cytie of Nebo: for it is layed wast, brought to confusion: and Kariathiarim taken, Misgab is brought to shame and afrayed:
Moab can boast nomore of Hesebon: for they haue deuysed against it. Come, shall they saye, let vs rote them out, that they maye be nomore amonge the nomber of the Gentiles, and that thou Madmen maye nomore be thought vpon: and the swearde shall persecute the.
A voyce shall crye from Horanaim: With greate wastynge and destruccyon
is Moab made desolate. Chyldren coulde tell of the crye therof.
For at the goynge vp vnto Luyth, he arose with lamentation and mournynge, and downe towarde Horonaim, they heard a cruell and a deedly crye.
Get you awaye, saue your lyues, and be lyke vnto the heeth in the wildernesse.
For because thou hast trusted in thine owne workes and treasure, thou shalt be taken. Chamos with his prestes and princes shall go awaye into captiuyte.
The destroyer shall come vpon all cyties none shall escape. The valleys shalbe destroyed, and the feldes shalbe layed waste, lyke as the Lorde hath spoken.
Geue wynges vnto Moab, that she get her awaye spedely: for her cyties shalbe made so desolate, that no man shall dwell therin.
Cursed be he that doth the worcke of the Lorde negligently, and cursed be he that kepeth backe his swearde from sheddynge of bloude.
Moab hath euer bene ryche and carelesse from her youth vp, she hath sytten and taken her ease with her treasure. She was neuer yet put out of one vessell into another (that is) she neuer wente awaye into captiuyte, therfore her taste remayneth, and her sauour is not yet chaunged.
But lo, the tyme commeth, sayth the Lord, that I shall sende her trussers to trusse her vp: which shall remoue her from her dwellynge: and to emptye her vessels, and breake her wyne pottes.
And Moab shalbe ashamed of Chamos, lyke as Israel was ashamed of Bethel, wherin she put her trust
Wherfore do ye thynke thus: we are myghtye and stronge men of warre?
Moab is destroyed, and her cyties brent vp: her chosen yonge men be slayne, sayth the kyng, whose name is the Lorde of hostes.
The destruccyon of Moab commeth on apace, and her fall is at hande.
All her neyghbours shall mourne for her, and all they that know her name shall saye, O howe happeneth it, that the stronge stafe and the goodly rodde is thus broken?
And thou daughter Dibon, come downe from thy glory, Ꟶ syt in thyrst. For he that destroyeth Moab, shall come vp to the also, and breake downe thy stronge holde.
And thou that dwellest in Aroer, get the to the strete, and loke aboute the: aske them that are fledd and escaped, and saye: what thinge is happened?
Oh, Moab is confounded and ouercome. Mourne and crye, tell it out at Arnon, that Moab is destroyed.
For iudgment shall come vpon the playne lande: Namely, vpon Holon, and Iahazah, vpon Mephaath
and Dibon, vpon Nabo and the house of Deblathaim,
vpon Cariathiarim and vpon the house Gamul, vpon the house Maon
and Carioth vpon Bozrah and all the cyties in the lande of Moab, whether they lye farre or neare.
The horne of Moab is smyten downe and her arme broken, sayth the Lorde.
Make her dronken, for she magnifyed her selfe aboue the Lorde, that men maye clappe theyr handes at her vomyte, and that she also maye be laughed to scorne.
O Israel, shalte thou not laugh him to scorne, when he is taken amonge theues. Yee, because of thy wordes that thou hast spoken agaynste hym, thou shalt be dryuen awaye.
Ye Moabites shall leaue the cyties, and dwell in rockes of stone, and become lyke doues, that make theyr nestes in holes.
As for Moabs pryde, we haue hearde of it: she is verye hye mynded. I knowe her stoutnes, her boastynge, her arogancye, and the pryde of her stomack, sayth the Lorde.
I knowe (sayeth the Lorde) her indignacyon, she doth not ryght, her wordes are lyes, and they haue not delt truly.
Therfore shal ther mourning be made for Moab, and euery man shall crye for Moabs sake: a lamentatyon shalbe made to the men that stande vpon the wall.
So will I mourne for the also, O Iazer and for the, O thou vineyarde of Sabamah. Thy vyne braunches shall come ouer the see, and the braunches of Iazer but vnto the see: the destroyer shall breake into thy haruest and grape gathering:
myrth and cheare shalbe taken awaye from the tymbre felde, and from the whole lande of Moab. There shalbe no swete wyne in the presse, the treader shall haue no stomacke to crye yee, ther shalbe none to crie vnto him:
which afore tyme were heard from Hesebon to Eleale and Iahaz, which lifted vp their voyce from zoar vnto Horonaim, that bullocke of thre yeare olde shall go mourning. The waters also of Memrim shalbe dryed vp.
Moreouer, I will make Moab cease, sayeth the Lord, from the offeringes and censing that, she hath made vnto her goddes in hie places.
Wherfore my hert mourneth for Moab, lyke a crowde playenge an heuy songe: and for the mennes sake of the brycke wall my herte mourneth also: euen as a pype that pypeth a dolefull songe: for they shalbe very feawe, and destroyed.
All heades shalbe shauen, and all beerdes clipped of: all handes bounde, and loynes girded about with sacke cloth.
Upon all the house toppes and stretes of Moab, ther shall be lamentable mourning. For I wyll breake Moab lyke an vnprofytable vessell, sayth the Lorde.
O howe is she destroyed? O howe mourneth she? O howe doeth Moab hange downe her heade, Ꟶ is ashamed? Thus shall Moab be a laughing stock: Ꟶ had in derision of all them that be rounde aboute her.
For thus sayth the Lorde. Beholde, the enemye shall come flieng as an aegle: Ꟶ sprede hys winges vpon Moab.
They shall clyme ouer the walles, Ꟶ wynne the strongholdes. Then the mighty mens hertes in Moab shalbe lyke the hert of a woman trauelyng with chylde.
And Moab shalbe made so desolate: that she shal nomore be a people, because she hath sett vp her selfe agaynst the Lorde.
Feare, pytt Ꟶ snare shall come vpon the, O Moab, sayeth the Lorde.
Whoso escapeth the feare, shall fall in the pytte: and who so getteth out of the pyt, shalbe taken in the snare. For I will bring a yeare of visitation vpon Moab, sayth the Lorde.
They that are able to flye, shall stande vnder the shadowe of Hesebon. For there shall go a fier out of Hesebon, and a flame from Sion, and shall burne vp that proude people of Moab, and the toppe of those sedityous chyldren.
Wo be vnto the, O Moab, for thou people of Chamos shalt peryshe. Yee, thy sonnes and daughters shalbe leade awaye captiue.
Yet at the laste wyll I brynge Moab out of captiuite agayne, sayeth the Lorde. Thus farre is of the plage of Moab.
As concerning the Ammonytes, thus the Lorde sayth: Hath Israel no children, or is he without an heyre? Why hath youre king then taken Gad in? Wherfore doth his people dwell in his cityes?
Beholde therfore, the tyme commeth, sayth the Lorde, that I wyll bring a noyse of warre into Rabah of the Ammonites: and it shall be layed on a desolate heape: and her cityes brent vp: Ꟶ the Israelites shalbe lordes ouer those that had them in possession afore, sayeth the Lorde.
Hesebon shall mourne, for Ay shalbe roted out of the grounde, sayth the Lorde. The cityes of Rabah shall crye out, and gyrde them selues with sacke cloth: they shall mourne, Ꟶ runne about the walles: for theyr king shalbe led awaye presoner: yee, his prestes and princes with hym.
Wherfore trustest thou in the valley? thy valleye hath flowed awaye, O thou fearce daughter, Ꟶ thynkest thou that thou art so safe, by reason of thy treasure, that no man shall come to the?
Beholde, I will brynge a feare vpon the, sayth the Lorde God of hostes, from all those that be about the: so that ye shalbe scatered euery man from another, and a man shall gather them together agayne that be fled.
But after that, I wyll bring the Ammonites also out of captiuyte agayne.
Upon the Edomites hath the Lorde of hoostes spoken on thys maner: Is there nomore wysdome in Theman? Is there nomore good councell amonge his people? Is theyr wysdome then turned clene to naught?
Gett you hence, turne youre backes, crepe downe into the deppe, O ye citesyns of Dedan. For I will bryng destruccion vpon Esau: yee, and the daye of hys visytatyon.
If the grapegatherers came vpon the, shulde they not leaue some grapes? If the night robbers came vpon the, shulde they not take so moch as they thought were ynough?
But I wyll make Esau bare, and discouer his secretes, so that he shall not be able to hyde them. Hys sede shalbe wasted awaye: yee, hys brethren and hys neyghbours, and he hym selfe shall not be lefte behynde.
Thou shalt leaue thy fatherlesse children behynde the, and I wyll kepe them, and thy wyddowes shall take their comforte in me.
For thus hath the Lorde spoken. Behold, they that men thought were vnmete to drinke of the cuppe, haue dronken with the fyrst: and thynkest thou then to be fre? No, no, thou shalt nether be quite nor fre: but thou must drinke also.
For why? I haue sworne by my selfe, sayth the Lorde, that Bozrah shall become a wyldernes, an open shame, a laughyng stocke and cursynge: and all her cyties shalbe a continuall deserte.
For I am perfectly informed of the Lorde that he hath sent a message allredy vnto the Heythen. Gather you together, and go forth agaynst them: make you ready to the battaylle:
for lo, I wyll make the but small amonge the Heythen, and lytell regarded amonge men.
Thy hye stomacke and the pryde of thy herte haue disceaued the, because thou wylt dwell in the holes of stony rockes, and haue the hye mountaynes in possession. Neuertheles, though thy neste were as hye as the aegles, yet wyll I cast the downe, sayeth the Lorde.
Moreouer, Idumea shalbe a wildernes: whoso goth by it, shalbe abashed, and wonder at all her myserable plages.
Lyke as Sodome, Gomor, and the cytyes that laye ther about were turned vp side downe, saith the Lord, so shall no body dwell in Idumea, and no man shall haue his habitation there.
Behold, lyke as the lyon, so shall a destroyer come vp from the pleasaunt medowes of Iordane vnto the stronge dwelling place: Ꟶ when I haue made him quiet, I will make him to fle from her: and all chosen men, will I set in araye agaynst her. Who is lyke vnto me? What is he that will stryue with me? What shepherde maye stande in my handes?
Therfore, heare the councell of the Lorde, that he hath taken vpon Idumea: and hys purpose that he hath deuysed vpon the citesyns of Theman. The leest of the flocke shall teare them in peces, Ꟶ loke what fayre thinge they haue, they shall make it waste, Ꟶ them selues also.
At the noyse of their fall, the earth shall quake the crye of their voyce shalbe heard vnto the redd see.
Beholde, the enemye shall come and fle vp hither, like as it were an aegle, Ꟶ sprede his winges vpon Bozrah. Then shall the hertes of the worthyes in Edom be as the hert of a woman trauelyng of chylde.
Upon Damascus, Hemath and Arphad shall come confusion: for they shall heare euell tydinges: they shalbe tossed to and fro lyke the see that cannot stande styll.
Damascus shalbe sore afrayed, and shall flee, tremblinge come vpon her. Sorowe Ꟶ payne shall ouertake her as a woman trauelynge of chylde.
But howe shuld so worshipfull Ꟶ glorious a citye be forsaken?
Heare therfore: her yonge men shall fall in the stretes, and all her men of warre shalbe taken awaye in that tyme, sayth the Lorde of hostes.
I wyll kyndle a fyre in the walles of Damascus, which shall consume the palace of Benhadad.
As for Cedar and the kingdom of Hazor, whom Nabuchodonosor the kyng of Babylon smote downe, the Lorde hath spoken thus vpon them: Aryse, and get you vp vnto Cedar, and destroye the people towarde the easte.
Theyr tentes and theyr flockes shall they take awaye: yee, their hangynges and their vessels. Their camels also shal they carye awaye with them. They shall crye to them: Feare is on euery syde.
Fle, get you sone awaye, creape into caues, that ye maye dwell there, O ye inhabiters of Hazor, saith the Lorde: for Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babylon hath holden a councell concernynge you: and concluded his deuyce agaynst you.
Aryse, and get you vp agaynst yonder ryche and careles people (sayeth the Lorde) which haue nether gates nor dore barres, but dwell alone.
Their camels shalbe stollen, and the drones of theyr catell dryuen awaye. Moreouer, those wyll I scater towarde all the wyndes: and bringe them to destruccyon: yee, and that thorowe their awne familyers, sayth the Lorde.
Hazor also shall be a dwellyng for dragons, and an euerlasting wildernes: so that no body shall dwell there: and no man shall haue there his habitation.
These are the wordes that the Lorde spake to the prophete Ieremy, concerning Elam, in the begynninge of the raygne of zedekiah kynge of Iuda.
Thus sayeth the Lorde of hostes: Beholde, I wyll breake the bowe of Elam, and take awaye theyr strength:
and vpon Elam I wyll bring the foure wyndes from the foure quarters of heauen, and will scater them agaynst the same foure windes. And there shalbe no people, but some of Elam shall fle vnto them.
For I wyll cause Elam to be afrayed of theyr enemyes, and of them that seke theyr lyues: and wyll brynge vpon them the indygnation of my wrath, sayth the Lorde. And I wyll persecute them with the swearde, so longe tyll I haue brought them to naught.
I wyll sett my throne in Elam, I wyll destroye both the kynge and the prynces from thence, sayth the Lorde.
But in processe of tyme I wyll brynge Elam out of captiuyte agayne, sayth the Lorde.
The wordes that the Lorde spake vnto the prophete Ieremy, concernynge Babilon, and the lande of the Chaldees:
Preache amonge the Gentyles, let your voyce he hearde, make a token, crye out, kepe no silence, but saye: Babilon is wonne. Bel is confounded, and Merodach is ouercome. Yee, their goddes be brought to shame: and their ymages burst in peces.
For out of the north there doth come a people agaynst her: which make her lande so waste, that no body dwell therin, nether man nor beast: for they flye and departe from thence.
In those dayes and at that tyme, sayth the Lord: the chyldren of Israel shall come, they and the chyldren of Iuda, wepinge and making haste, and shall seke the Lorde their God.
They shall aske the waye to Sion, thyther shall they turne their faces, sayinge: Come and we wyll cleaue to the Lorde, in a couenaunt that neuer shalbe broken.
My people hathe bene a loste flocke, my shepherdes haue disceaued them, and haue made them go astraye vpon the hylles They haue gone frome the mountayne to the lytle hyll, and forgotten their folde.
All they that came vpon them, haue deuoured them: and theyr enemyes sayde: We haue made no faute agaynst them: for they haue displeased the Lorde: yee, euen the Lorde, which is the bewtye of theyr ryghteousnesse Ꟶ that defended their fathers.
Yet shall ye flie from Babilon, and departe out of the lande of the Chaldees, and be ye as the rammes that goo before the flocke.
For loo, I wyll wake vp an hooste of people from the northren lande, and bringe them vpon Babylon: these shall laye sege to it, and wynne it. Theyr arowes shall not mysse, lyke as a connynge archer shuteth not wronge.
And the Chaldees shalbe spoyled, and all they that spoyle them, shalbe satisfied, sayth the Lorde,
although ye were so chearfull and gladd, to treade downe myne heritage, and fulfylled youre pleasures, as the calues in the grasse, and triumphed ouer them lyke the bulles, when ye had gotten the victory.
Youre mothers shalbe sore confounded, and they that bare you, shall come to shame. She shalbe the least sett by amonge the nacions, voyde, wasted and dryed vp.
No man shalbe able to dwell there, for the feare of the Lorde, but she shalbe whole desolate. All they that go by Babylon, shall stande styll, and be abashed, and shall wondre at all her plages.
Go forth in your araye against Babilon rounde about, all ye that can handle bowes: shute at her, spare no arowes: for she hathe synned agaynst the Lorde.
Crye out: vpon her, vpon her, agaynst her rounde about: she shall yelde her selfe, her foundations shall fall and her walles shall come downe: for it shalbe the vengeaunce of the Lorde. Yee, vengeaunce shalbe taken of her, and as she hath done, so deale ye with her.
Rote out the sower from Babilon, and him that handleth the syckle in haruest. For feare of the swearde of the enemye, euery man shall gett him to hys awne people: and euery man shall flee to his awne lande.
Israel is a scatred flocke, the lyons haue dispersed them. Fyrst the king of the Assirians deuoured them, last of all this Nabuchodonosor king of Babilon hath brosed all their bones.
Therfore, thus saith the Lorde of hostes the God of Israel: Beholde, I will viset the kyng of Babylon and his kingdome as I haue visited the kyng of the Assirians,
and wyll brynge Israel agayne to his pleasaunt pasture, that he maye fede vpon Charmel and Basan, and be satisfyed vpon the mount of Ephraim and Galaad.
In those dayes and at the same tyme, sayth the Lord, yf the offence of Israel be sought for, there shall none be founde. Yf men enquere for the synne of Iuda, there shalbe none: for I wyll be mercyfull vnto them, whom I suffre to remayne ouer.
Go downe, O thou auenger, into the enemyes lande, and viset them that dwell therin: downe with them, and smyte them vpon the backes, sayth the Lorde: do according to all that I haue commaunded the.
There is gone aboute the lande a crye of a slaughter and great murther, namely on this maner.
How happeneth it, that the hammer of the whole worlde is thus broken and brosed in sonder? Howe chaunceth it, that Babilon is become a wildernesse amonge the Heythen on thys maner?
I my selfe haue layed wayte for the, and thou art taken vnawares: art thou trapped and snared: for why? thou hast prouoked the Lorde vnto anger.
The Lorde hath opened his house of ordinaunce, Ꟶ brought forth the weapens of hys wrath. For the thynge that is done in the lande of the Chaldees, it is the Lorde of hostes worcke.
Come agaynste her, for this is her ende: breake vp her chestes: threshe her as ye thresh corne: destroye her, that nothing shalbe left.
Slaye all their myghtye souldyers, and put them to death. Woo be vnto them, for the daye and tyme of their visitatyon is at hande.
Me thynke I heare allready a crye, of them that be fled and escaped out of the lande of Babilon, which shewe in Sion the vengeaunce of the Lorde our God, the vengeaunce of his temple: yee, a voyce of them, that crye agaynste Babylon.
Call vp all the archers agaynst Babilon, pitche your tentes rounde about her, that none escape. Recompence her, as she hath deserued: and accordynge as she hath done, so deale with her agayne, for she hath set vp her selfe agaynst the Lorde, agaynst the holye one of Israel.
Therfore shall her yonge men fall downe in the stretes, and all her men of warre shalbe roted out in that daye, sayth the Lorde.
Beholde, I speake vnto the, O thou proude, sayth the Lorde God of hostes: for thy daye shall come, euen the tyme of thy visitation.
And the proude shall stomble and fall and no man shall helpe him vp. I wyll burne vp his cityes with fyer, and it shall consume all that is rounde about him.
Thus sayth the Lorde of hoostes: The children of Israel and Iuda suffer violence together. All they that haue them in captiuitie, kept them fast, and wyl not let them go,
but their auenger and redemer is mightye, whose name is the Lorde of hoostes: he shall mainteyne their cause, he shall make the lande shake, and iudge them that dwell therin, one with another.
The swearde shall come vpon the Chaldees, sayth the Lorde, vpon them that dwell in Babilon, vpon their princes, and vpon their wyse men.
The swearde vpon their sothsayers, as for those, they shall become fooles. The swearde vpon their worthies, so that they shall stande in feare.
The swearde vpon their horsmen and charettes, and vpon all the comon people that dwell vnder them: so that they shall all become lyke women. The swearde vpon their treasure, so that it shalbe stollen awaye.
A drougth vpon their waters, so that they shalbe dried vp. For the lande worshippeth ymages, and delyteth in straunge wondrefull thinges.
Therfore shall wylde beastes, lamia Ꟶ catte of mountaynes, and estryches dwell therin, for there shall neuer man dwell there, nether shall eny man haue his habitation there for euermore.
Like as God destroyed Sodom and Gomorre, with the cityes that laye ther aboute, sayth the Lorde. So shall no man dwell there also, nether shall eny man haue there his habitatyon.
Beholde, there shall come a people from the north with a greate bonde of men, and many kynges shall stande vp from the endes of the earthe.
They beare bowes and bucklers, cruell are they and vnmercyfull. Their voyce roareth like the raging see, they ryde vpon horsses, and come weapened to fyght agaynst the, O Babylon.
Assoone as the king of Babilon heareth tell of them, his handes shall waxe feable. Sorowe and heuynes shall come vpon him, as a woman trauelynge with chylde.
Beholde, lyke as the lyon commeth vp from the pleasaunt medowes of Iordane vnto the grene pastures of Ethan, so wyll I dryue them forth, and make them runne agaynst her. But whom shall I chose out: Ꟶ ordeyne to soch a thynge? For who is lyke me, or who will stryue wt me? or what shepherd maye stande agaynst me?
Therfore, heare the councell that the Lord hath geuen vpon Babilon, and the deuyce that he hath taken vpon the land of the Chaldees: The least among the people shall teare them in peces, and loke what pleasaunt thing they haue: they shall laye it waste.
The noyse at the wynnynge of Babylon shall moue the earth, and the crye shalbe heard amonge the Gentiles.
Thus hath the Lorde sayd: beholde, I wyll rayse vp a perlous wynde agaynst Babylon and her citezens, that beare euyll wyll agaynst me.
I wyll sende also into Babilon fanners, to fanne her out, and to destroye her lande: for in the daye of her trouble they shalbe aboute her on euery syde.
Moreouer, the Lorde hath sayde vnto the bowe men, and to them that clyme ouer the walles in brest plates. Ye shall not spare her yonge men: kyll downe all her host.
Thus the slayne shall fall downe in the lande of the Chaldees, and the wounded in the stretes.
As for Israel and Iuda, they shall not be forsaken of their God, of the Lorde of hostes for the holy one of Israel sake: no, though they haue fylled all their land full of synne.
Flye awaye from Babilon, euery man saue his lyfe, that ye be not roted out wt her wickednesse: for the tyme of the Lordes vengeaunce is come: yee, he shall reward her agayne.
Babylon hathe bene in the Lordes hande, a golden cuppe that maketh all landes droncken. Of her wyne haue all people droncken: therfore, are they out of theyr wittes.
But sodenly is Babylon fallen, Ꟶ destroyed. Mourne for her, brynge plasters for her woundes, yf she maye paraduenture be healed againe.
We wold haue made Babylon whole, saye they: but she is nott recouered. Therfore wyll we let her alone, and go euery man into his awne countreye. For her iudgment is come into heauen, Ꟶ is gone vp to the cloudes.
The Lord hathe brought forth our righteousnes. And therfore come on, we wyll shewe Sion the worcke of the Lorde oure God.
Make sharpe the arowes, and multiplye youre shyldes: for the Lorde shall rayse vp the sprete of the kinge of the Medees, which hath allready a desyre to destroye Babilon. This shalbe the vengeaunce of the Lord, and the vengeaunce of his temple.
Set vp tokens vpon the walles of Babilon: make youre watch stronge, sett youre watchmen in araye: yee, holde preuye watches: and yet for all that shall the Lorde go forth with the deuyce, which he hath taken vpon them that dwell in Babilon.
O thou that dwellest by the greate waters, O thou that hast so great treasure and riches, thyne ende is come, and the rekening of thy wynninges.
The Lorde of hoostes hath sworne by him selfe, that he wyll ouerwhelme the with men, lyke gresshoppers in nomber, which with a corage shall crie, alarum, alarum agaynst the.
Yee, euen the Lorde of hostes, that wt his power made the earth, wt hys wysdome prepared the rounde worlde, and with his discretion spred out the heauens.
Assone as he letteth his voyce be hearde, the waters in the ayre waxe fearce. He draweth vp the cloudes from the endes of the earth. He turneth the lightnynges to rayne, he bringeth the wyndes out of their secrete places.
If they be estemed by their wysdome, all men are become fooles. Confounded be all the casters of ymages: for the thing that they make is but disceate, and hath no breath.
Uayne is it and an erronyouse worke: and in the time of visitation it shall perishe.
Neuertheles, the porcion of Iacob is none soch: but he that made all thinges, whose name is the Lorde of hoostes, he is the rodde of his enheritaunce.
Thou hast bene myne hammer and weapens for warre: for with the haue I broken the people in peces: and with the haue I destroied kingdomes.
Thorow the I haue beaten to poulder horse and horseman: yee, the charettes Ꟶ soch as sat vpon them.
Thorowe the I haue broken man Ꟶ woman, olde Ꟶ yonge, bacheler Ꟶ mayden.
Thorowe the I haue destroyed the sheperde and his flocke, the husbandeman and his catell, the princes and the rulers.
Therfore wyll I reward the citye of Babilon Ꟶ all her citesins, the Chaldees wt all the euyll which they haue done vnto Sion: yee, that ye your selues shall se it, sayth the Lorde:
Beholde, I come vpon the, thou noysome hill, sayth the Lorde: thou that destroyest all landes: I wyll stretche oute my hande ouer the, and cast the downe from the stony rockes: and will make the a brent hill:
so that nether corner stones, ner pinacles, ner foundatyons of stones shalbe taken eny more out of the, but wast and desolate shalt thou lye for euermore, sayth the Lorde.
Set vp a token in the laude: blowe the trompettes amonge the Heythen: prouoke the nations agaynst her, call the kyngdomes of Ararat, Menni and Ascanes agaynst her. Set the prince agaynst her: bring as great a sorte of terrible horses against her: as yf they were gresshoppers.
Prepare agaynst them the people of the Meedes wt their kynges, prynces and all their chefe rulers: yee, Ꟶ the whole lande that is vnder hym.
The lande also shall shake and be afrayed when the deuice of the Lorde shall come forth agaynst Babylon: to make the lande of Babylon so waste, that no man shall dwell eny more therin.
The worthyes of Babylon shall leaue the batayll, and kepe them selues in stronge holdes, their strength hath fayled them, they shalbe lyke wemen. Theyr dwellynge places shalbe brent vp, theyr barres shalbe broken.
One purseuaunt shall mete another: yee, one poste shall come by another, to bring the kynge of Babylon tydinges: that his cytie is taken in on euery syde,
the foordes occupied, the fennes brent vp, and the soudiers sore afrayed.
For thus sayeth the Lorde of hoostes the God of Israel: the daughter of Babylon hath bene in her tyme lyke as a thresshyng floore, but shortly shal her haruest come.
Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babylon hath deuoured Ꟶ destroyed me, he hath made me an empty vessell. He swalowed me vp lyke a dragon, and fylled his bely with my delycates: he hath cast me oute,
he hath taken my substaunce awaye, and the thinge that was left me hath he caried vnto Babylon, sayeth the daughter that dwelleth in Syon: yee, Ꟶ my bloude also vnto the Caldees, sayeth Ierusalem.
Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde: Beholde, I wyll defende thy cause, and auenge the: I wyll drincke vp her see, and drye vp her water sprynges.
Babylon shall become an hepe of stones a dwellinge place for dragons, a fearfulnes and wondrynge, because no man dwelleth there.
They shall roare together lyke lyons, and as the yonge lyons when they be angrye, so shall they bende them selues.
In theyr heate I shall gyue them a dyner and they shalbe droncken for ioye. Then shall they slepe an euerlastynge slepe, and neuer wake, sayeth the Lorde.
I shall carye them downe to be slayne lyke shepe, lyke wethers and goates.
O, how was Sesach wonne? O, how was the glory of the whole lande taken? how happeneth it, that Babilon is so wondred at among the Heathen?
The see is rysen ouer Babylon, and hath couered her wt his greate waues.
Her cyties are layed waste the lande lyeth vnbuylded and voyde: it is a lande where no man dwelleth, and where no man trauaylleth thorowe.
Moreouer, I wyll viset Bel at Babylon: and the thynge that he hath swalowed vp, that same shall I plucke out of hys mouth. The Gentyls also shall runne nomore vnto hym, yee, and the walles of Babylon shall fall.
O my people, come out of Babylon, that euery man maye saue his lyfe, from the fearfull wrath of the Lorde.
Be not faynte herted, and feare not at euery rumoure that shalbe herde in the lande: for euery yeare bringeth new tydinges, Ꟶ in the yere folowynge newe tydinges, Ꟶ robbynge in the lande and Lorde vpon Lorde.
And lo, the tyme commeth, that I wyll viset the ymages of Babylon, Ꟶ the whole lande shalbe confounded: yee, and her slayne shall lye in the myddest of her.
Heauen Ꟶ earth with all that is therin, shall reioyce ouer Babilon, when the destroyers shall come vpon her from the North, sayeth the Lorde.
Lyke as Babilon hath beaten downe Ꟶ slayne many out of Israel, so shall there fall many, and be slayne in all her kyngdome.
Ye that haue escaped the sweard, haste you, stande not styll, remembre the Lorde a farre of, and thyncke vpon Ierusalem,
for we were ashamed to heare the blasphemyes: our faces were couered with shame, because the straunge aleauntes came into the Sanctuary of the Lorde.
Wherfore, beholde (sayeth the Lord) the tyme commeth, that I wyll viset the ymages of Babylon, and thorowe the whole land they shall mourne and fall.
Though Babylon clymed vp into heauen, and kepte her power an hye: yet shal I sende her destroyers sayeth the Lorde.
A pyteous cry shalbe hearde from Babilon, and a greate misery from the land of the Caldees,
when the Lorde destroyeth them and when he dryueth out the hye stomack Ꟶ proude boastynge, wherwith they haue bene as furious as the waues of greate water floudes, and made greate crakes with their wordes.
For the destroyers shall come vpon her (euen vpon Babylon) which shall take their worthyes, and breake their bowes: for God is disposed to auenge hym selfe vpon them, and sufficiently to recompence them.
Yee, (sayeth the Lorde.) I wyll make theyr princes, theyr wyse men, theyr chefe rulers, and all their worthyes, droncken: so that they shall slepe an euerlastynge slepe, and neuer wake. Thus sayeth the kynge, whose name is the Lorde of Hostes.
Moreouer, thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes. The thycke wall of Babylon shalbe broken, and her hye gates shalbe brent vp. And the thynge that the Gentyles and the people haue wrought with greate trauayle and labour, shall come to naught and be consumed in the fyre.
This is the charge that Ieremy gaue vnto Saraiah the sonne of Neriah, the sonne of Maasiah, when he went towarde Babylon with zedekiah the kyng of Iuda, in the fourth yeare of hys raygne. Nowe thys Saraiah was a peaceable prynce.
Ieremy wrote in a booke all the misery that shulde come vpon Babylon, yee, and all these sermons that be wrytten agaynst Babylon,
and gaue Saraiah thys charge. When thou commest vnto Babilon, se that thou reade all these wordes,
and saye. O Lorde, thou art determined to rote out thys place, so that nether people ner catell shall dwell there eny more, but to lye waste for euer:
and when thou hast redde out the booke, bynde a stone to it, and cast it in the myddest of Euphrates,
and saye, Euen thus shall Babylon syncke, Ꟶ be thrust downe with the burthen of trouble, that I wyll brynge vpon her: so that she shall neuer come vp agayne. Thus farre are the preachynges of Ieremy.
zedekiah was one and .xx. yeare olde, when he was made kyng, and he raygned eleuen yeare in Ierusalem. His mothers name was Hamutall, Ieremyes daughter of lybna.
He lyued wyckedly before the Lorde euen as Iehoachin dyd.
For the Lorde was angry at Ierusalem and Iuda, so longe tyll he had cast them out of hys presence. And zedekiah fell from the kynge of Babilon.
But in the nynth yeare of hys raygne, In the tenth moneth, the tenth daye of the moneth it happened, that Nabuchodonosor the kyng of Babilon with all hys hooste came before Ierusalem, and beseged it, and made them bulworckes rounde aboute it.
And thys besegynge of the cytie endured vnto the eleuenth yeare of kyng zedekiah.
And in the fourth moneth, the .ix. daye of the moneth, there was so great honger in the cytie: that there were nomore vytayles for the people of the lande.
So all the soudiers brake awaye, and fled oute of the cytie by nyght thorowe the waye of the porte betwene the two walles vp the kynges garden. Nowe the Chaldees had compassed the cytie rounde aboute, yet went these men their waye towarde the wyldernes.
And so the Chaldees folowed vpon them, and toke zedekiah the kynge in the felde of Iericho, when his hoost was runne from hym:
So they caryed the kyng awaye prysoner to Reblath, vnto the kynge of Babylon in the lande of Hemath, where he gaue iudgement vpon hym.
The kynge of Babylon also caused zedekiahs sonnes to be slayne before his face, yee and put all the prynces of Iuda to death at Reblath.
Moreouer, he put out the eyes of zedekiah, caused him to be bounde with two cheynes, to be caried vnto Babylon: and let hym lye in preson, tyll he dyed.
Nowe the tenth daye of the fyfth moneth in the nynth yeare of Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babilon, Nabusaradan the chefe captayne and the kynge of Babylons seruauntes came vnto Ierusalem,
and brent vp the house of the Lorde. He brent vp also the kynges palace, all the houses and all the gorgeous buyldynges in Ierusalem.
And the whole hoost of the Chaldees that were with the chefe captayne, brake downe all the walles of Ierusalem rounde aboute.
As for the poore people and soch folke as yet was left in the cytie: which also were fallen to the kynge of Babylon, yee, and what people as yet remayned: Nabuzaradan the chefe captayne caried them awaye presoners.
But the poore people of the countre, dyd Nabuzaradan the chefe captayne leaue in the lande, to occupye the vyneardes and feldes.
The Chaldees also brake the brasen pyllers that were in the house of the Lorde, yee, the seate and the brasen lauer that was in the house of the Lorde: and caryed all the metall of them vnto Babylon.
They toke awaye also the Cauldrons, shouels, fleshehokes, sprynklers, spones, and all the brasen vessell that was occupied in the seruyce:
with the basens, colepannes, sprynklers, pottes, candelstyckes, spones, and cuppes: wherof some were of golde, and some of syluer.
The chefe captaine toke also the two pillers, the lauer, the twelue brasen bullockes that stode vnder the seate which kyng Salomon made in the house of the Lord: and all the vessell conteyned so moch metall, that it myght not be weyed.
For euery piller was eyghtene cubytes hye: and the rope that went aboute it, was twelue cubytes, Ꟶ foure fyngers thycke and rounde.
Nowe vpon the rope were brasen knoppes, and euery knoppe was fyue cubytes hye: and vpon the knoppes were whopes, and pomgranates rounde about of cleane brasse:
After thys maner were both the pylers fashyoned wt the pomgranates, wherof there were an hundred and .xcvi. which hanged vpon the whoopes rounde about.
The chefe captaine also toke Sariah the hie preste, and Sophoniah that was chefe nexte hym, and the thre kepers of the treasury.
He toke oute of the cytie a chamberlayne which was a captayne of the souldyers, and seuen men that were the kynges seruauntes, which were founde in the cytie: and Sepher a captayne that vsed to muster the men of warre, with threscore men of the countre that were taken in the cytie.
These Nabuzaradan the chefe captayne toke, and caried them to the kynge of Babylon vnto Reblath:
and the kyng of Babylon caused them to be put to death at Reblath in the lande of Hemath. And thus Iuda was ledde awaye captiue, oute of hys awne lande.
This is the summe of the people, whom Nabuchodonosor ledde awaye captiue. In the seuenth yeare of hys raygne, he caried awaye of the Iewes, thre thousand and thre and twenty.
In the .xviii. yeare Nabuchodonosor caryed awaye from Ierusalem eyght hundreth thirty and two personnes.
In the .xxiii. yeare of Nabuchodonosor Nabuzaradan the chefe captayne, toke awaye seuen hundreth fourty and fyue Iewes presoners. The whole summe of all the presoners, is foure thousande and syxe hundreth.
In the .xxxvii. yeare after that Iehoachin the kynge of Iuda was caryed awaye in the .xxv. daye of the .xii. moneth, Euilmerodach kynge of Babylon (the same yeare that he reygned) gaue Iehoachin the kyng of Iuda hys pardon, and let hym out of preson,
and spake louyngly to him. And sett his trone aboue the trones of the other kynges that were with hym in Babylon.
He chaunged also the clothes of his preson, yee, and he dyd eate wt hym all his lyfe longe.
And he had a continuall lyuyng geuen him of the kynge of Babylon, euery daye a certayne thynge alowed him all the dayes of hys lyfe, vntyll he dyed.
Alas, howe sytteth the cytie so desolate, that somtyme was full of people? Howe is she become lyke a wedowe, which was the lady of all nacyons? Howe is she brought vnder trybute, that ruled all landes.
She wepeth sore in the nyght so that the teares runne downe her chekes: for amonge all her louers, there is none that geueth her eny comforte: ye her nexte frendes transgresse agenst her, and are become her enemyes.
Iuda is taken presoner, because she was defyled: and for seruynge so many straunge goddes, she dwelleth nowe amonge the Heythen. She fyndeth no rest, all they that persecuted her, toke her, in strayte places wher she coulde not escape.
The streates of Sion mourne, because no man commeth nomore to the solempne feastes. All her gates are desolat, her prestes make lamentacion, her maydens are carefull: Ꟶ she her selfe is in great heuynesse.
Her enemies haue bene rulers ouer her, and her enemyes haue prospered: because the Lorde hath chastened her for her greate wyckednes: her chyldren are ledde awaye captiue before theyr enemye.
All the bewtie of the daughter of Sion is awaye, her princes are become lyke hertes that fynde no pasture. They are dryuen awaye before theyr enemie, so that they haue nomore power.
Nowe doth Ierusalem remembre the tyme of her misery and disobedience, yee, the ioye and pleasure that she hath had in tymes past seynge her people is brought downe thorow the power of theyr enemye, and there is no man for to helpe her: her enemyes stande lokynge at her, and laugh her Sabbath dayes to scorne.
Ierusalem hath synned euer, more and more, therfore is she come in decaye. All they that had her in honoure despyse her: for they haue sene her fylthynes. Yee, she sygheth, and is ashamed of her selfe.
Her skyrtes are defyled, she remembred not what wolde folowe: therfore is her fall so wonderfull, and there is no man to comforte her. O Lorde, consydre my trouble, for myne enemye hath the vpperhande.
The enemye hath put hys hande to all the precious thynges that she had, yee, euen before her eyes came the Heathen in and out of the Sanctuary: whom thou (neuertheles) hast forbydden to come within thy congregacyon.
All her people seke theyr breade with heuynes, and loke what precyous thing euery man hath, that geueth he for meate, to saue hys lyfe. Consydre, O Lorde, and se, how vyle I am become.
Haue ye no regarde O all ye that go fore by, be holde and se, yf there be eny sorow lyke vnto myne, wherwith the Lorde hath troubled me, in the daye of his fearfull wrath.
From aboue hath he sent downe a fyre into my bones and it burneth them cruellye: he hath layed a net for my fete and throwen me wyde open: he hath made me desolate, so that I must euer be mournynge.
The yocke of my transgressyon is come at the last, with hys hande hath he taken it vp, and put it aboute my neck. My strength is gone: the Lorde hath delyuered me into those handes, wherout I cannot quyte my selfe.
The Lorde hath destroyed all the myghtye men, that were in me He hath proclaymed a feaste, to slaughter all my best men. The Lorde hath troden downe the daughter, of Iuda, lyke as it were in a wyne presse.
Therfore do I wepe, and myne eyes gusshe oute of water: for the comforte that shulde quycken me, is farre fro me. My chyldren are dryuen awaye, for why? the enemy hath gotten the ouerhande.
Syon casteth out her handes, and there is no man to comforte her. The Lorde hath laied the enemyes rounde aboute Iacob, and Ierusalem is become abominacyon in the myddest of them.
The Lorde is ryghtuous, for I haue prouoked his countenaunce vnto anger. O take hede all ye people, and consydre my heuinesse. My maydens and my yonge men are led awaye into captiuyte.
I called for my louers (but they begyled me) for my prestes and councellers, but they peryshed: euen whyle they sought for meate, to saue theyr lyues.
Consydre (O Lord) howe I am troubled, my wombe is disquyeted, my hert turneth about in me, and I am full of heuines because I rebelled stoburnlie. The swearde hurteth me withoute, Ꟶ within I am like vnto death.
They heare my mournyng, but there is none that wyll comforte me. All myne enemies haue hearde of my trouble and are glad therof, because thou hast done it and thou hast brought forth the tyme which thou calledest, when they also shalbe like vnto me.
From the shall come all their aduersitie thou shalt plucke them awaye euen as thou hast pluked me, because of all my wikednes. For my sorowe is very greate, Ꟶ my hert is heuy.
Alas, howe hath the Lorde darckened the daughter of Syon so sore in hys wrath? As for the honour of Israel he hath cast it downe from heauen vnto the erth. Howe happeneth it, that he remembred not his awne fote stole when he was angre?
The Lorde hath cast downe all the habitatyons of Iacob without any fauour: all the stronge places of the daughter Iuda hath he broken in hys wrath, and throwen them downe to the grounde: her kyngdome and her princes hath he suspended.
In the wrath of hys indignacyon he hath broken all the horne of Israel: he hath wt drawen his right hande from the enemye: yee, a flame of fyre is kyndled in Iacob, and hath consumed vp all rounde aboute.
He hath bent his bowe lyke an enemye, he hath fastened hys right hand as an aduersary: and euerythynge that was pleasaunt to se, he hath smytten it downe. He hath poured out his wrath lyke a fyre, into the tabernacle of the daughter of Syon.
The Lorde is become lyke as it were an enemie, he hath deuoured Israel and all hys palaces: yee, all his strong holdes hath he destroyed, and fylled the daughter of Iuda with moche sorowe and heuynesse.
Her tabernacle (which was lyke a garden of pleasure) hath he destroyed: her hye solempne feastes hath he put downe. The Lorde hath brought it so to passe, that the hie solempne feastes and Sabbathes in Sion, are cleane forgotten. In his heuy displeasure hath he made the kynge and prestes to be despised.
The Lorde hath forsaken hys awne aulter, and hath abhorred his awne Sanctuarye, and hath geuen the walles of theyr towres into the handes of the enemye. Theyr enemies made a noise in the house of the Lord, as it had bene in a solempne feaste daye.
The Lorde thought to breake downe the walles of the daughter of Sion, he spred out his lyne, and drewe not in hys hande, tyll he had destroyed them: Therfore mourne the turrettes and the broken walles together.
Her gates are soncke downe to the grounde, her barres are broken and smytten in sonder, her kynge Ꟶ princes are caried awaye to the Gentyls. They haue nether lawe ner prophetes, ner yet eny visyon from the Lorde.
The senatours of the daughter Sion syt vpon the grounde in silence: they haue strawed asshes vpon theyr heades, and gyrded them selues with sack cloth. The maydens of Ierusalem hange downe theyr heades to the grounde.
Myne eyes begyne to fayle me thorowe wepyng, my body is disquyeted, my liuer is poured vpon the earth, for the greate hurte of my people, seynge the chyldren and babes dyd swowne in the stretes of the cyte.
Euen when they spake to theyr mothers: where is meate and dryncke? for whyle they so sayde, they fell downe in the stretes of the cytie, lyke as they had bene wounded, and some dyed in theyr mothers bosome.
What shall I saye of the, O thou daughter Ierusalem, to whom shall I lycken the? To whom shall I compare the. O thou daughter Sion, to comforte the withall? Thy hurte is lyke a mayne see, who maye heale the?
Thy prophetes haue loked out vayne and folishe thinges for the, they haue not shewed the of thy wickednes, to kepe the from captiuite: but haue ouerladen the, and thorow falshed scatred the abrode.
All they that go by the, clappe their handes at the: hissynge and wagginge their heades vpon the daughter Ierusalem, and saye: is this the cyte that men call so fayre: wherin the whole lande reioyseth?
All thyne enemies gape vpon the: whysperinge and bytinge their teth, saying: let vs deuoure, for the tyme that we loked for, is come: we haue founde and sene it.
The Lorde hath fulfylled the thinge, that he was purposed to do: and perfourmed that he had deuised longe a go: he hath destroyed, and not spared. He hath caused thine aduersarye triumphe ouer the, and set vp the horne of thyne enemie.
Let thyne herte crye vnto the Lorde, O thou cytie of the daughter Sion: let thy teares runne downne lyke a ryuer daye and nyght, rest not, and let not the aple of thyne eye leaue of.
Stande vp and make thy praier in the fyrst watch of the nyght, poure oute thyne hert lyke water before the Lorde. lyft vp thyne handes, for the lyues of thy yonge chyldren, that dye of honger in the stretes.
Beholde, O Lorde, and consydre, why hast thou gathered me vp so cleane? Shall the wemen then eate their awne frute, euen chyldren of a spanne longe? Shall the prestes and prophetes be slayne thus in the Sanctuary of the Lorde?
Yonge and olde lye behynde the stretes vpon the grounde, my maydens and yonge men are slayne with the swearde: whom thou in the daye of thy wrathfull indignacion hast put to death: yee, euen thou hast put them to death, Ꟶ not spared them.
My neyghboures that are rounde about me, hast thou called, as it were to a feast daye: so that in the daye of the Lordes wrath none escaped, nether was eny left behynde. Those that I haue brought Ꟶ noryshed, hath myne enemy destroyed.
I am the man, that (thorowe the rodd of hys wrath) haue experience of misery.
He droue me forth, and led me: yee, into darckenesse, but not into lyght.
Agaynst me onely he turneth hys hande, and layeth it euer vpon me.
My fleshe and my skynne hath he made olde, Ꟶ my bones hath he brused.
He hath buylded rounde aboute me, and closed me in with gall and trauayle.
He hath sett me in darckenes, as they that be deed for euer.
He hath so hedged me in, that I cannot get out, and hath layed heuy lynckes vpon me.
Though I crye and call pyteously, yet heareth he not my prayer.
He hath stopped vp my wayes with foure squared stones, and made my pathes croked.
He layeth wayte for me lyke a Beare, and as a lyon in a hole.
He hath marred my wayes, and broken me in peces, he hath layed me waste altogether.
He hath bent hys bowe, Ꟶ made me as it were a marck to shut at:
The arowes of his quyuer hath he shot euen into myne reynes.
I am laughed to scorne of all my people, they make songes vpon me all the daye longe.
He hath fylled me with bitternes, and geuen me wormwod to dryncke.
He hath smitten my teth in peces with stones, and rolled me in the dust.
He hath put my soule out of rest, I forget all good thynges.
I thought in my selfe: I am vndone, there is no hope for me in the Lorde.
O remembre yet my misery and my trouble, the wormwod and the gall.
Yee, thou shalt remembre them, for my soule melteth awaye in me.
Whyle I consydre these thynges in my herte, I get a hope agayne.
Namely, it is of the Lordes mercyes that we are not, vtterly consumed. For trulye hys pytefull compassion hath not ceassed.
Newe mercyes shall the Lorde shewe vpon the, erly, yee in the daye sprynge, (O Lorde) greate is thy faythfulnesse.
The Lorde is my porcyon, sayeth my soule, therfore wyll I hope in him.
O how good is the Lorde vnto them, that put theyr trust in hym, and to the soule that seketh after hym?
The good man with stylnes and pacience tarieth, for the health of the Lorde.
O howe good is it for a man, to take the yock vpon him from his youth vp.
He sytteth alone, he holdeth hym still, and dwelleth quyetly by him selfe.
He laieth hys face vpon the earth, yf (percase) there happen to be eny hope.
He offreth his cheke to the smyter, he wyll be content with reproues.
For the Lorde wyll not forsake for euer,
but though he punyshe hym: yet according to the multitude of his mercyes, he receaueth to grace agayne:
For he doth not plage Ꟶ cast out the children of men from his herte.
To treade all the presoners of the earth vnder his fete.
To moue the iudgement of man before the most hyghest.
To condempne a man in hys cause. The Lorde hath not pleasure in soche thynges.
What is he then that saieth: there shulde somthinge be done without the Lordes commaundement.
Out of the mouth of the moost hyghest goeth not euell and good?
Wherfore then murmureth the lyuynge man? let him murmure at his awne synne.
Let vs loke, well vpon our awne wayes and remembre oure selues, and turne againe to the Lorde.
Let vs lyfte vp oure hertes with oure handes vnto the Lorde that is in heauen.
We haue bene dissemblers, and haue offended, wylt thou therfore not be intreaded?
Thou hast couered vs in thy wrath, and persecuted vs, thou hast slayne vs without any fauoure.
Thou hast hyd thy selfe in a cloude, that oure prayer shuld not go thorowe.
Thou hast made vs out castes, and to be despysed amonge the people.
All oure enemyes gape vpon vs.
Feare and pytt is come vpon vs, yee, deceyte and destruccion.
Whole ryuers of water gushe oute of myne eyes, for the greate hurte of my people.
Myne eyes runne, and cannot ceasse, for there is no rest.
O Lorde, when wylt thou loke downe from heauen, and consydre?
Myne eye breaketh my herte: because of all the daughters of my cyte.
Myne enemies hunted me out sharpely, lyke a byrde, yee, and that without a cause.
They haue put downe my life into a pytt, Ꟶ they haue cast stones vpon me.
They poured water vpon my heade, then thought I: nowe am I vndone.
I called vpon thy name, O Lord, out of the depe pyt.
Thou hast herde my voyce: and hast not turned awaye thyne eares fro my syghthynge and cryenge.
Thou hast enclyned thy selfe vnto me, when I called vpon the, and haste sayde: feare not.
Thou (O Lorde) hast mayntened the cause of my soule, and hast redemed my lyfe.
O Lorde thou hast sene my blasphemers, take thou my cause vpon the.
Thou hast well consydred howe they go aboute to do me harme, Ꟶ that all their councels are agaynst me.
Thou hast heard their despytefull wordes (O Lorde) yee, and all theyr ymaginacyons agaynst me.
The lyppes of myne enemyes, and theyr deuices that they take agaynst me, all the daye longe.
Thou seyst also theyr syttinge downe, and theyr rysinge vp: they make theyr songes of nothynge but of me.
Rewarde them (O Lorde) accordynge to the worckes of theyr handes,
Geue them an obstinate herte: euen thy curse.
Persecute them (O Lorde) with thyne indignacyon, and rote them out from vnder the heauen.
O how is the golde become so dymme? Howe is the goodly coloure of it so sore chaunged? and the stones of the Sanctuary thus scatred in the corner of euery strete.
The chyldren of Syon that were alwaye in honoure, and clothed with the most precyous golde: howe are they nowe become lyke the erthen vessels which be made with the potters hande?
The dragons geue theyr yong ones suck with bare brestes: but the daughter of my people is cruell, and dwelleth in the wyldernesse lyke the Estriches.
The tonges of the suckynge chyldren, cleue to the rofe of theyr mouthes for very thyrst. The yonge children aske bread, but there is no man that geueth it them.
They that were wonte to fare delycatly, peryshe in the streates: they that afore were brought vp in purple, make nowe moche of donge.
The synne of the daughter of my people is become greater then the wyckednes of Sodome, that sodenly was destroyed, and not taken with handes.
Her absteyners (or Nazarees) were whyter then the snowe or mylke: theyr coloure was fresshe, reade as Corall, theyr bewtye lyke the Saphyre.
But nowe theyr faces very blacke. In so moche, that thou shuldest not knowe them in the streates. Theyr skynne cleueth to theyr bones, It is withered and become lyke a drye stocke.
They that be slayne with the sweard are happyer then soche as dye of honger, and peryshe awaye, famyshynge for the frutes of the felde.
The wemen (which of nature are pytiefull) haue sodden theyr awne children with theyr handes, that they might be their meate in the miserable destruccyon of the daughter of my people.
The Lorde hath perfourmed hys heuy wrath: he hath poured oute the furiousnes of hys displeasure. He hath kyndled a fyre in Syon, which hath consumed the foundacyons therof.
Nether the kynges of the earth, ner all the inhabitours of the worlde, wolde haue beleued that the enemy and aduersary shuld haue come in at the gates of the cytie of Ierusalem.
Which neuerthelesse is come to passe for the synne of her prophetes, and for the wickednes of her prestes: that haue shed innocentes bloude within her.
So that the blynde men wente stomblynge in the streates, and stayned them selues with bloude. They wolde in no wyse touche there garmentes.
But they cried vnto euery man flee the staynynge, awaye, gett you hence, touche it not. Yee, they fleade and remoued from them yee, they haue sayde amonge the hethen they shall nomore dwell in this cytie.
The countenaunce of the Lorde hath banyshed them, and shall neuer loke more vpon them. For they them selues nether regarded the prestes, nor pytied theyr elders.
Wherfore yet oure eyes fayle vs, whyle we loke for vayne helpe: seynge we be euer waytyng vpon a people, that can do vs no good.
They laye so sharpe wayte for vs that we cannot go safe vpon the stretes: for oure ende is come, oure dayes are fulfylled, oure ende is here.
Oure persecuters are swyfter then the Aegles of the ayre, they folowed vpon vs ouer the mountaynes and layed wayte for vs in the wyldernesse.
The very breth of oure mouth: euen the anoynted Lorde hymselfe was taken in ther nett of whom we saye: Under hys shadowe we shalbe preserued amonge the Heythen.
And thou (O daughter Edom) that dwellest in the lande of Huz, be glad and reioyce: for the cuppe shall come vnto the also, whych whan thou suppest of, thou shalt be droncken.
Thy synnes is well punyshed, (O thou daughter Syon) he shall not suffre the to be caryed awaye eny more. But thy wyckednes (O daughter Edom) shall he vyset, and for thy synnes sake, he shall lede the into captyuite.
Call to remembraunce (O Lorde) what we haue suffred, consydre, and se oure confusion.
Oure enheritaunce is turned to the straungers and oure houses to the aleauntes.
We are become carefull and fatherles, and oure mothers are as the wyddowes.
We are fayne to dryncke oure awne water for money, and oure awne wod must we bye with money.
Oure neckes are vnder persecucion, we are weery, and haue no rest.
Afore tyme we yelded oure selues to the Egypcians, and nowe to the Assyrians, only that we myght haue bred ynough.
Oure fathers (which now are gone) haue synned, Ꟶ we must beare theyr wyckednes.
Seruauntes haue the rule of vs, and no man delyuereth vs out of their handes.
We must get oure lyuynge with the parell of oure lyues, because of the drouth of the wyldernes.
Oure skynne is as it had bene brent in an ouen, for very sore honger.
The wyues are raueshed in Syon, and the maydens in the cyties of Iuda.
The princes are hanged vp with the hande of the enemies, they haue not spared the olde sage men,
they haue taken yonge mennes lyues from them, Ꟶ the boyes are hanged vp vpon trees.
The elders sytt nomore vnder the gates, and the yonge men vse nomore playenge of musycke.
The ioye of oure herte is gone, oure mery queer is turned into mournynge.
The garlande of oure heade is fallen: alas, that euer we synned so sore.
Therfore, oure herte is full of heuynes, Ꟶ oure eyes dymme:
because of the hyll of Sion, that is destroyed. In so moch, that the foxes runne vpon it.
But thou, O Lorde, that remaynest for euermore, and thy seate worlde without ende:
wherfore wylt thou styll forget vs, and forsake vs so longe?
O Lorde turne thou vs vnto the, and so shall we be turned. Renue oure dayes as in olde tymes,
for thou hast banyshed vs nowe longe ynough, and hast bene sore displeased at vs.
It chaunsed in the .xxx. yeare, the fyfthe daye of the fourth moneth, that I was among the presoners by the ryuer of Cobar: where the heauens opened, and I sawe a visyon of God.
Nowe the fyfth daye of the moneth made out the fyfth yeare of Kynge Ioachins captyuite.
At the same tyme came the worde of the Lorde vnto Ezechiel the sonne of Buzi the preste, in the lande of the Chaldees by the water of Cobar, where the hande of the Lorde came vpon hym.
And I loked, and beholde a stormy wynde came out of the North with a greate cloude full of fyre, which with hys glystre lyghtened all rounde aboute. And in the middest of the fyre it was all cleare lyke the face of an angell,
and as it were the lykenes of foure beastes, and thys was there lykenesse. They were fashyoned lyke a man: sauynge,
that euery one had foure faces and foure wynges.
Theyr legges were streight, but theyr fete were lyke bullockes fete, and they glystered, as it had bene fayre scoured metall.
Under theyr wynges, vpon all the foure corners they had mens handes. Theyr faces and theyr wynges were towarde the foure corners:
yet were the wynges so, that one euer touched another. When they went, they turned them not aboute: but eche one went streight forwarde.
Furthermore thys was the symilitude of theyr faces. Upon the ryght syde of these foure, theyr faces were lyke the face of a man, and the face of a lyon. But vpon the lefte syde,
they had the face of an oxe, and the face of an Aegle. Theyr faces also and theyr wynges were spred out aboue: so that two wynges of one touched euer two wynges of another, Ꟶ with the other they couered their body.
Euery one when it wente, it wente streyght forwarde. Where as the sprete led them, thyther they wente, and turned not aboute in theyr goynge.
The fashyon and countenaunce of the beastes was lyke hoate coales of fyre, euen as though burning cressettes had bene among the beastes: and the fyre gaue a glistre, and out of the fyre there went lyghtenynge.
When the beastes wente forwarde Ꟶ backward, one wold haue thought it had lyghtened.
Now when I had well consydered the beastes, I saw a worcke of wheles vpon the earth with foure faces also nye vnto the beastes.
The fashyon and worcke of the wheles was lyke the see. The foure wheles were ioyned and made (to loke vpon) as it had bene one whele in another.
When one wente forwarde, they wente all foure, and turned them not about in theyr goinges.
They were large greate and horrible to loke vpon. Theyr backes were full of eyes rounde about them all foure. When the beastes wente, the wheles wente also with them.
And when the beastes lyfte them selues vp from the earth, the wheles were lyft vp also.
Whithersoeuer the sprete wente, thyther went they also, and the wheles were lyfte vp, and folowed them: for the sprete of lyfe was in the wheles.
When the beastes wente forth, stode styll, or lyft them selues from the earth, then the wheles also wente, stode styll, and were lyfte vp, for the breth of lyfe was in the wheles.
Aboue, ouer the heades of the beastes there was a fyrmament, which was fashyoned as it had bene of the most pure Christall, and that was spred oute aboue vpon theyr heades:
vnder the same fyrmament were theyr wynges layed abrode, one towarde another and two wynges couered the body of euery beaste.
And when they wente forth, I hearde the noyse of theyr wynges, lyke the noyse of greate waters, as it had bene the voyce of the greate God, and a russhynge together as it were of an hoost of men. And when they stode styll, they let downe theyr wynges.
Nowe when they stode styll, and had letten downe theyr wynges, it thondred in the fyrmament that was aboue theyr heades.
Aboue the fyrmament that was ouer theyr heades, there was the fashyon of a seate, as it had bene made of Saphyr. Upon the seate there satt one lyke a man.
I behelde hym, and he was lyke an angell, as it had bene all of fyre within from his loynes vpwarde. And beneth, when I loked vpon him vnder the loynes, me thought he was lyke a shynynge fyre, that geueth lyght on euery syde. Yee, the shyne and glystre that lyghtened rounde about,
was lyke a raynbowe, which in a raynye daye appeareth in the cloudes. Euen so was the similytude, wherin the glorye of the Lorde appeared. When I sawe it, I fell vpon my face, and herkened vnto the voyce of hym that spake:
And then sayd he vnto me: Stande vp vpon thy fete (O thou sonne of man) and I wyll talke with the.
And as he was comoninge wt me, the sprete came into me, and sett me vp vpon my fete: so that I marcked the thynge, that he sayde vnto me.
And he sayde Behold, thou sonne of man: I wyll sende the to the chyldren of Israel, to those runnagates and obstinate people: for they haue taken parte agaynst me, and are runne a waye fro me: both they and theyr fore fathers vnto thys daye.
Yee, I wyll sende the vnto a people that haue rough visages and stiffe stomakes: vnto whom thou shalt saye on thys maner: Thys the Lorde God hym selfe hath spoken,
that whether they be obedient or no (for it is a frowarde housholde) they maye knowe yet that there hath bene a Prophete amonge them.
Therfore (thou sonne of man) feare them not, nether be afrayed of theyr wordes: for prouokers and thornes are with the. Yee, thou doest dwell amonge scorpions. but feare not theyr wordes, be not abashed at theyr lookes, for it is a frowarde housholde.
Se that thou speake my wordes vnto them, whether they be obedient or not, for they are obstynate.
Therfore, thou sonne of man, obey thou all thynges that I saye vnto the, Ꟶ be not thou styfnecked, lyke as they are a styfnecked houshold. Open thy mouth, and eate that I geue the.
So as I was lokynge vp, beholde, there was sent vnto me an hande, wherin was closed a booke:
and the hande opened it before me, and it was wrytten within and without full of carefull mournynges: alas, and woo
After thys, sayde he vnto me: Thou sonne of man, eate that, whatsoeuer it be: yee eate that booke, and go thy waye, and speake vnto the chyldren of Israel:
So I opened my mouth, and he gaue me the booke for to eate,
and sayde vnto me. Thou sonne of man, thy bely shall eate, and thy bowels shalbe fylled with the booke, that I geue the. Then dyd I eate the boke, and it was in my mouth sweter then hony.
And he sayde vnto me: thou sonne of man, get the soone vnto the house of Israel, and shewe them the wordes, that I commaunde th
for I sende the not to the people that hath a straunge, vnknowne, or hard speache, but vnto the house of Israel.
Not to many nacyons, which haue dyuerse speaches and harde languages, whose wordes thou vnderstandest not Neuerthelesse, yf I sent the to those people, they wolde folowe the.
But the house of Israel wyll not folowe the, for they wyll not folowe me: yee, all the house of Israel haue stiffe forheades Ꟶ harde hertes.
Beholde therfore, I will make thy face preuayle agaynst their faces, and harden thy foreheade agaynst their foreheades:
so that thy foreheade shalbe harder then an Adamant or flynt stone: that thou mayest feare them the lesse, and be lesse afrayed of them, for they are a frowarde housholde.
He sayde moreouer vnto me: thou sonne of man, take diligent hede with thyne eares, to the wordes that I speake vnto the fasten them in thyne herte:
and go to the presoners of thy people, speake vnto them, and saye on thys maner: Thus the Lorde God hath spoken: whether ye heare, or heare not.
With that the sprete toke me vp. And I hearde the noyse of a greate russhynge and remouynge of the most blessed glory of the Lorde out of hys place.
I hearde also the noyse of the wynges of the beastes, that russhed one agaynst another, yee, and the ratlyng of the wheles, that were by them, whych rushynge and noyse was very greate.
Nowe when the sprete toke me vp, and caryed me awaye, I wente wyth an heuy Ꟶ a sorowfull mynde, but the hande of the Lorde comforted me ryght soone.
And so in the begynnynge of the moneth Abib. I came to the presoners, that dwelt by the water of Cobar, Ꟶ remayned in that place, where they were: And so contynued I amonge them seuen dayes, beynge very sory.
And when the seuen dayes were expired, the Lorde sayde vnto me:
Thou sonne of man, I haue made the a watchman vnto the house of Israell: therfore take good hede to the wordes of my mouthe, Ꟶ geue them warnynge at my commaundement.
If I saye vnto the, concernynge the vngodly man, that (wythout doute) he must dye, and thou geuest hym not warnynge, ner speakest vnto hym, that he may turne from hys euell waye, and so to lyue: Then shall the same vngodly man dye in his awne vnryghteousnes: but hys bloude wyll I requyre of thyne hand.
Neuertheles, yf thou geue warnynge vnto the wycked, and he yet forsake not his vngodlynesse: then shall he dye in his awne wyckednesse, but thou hast discharged thy soule.
Nowe yf a ryghteous man go from his ryghteousnesse, and do the thynge that is euell: I will laye a stomblynge blocke before him, and he shall dye because thou hast not geuen hym warnyng: yee, dye shall he in hys awne synne, so that the vertue, whych he dyd before, shall not be thought vpon: but his bloude wyll I requyre of thyne hande.
Neuerthelesse, yf thou exhortest the ryghteous, that he synne not, Ꟶ so the ryghteous do not synne: then shall he lyue, because he hath receaued thy warnynge, and thou hast discharged thy soule.
And there came the hande of the Lorde vpon me, and he sayd vnto me: Stande vp, and go into the felde, that I may there talke wyth the.
So when I had rysen vp, and gone forth into the felde: Beholde, the glory of the Lord stode there, lyke as I sawe it afore, by the water of Cobar. Then fell I downe vpon my face,
Ꟶ the sprete came in to me, whych set me vp vpon my fete, Ꟶ sayd thus vnto me: Go thy waye, and sparre thy self in thyne house.
Beholde, (O thou sonne of man) there shall chaynes be brought for the, to bynde the wythall, so that thou shalt not escape out of them.
And I wyll make thy tunge cleue so to the rofe of thy mouth, that thou shalt be domme, Ꟶ not be as a chyder wyth them: for it is an obstinate housholde.
But when I speake vnto the, then open thy mouth, and saye: Thus sayeth the Lorde God: who so heareth, let hym heare: who so wyll not let him leaue, for it is an obstynate housholde.
Thou sonne of man: take a tyle stone, Ꟶ laye it before the, and descrybe vpon it the cytie of Ierusalem,
howe it is beseged, howe bulwarkes and stronge dyches are grauen on euery syde of it: descrybe also tentes, and an hoost of men rounde aboute it. wyth engynes of warre.
Moreouer, take an yron panne, and set it betwixte the and the cyte, in steade of an yron wall. Then set thy face toward it, besege it, and laye ordinaunce agaynst it, to wynne it. Thys shalbe a token vnto the house of Israel.
But thou shalt slepe vpon thy left syde, and laye the synne of the house of Israel vpon the. Certayne dayes appoynted, thou shalt slepe vpon that syde, and beare their synnes.
Neuerthelesse, I will appoynte the a tyme (to put of theyr synnes) Ꟶ the nombre of the dayes: Thre hundreth and .xc. dayes must thou beare the wyckednesse of the house of Israell.
When thou hast fulfylled these dayes lye downe agayne, and slepe vpon thy ryght syde .xl. dayes, and beare the synnes of the house of Iuda. A daye for a yeare, a daye (I saye) for a yeare, wyll I euer laye vpon the.
Therfore set nowe thy face agaynst that beseged Ierusalem, and discouer thyne arme, that thou mayest prophecye agaynst it.
Beholde, I wyll laye chaynes vpon the, that thou shalt not turne the from one syde to another, tyll thou hast ended the dayes of thy sege.
Wherfore, take vnto the wheate, barly beanes, growell sede, Milium and fytches: and put these together in a vessel, and make the loaues of bread therof, accordynge to the nombre of the dayes that thou must lye vpon thy syde: that thou mayest haue bread to eate, for thre hundreth and .xx. dayes.
And the meate that thou eatest, shall haue a certayne wayght appoynted: namely twentye sycles euery daye. Thys apoynted meate shalt thou eate daylye, from the begynnynge to the ende.
Thou shalt dryncke also a certayne measure of water: Namely, the syxt parte of an Hin shalt thou dryncke dayly from the begynnyng vnto the ende.
Barly cakes shalt thou eate, yet shalt thou fyrst tost them at a fyre made with mans donge, that they maye se it.
And with that sayde the Lorde: Euen thus shall the chyldren of Israel eate their defyled bread in the myddest of the Gentiles, amonge whom I wyll scatre them.
Then sayde I: Oh Lorde God. Beholde my soule was yet neuer stayned: for fro my youth vp vnto this houre, I dyd neuer eate of a deed carcase, or of that which was slayne of wylde beastes, nether came there euer eny vncleane fleshe in my mouth.
Wher vnto he answered me, and sayde: well than, I wyll graunte the to take cowes donge for the donge of a man, and to toste the bread wyth all before them.
And he sayde vnto me: Beholde thou sonne of man, I wyll mynishe all the prouision of bread in Ierusalem, so that they shall weye their bred: and eate it with scarcenesse. But as for water, they shall haue a very lytle measure therof, to drincke.
And when they haue nomore bread ner water, one shall be destroyed with another, and famysh awaye for theyr wyckednesse.
O thou sonne of man, take the then a sharpe knyfe, namely, a rasoure. Take that, and shaue the heare of thy head and beerd: Then take the skales and the wayght, Ꟶ deuyde the hearre a sunder.
And after thou hast accomplished the dayes of the syege: burne the thyrde parte therof in the fyre in the myddest of the cytie, Ꟶ cut the other thyrde parte in peces wyth a knyfe. As for the thirde parte that remayneth, cast it in the wynde and I wyll drawe out the swerde after them.
Yet afterwarde, take a lytle of the same, and bynde it in thy cote lappe.
Then take a curtesy of it, and cast it in the myddest of the fyre: Ꟶ burne it in the fyre. Out of the same fyre shall there goo a flame, vpon the whole house of Israel.
Moreouer, thus sayde the Lorde God: Thys same is Ierusalem. I sett her in the myddest of the Heathen Ꟶ nacions that are rounde aboute her,
but she hath despysed my iudgementes more then the Gentiles them selues, and broken my commaundementes more then the nacyons, that lye rounde aboute her: For they haue cast out myne ordinaunces, and not walcked in my lawes.
Therfore, thus sayeth the Lord God: For so moch as ye haue bene more augmented in nombre of people then the Heathen, that dwell rounde aboute you: and ye haue not walcked in my lawes, nether haue ye kepte myne ordinaunces, and ye haue not lyued so ryghtwislye as the Hethen that ar rounde about youe:
Therfore thus sayeth the Lord God: I wyll also come vpon the, I my selfe I saye, for in the myddest of the wyll I syt in iudgment, in the syght of the Heathen,
Ꟶ wyll handle the of soch a fashyon, as I neuer dyd before, and as I neuer wyll do from that tyme forth, and that because of all thyne abhominacions.
For in the, fathers shall be fayne to eate their awne sonnes, and the sonnes their awne fathers. Soch a courte will I kepe in the, and the whole remnaunt of the wyll I scatre in to all the wyndes.
Wherfore, as truly as I lyue (sayeth the Lord God) seyng thou hast defyled my Sanctuary, with all maner of abhominacyons Ꟶ wt all thy shamefull offences: For thys cause wyll I also destroye the. Myne eye shall not ouerse the, nether wyll I spare the.
One thyrde parte wythin the, shall dye of the pestilence Ꟶ of honger: Another thirde parte shall be slayne downe rounde aboute the with the swerde: The other thyrde parte that remayneth, wyll I scatre abroade towarde all the wyndes, and drawe out the swearde after them.
Thus I wyll perfourme my indignacion, Ꟶ set my wrath agaynst them, and ease my selfe. So that when I haue fulfylled myne anger agaynst them, they shall knowe that I am the Lorde, which wyth a feruent gelousy haue spoken it.
Moreouer, I wyll make the waste and abhorred, before all the Heathen that dwell aboute the, Ꟶ in the sight of all them, that go by the:
so that when I punish the in my wrath, in myne anger, Ꟶ with the plage of my whole displeasure: thou shalt be a very abhominacion, shame, a gasynge Ꟶ wondrynge stocke, amonge the Heathen that lye aboute the. Euen I the Lorde haue spoken it, and it shall come to passe,
when I shute amonge them the perlous dartes of honger, which shalbe but death: Yee, therfore shall I shute them, because I will destroye you: I wyll encrease hunger, and mynish all the prouision of bread amonge you.
Plages Ꟶ misery wyll I sende you, yee, Ꟶ wylde beastes also to destroye you. Pestilence and bloudshedinge shall come vpon you, Ꟶ the swearde wyll I bringe ouer you. Euen I the Lorde, haue sayde it.
And the worde of the Lord came vnto me, sayinge:
Thou sonne of man, turne thy face to the mountaynes of Israel, that thou mayest prophecie vnto them,
and saye: Heare the worde of the Lord God, O ye mountaynes of Israel: Thus hath the Lorde God spoken to the mountaynes, hylles, valleys and dales. Beholde I, I my selfe I saye, wyll brynge a swearde ouer you, and destroye youre hye places:
I wyll cast downe youre aulters, and breake downe youre ymages. Youre slayne men wyll I laye before youre goddes,
and the deed carcases of the chyldren of Israel wyll I cast before theyr Idoles, youre bones wyll I destroye rounde aboute youre aulters,
and dwellyng places. The cyties shalbe desolate, the hyllchapels layed waste: youre aulters destroyed, Ꟶ broken: youre goddes cast downe, and taken awaye, your temples layde eauen wyth the grounde, your awne worckes cleane roted oute.
Youre slayne men shall lye amonge you, that ye maye learne to knowe, howe that I am the Lorde.
Those that be amonge you Ꟶ haue escaped the swearde, wyll I leaue amonge the Gentiles, for I wyll scatre you amonge the nacyons.
And they that escape of you, shall thincke vpon me amonge the Heathen, where they shalbe in captiuitye. As for that whorysh and vnfaythfull herte of theyrs, wherewyth they runne awaye fro me, I wyll breake it: yee, Ꟶ put oute those eyes of theirs, that commytte fornicacyon with theyr Idols. Then shall they be ashamed, and displeased wyth their selues, for the wyckednesses and abhominacyons, which they haue done:
and shall learne to knowe, that I am the Lorde howe that it is not in vayne, that I the Lorde spake, to brynge soch misery vpon them.
The Lord sayde moreouer vnto me: Smyte thyne handes together, and stampe wyth thy fete, and saye: Wo worth all the abhominacions and wyckednesses of the house of Israel, for because of them, they shall perysh wt the swearde, wyth honger and with pestilence.
Who so is farre of, shall dye of the pestilence: he that is nye at hande, shall perysh wyth the swearde: and the other that remayne Ꟶ that are beseged, shall dye of honger. Thus wyll I satisfye my wrothfull displeasure vpon them.
And so shall ye learne to knowe, that I am the Lorde, when youre slayne men lye amonge youre Idols, and aboute youre aulters: vpon all hye hylles and toppes of mountaynes, amonge all grene trees, amonge all thycke okes: euen in the places, where they dyd sacrifyce to all theyr Idols.
I wyll stretch myne hande oute vpon them, and wyll make the lande waste: So that it shall lye desolate and voyde, from the wyldernesse of Deblothah forth, thorowe all their habitacions: to learne them for to knowe, that I am the Lorde.
The worde of the Lorde came vnto me on thys maner:
The I call, O thou sonne of man. Thus sayeth the Lorde God vnto the lande of Israel: The ende commeth, vpon the lande of Israel yee, verely the ende commeth vpon all the foure corners of the lande.
But nowe shall the ende come vpon the for I wyll sende my wrath vpon the, Ꟶ will punyshe the: accordynge to thy wayes, Ꟶ rewarde the after all thyne abhominacions.
Myne eye shall not ouerse the, nether will I spare the: but rewarde the, accordyng to thy wayes, and declare thyne abhominacyons. Then shall ye knowe, that I am the Lorde.
Thus sayeth the Lord God: Beholde, one misery and plage shall come after another.
the ende is here. The ende (I saye) is come, it watched for the, beholde it is come all ready,
thy destructyon is erlye come agaynst the, that dwellest in the lande. The tyme is at hande, the daye of sedicion is harde by, Ꟶ the crye shall not be as the soundinge agayne of the mountaynes.
Therfore, I wyll shortly pour out my sore displeasure ouer the, and fulfyll my wrath vpon the. I wyll iudge the after thy wayes, and recompence the all thy abhominacyons.
Myne eye shall not ouerse the, nether wyll I spare the: but rewarde the after thy wayes, Ꟶ thyne abhominacions shall be punished in the middes of the, to learne you for to knowe, howe that I am the Lord that smyteth.
Beholde, the daye is here the daye is come, the houre is runne out, the rodde florisheth, pryde waxeth grene,
malicyous violence is growne vp, and the vngodly waxen to a staf. None of them shal remayne ouer, none of their riches, not one of ther seede, and no lamentacion shall be made for them.
The tyme commeth, the daye draweth nye: Who so byeth, lett him not reioyce: he that selleth, let hym not be sory: for why. Trouble shall come in the myddest of them all:
so that the seller shall not come agayne to the thinge he solde, all though theyr lyfe be yet with the lyuinge. For when the prophecye was preached vnto all the people, none returned from ther synne, and noman toke strengthe to him agenst his wyckednesse, to saue his awne lyfe.
The trompettes shall ye blowe, Ꟶ make you all ready, but no man shall goo to the battell, for I am wroth with all the whole multitude.
The swearde shalbe without, pestilence and honger wythin: so that whoso is in the felde, shalbe slayne with the swearde: and he that is in the cytie shall perysh with honger and pestilence.
And soch as escape and fle from amonge them, shall be vpon the hylles, lyke as the doues in the felde: euery one shalbe afrayed, because of his awne wyckednesse.
All handes shalbe let downe, Ꟶ all knees shalbe weake as the water:
they shall gyrde them selues wyth sackcloth, feare shall fall vpon them. Theyr faces shalbe confounded, and theyr heades balde:
theyr syluer shall they cast forthe in the stretes, Ꟶ their golde shalbe despysed: Yee, theyr syluer Ꟶ golde maye not delyuer them, in the daye of the fearfull wrath of the Lorde. They shall not satisfye their hongry soules, nether fyll their emptye bellyes therwt: For it is become their awne decaye thorow their wickednes:
And ther bewtyfull costlye ornamente that God had ordeyned to be their great glorye, in it they haue sett vp abhominacyons vnto ther Idols. For this cause wyll I make them and it to be abhorred.
Moreouer, I wyll geue it into the handes of the straungers to be spoyled: and to the wycked, for to be robbed, and they shall destroye it.
My face wyll I turne from them, my treasury shalbe defiled: for the theues shall go into it, and suspende it.
Make a cheyne, for the lande is whole defyled wyth vnryghteous iudgement of innocent bloude, and the cytie is full of violent oppressyon.
Wherfore, I wyll bringe the most cruell tyrauntes from amonge the Heathen, to take theyr houses in possessyon. I wyll make the pompe of the proude to ceasse, and ther sanctuary shall be defyled.
When thys trouble commeth, they shall seke peace, but they shall haue none.
One myschefe and sorowe shall folowe another, and one rumoure shall come after another: Then shall they seke visyons in vayne at their Prophetes. The lawe shall be gone from the prestes, and wysdome from the elders.
The kynge shall mourne, the Prynces shalbe clothed with heuynesse, and the handes of the people in the lande shall tremble for feare. I wyll do vnto them after theyr awne wayes, accordynge to their awne iudgementes wyll I iudge them: to learne them for to knowe, that I am the Lorde.
It happened, that in the syxte yeare the fyfth daye of the syxte moneth. I sat in my house, and the Lordes of the councell of Iuda with me: and the hande of the Lorde God fell euen there vpon me.
And as I loked vp, I sawe as it were a licknesse of fyre from hys loynes downe warde and from hys loynes vpwarde it shyned maruelous cleare Ꟶ lyke an angell to loke vpon.
This symilitude stretched out an hande, and toke me by the hearrye lockes of my head, and the sprete lyft me vp betwyxte heauen and earth: and brought me in a visyon to Ierusalem, into the entrie of the inner porte that lyeth towarde the north: there stode an ymage, with whom he that hath all thynges in hys power, was very wroth.
And beholde, the glory of the God of Israel was in the same place: euen as I had sene it afore in the felde.
And he sayde vnto me: Thou sonne of man, O lyft vp thyne eyes, and loke towarde the north. Then lyft I vp myne eyes towarde the north, Ꟶ beholde: besyde the porte northwarde, there was an aulter made vnto the ymage of prouocacyon in the very entryng in.
And he sayde furthermore vnto me: Thou sonne of man, seest thou what these do? Seest thou the greate abhominacyons that the house of Israel commytte in thys place? to dryue me from my sanctuary? But turne the aboute, and thou shalt se yet greater abhominacyons.
And wyth that brought he me to the courte gate: Ꟶ when I loked, beholde, there was an hole in the wall.
Then sayde he vnto me: Thou sonne of man, dygge thorow the wall. And when I dygged thorow the wall, beholde, there was a dore.
And he sayde vnto me: Go thy waye in, and loke what wycked abhominacyons they do here.
So I wente in, and sawe: and beholde, there were all maner ymages of wormes Ꟶ beastes, all Idoles and abhominacyons of the house of Israel paynted euery one rounde about the wall.
Ther stode also before the ymages .lxx. Lordes of the councell of the house of Israel: and in the myddest of them stode Iaazanih the sonne of Saphan: And euery one of them had a censoure in hys hande, and out of the incense, there went a smoke, as it had bene a cloude.
Then sayde he vnto me. Thou sonne of man, hast thou sene what the Senatoures of the house of Israel do secretly, euery one in hys chambre? For they saye: Tush, the Lorde seeth vs not, the Lorde regardeth not the worlde.
And he sayd vnto me: Turne the yet agayne, and thou shalt se yet greater abhominacyons that they do.
And wyth that he brought me to the dore of the porte of the Lordes house, towarde the north. And beholde, there sat women mournynge for Thamus.
Then sayde he vnto me: hast thou sene thys, thou sonne of man? Turne the aboute, and thou shalt se yet greater abhominacyons then thes are.
And so he brought me into the inwarde court of the Lordes house: and beholde at the porte of the Lordes house, betwyxte the fore entrye and the aulter, there were fyue and twenty men, that turned their backes vpon the temple of the Lorde, and theyr faces towarde the easte, and these worshypped the sonne.
And he sayde vnto me: hast thou sene this, thou sonne of man? Thynketh the house of Iuda, that it is but a trifle, to do these abhominacyons here? Shulde they fyll the lande full of wyckednesse, and vndertake to prouoke me vnto anger? Yee, and purposely to cast vp theyr noses vpon me?
Therfore will I also do some thynge in my wrathfull dyspleasure, so that myne eye shall not ouerse them, nether wyll I spare them. Yee, and though they crye in myne eares wyth loude voyce, yet wyll I not heare them.
He cryed also with a loude voyce in myne eares, sayinge: Come, here ye rulers of the cyte, euery man wyth his weapened hande to the slaughter.
Then came there syxe men out of the strete of the vpper porte towarde the north, and euery man a weapen in hys hande to the slaughter. There was one amongest them, that had on hym a lynen rayment, Ꟶ a wryters ynckhorne by hys syde. These wente in, Ꟶ stode besyde the brasen aulter:
for the glory of the Lorde was gone awaye from the Cherub whych was vpon him, Ꟶ was come downe to the thresholde of the house, and he called the man that had the lynen rayment vpon hym, and the wryters ynckhorne by his syde,
and the Lorde sayde vnto hym: Go thy waye thorowe the cyte of Ierusalem, and set a marcke vpon the foreheades of them, that mourne and are sory for all the abhominacions, that be done therin.
And to the other, he sayde that I myght heare: Go ye after hym thorowe the cytie, slaye, ouerse none, spare none:
kyll and destroye both olde men and yonge, maydens, chyldren, and wyues. But as for those, that haue the marcke vpon them: se that ye touch them not, and begynne at my Sanctuary. Then they beganne at the elders, whych were in the temple,
for he had sayde vnto them: When ye haue defyled the temple, and fylled the courte wyth the slayne, then go your waye forth. So they wente out, Ꟶ slewe downe thorowe the citie.
Nowe when they had done the slaughter, Ꟶ I yet escaped: I fell downe vpon my face, Ꟶ cryed, sayinge: O Lorde, wylt thou then destroye all the resydue of Israel, in thy sore displeasure, that thou hast poured vpon Ierusalem?
Then sayde he vnto me: The wyckednesse of the house of Israel and Iuda is very greate: so that the lande is full of bloude, and the citie full of vnfaithfulnesse: For they saye: Tush the Lorde regardeth not the earth, he seeth vs not.
Therfore wyll I vpon them, myne eye shall not ouerse them, nether wyll I spare them, but wyll recompense theyr wyckednesse vpon theyr heades.
And beholde, the man that had the lynen rayment vpon hym, and the wryters ynckhorne by hys syde: tolde all the matter howe it happened, and sayde: Lorde as thou hast commaunded me, so haue I done.
And as I loked, beholde, in the firmament that was aboue the Cherubins there appeared the symilitude of a stole of Saphyr vpon them:
Then sayde he that sat therin, to him that had the lynen rayment vpon hym: Crepe in betwene the wheles that are vnder the Cherubyns, and take thyne hande full of hoate coales out from betwene the Cherubyns, and cast them ouer the cytie. And he crepte in, that I myght se.
Now the Cherubyns stode vpon the ryght syde of the house, when the man wente in, Ꟶ the cloude fylled the inner courte.
But the glory of the Lorde remoued from the Cherubyns, and came vpon the thresholde of the house: so that the temple was full of cloudes, and the courte was full of the shyne of the Lordes glory.
Yee, and the sounde of the Cherubyns wynges was hearde into the fore courte, lyke as it had bene the voyce of the almyghtye God, when he speaketh.
Nowe when he had byden the man that was clothed in lynen, to go and take the hoate coales from the myddest of the wheles, whych were vnder the Cherubyns: he wente Ꟶ stode besyde the wheles.
Then the one Cherub reached forth hys hande from vnder the Cherubyns, vnto the fyre that was betwene the Cherubyns, and toke therof, and gaue it vnto hym that had on the lynen rayment in his hande: which toke it, Ꟶ went out.
And vnder the wynges of the Cherubyns, there appeared the lycknesse of a mans hande:
I sawe also foure wheles besyde the Cherubyns, so that by euery cherub there stode a whele. And the wheles were (to loke vpon) after the fashion of the precyous stone of Tharsys:
yet (vnto the syght) they were all .iiij. of one fashyon, as yf one whele had bene in another.
When they wente forth, they wente all foure together, not turnynge aboute in their goinge: But where the fyrst wente, thyther wente they after also, so that they turned not aboute in their goyng.
Their whole bodyes, their backes, theyr handes Ꟶ wynges, yee, and the wheles also, were all full of eyes rounde aboute them all foure.
And I hearde hym call the wheles.
Euery one of them had foure faces: so that the one face was the face of a Cherub, the seconde of a man, the thyrde of a lyon, the fourth of an Aegle,
Ꟶ they were lyfted vp aboue. This is the beast, that I sawe at the water of Cobar.
Nowe when the Cherubyns wente, the wheles wente wyth them, and when the Cherubyns shoke theyr wynges to lyft them selues vpwarde, the wheles remayned not behynde, but were wyth them also.
Shortly, when they stode, these stode also. And when they were lyft vp, the wheles were lyft vp also with them, for the sprete of lyfe was in the wheles.
Then the glory of the Lorde was lyft vp from the thresholde of the temple, and remayned vpon the Cherubyns:
And the Cherubyns flackred wyth theyr wynges, and lyfte them selues vp from the earth: so that I sawe when they went, and the wheles wt them. And they stode at the east syde of the porte that is in the house of the Lorde. So the glory of the Lorde was vpon them.
Thys is the beast that I sawe vnder the God of Israel, by the water of Cobar. And I perceaued, that it was the Cherubyns.
Euery one had foure faces, Ꟶ euery one foure wynges, and vnder theyr wynges, as it were mens handes.
Nowe the fygure of theyr faces was, euen as I had sene them, by the water of Cobar, and so was the countenaunce of them: Euery one in hys goinge wente strayght forwarde.
Moreouer, the sprete of the Lord lyft me vp, and brought me vnto the East porte of the Lordes house. And beholde, there were .xxv. men vnder the dore amonge whom I sawe Iaazaniah the sonne of Azur, and Pheltiah the sonne of Bananiah, the rulers of the people.
Then sayde the Lorde vnto me: Thou sonne of man: these men ymagyn myschefe, and a wycked councell take they in thys cyte,
sayinge: tush, there is no destruccyon at hande, let vs buylde houses: this Ierusalem is the cauldron, and we be the fleshe.
Therfore shalt thou prophecye vnto them, yee, prophecye shalt thou vnto them, O sonne of man.
And wyth that fell the sprete of the Lorde vpon me, and sayde vnto me: Speake, thus sayeth the Lorde: On this maner haue ye spoken (O ye house of Israel) Ꟶ I knowe the ymaginacyons of youre hertes.
Many one haue ye murthured in this cyte, and fylled the stretes full of the slayne.
Therfore, thus sayeth the Lorde God: The slayne men that ye haue layed on the grounde in this cyte, are the flesh, and thys cyte is the cauldron: But I wyll brynge you out of it
ye haue feared the swerde, Ꟶ I wyll brynge a swearde ouer you, sayeth the Lorde God.
I wyll dryue you out of thys cyte and delyuer you into youre enemyes hande, and will condemne you.
Ye shalbe slayne in all the coastes of Israel, I wyll be auenged of you: to lerne you for to knowe, that I am the Lord.
Thys cyte shall not be youre cauldron, nether shall ye be the flesh theryn: but in the coastes of Israel wyll I punysh you,
that ye maye knowe, that I am the Lorde: in whose commaundementes ye haue not walcked, ner kepte his lawes: but haue done after the customes of the Heathen, that lye rounde aboute you.
Nowe when I preached, Pheltiah the sonne of Bananiah dyed. Then fell I downe vpon my face, and cryed wyth a loude voyce: O Lorde God, wylt thou then vtterlye destroye all the remnaunt in Israel?
And so the worde of the Lorde came to me on thys maner:
thou sonne of man: thy brethren, thy kynsfolke, Ꟶ the whole house of Iuda, which dwell at Ierusalem, saye. Wythdrawe ye farre from the Lorde, for the lande is geuen vs in possession.
Therfore tell them, thus sayeth the Lorde God: I wyll sende you farre of amonge the Gentiles, and skatre you amonge the nacyons, Ꟶ I wyll halowe you but a lytle, in the landes where ye shall come.
Tell them also, thus sayeth the Lorde God: I wyll gather you agayne out of the nacyons, and brynge you from the countrees where ye be scatred, and wyll geue you the lande of Israel agayne.
And they shall comme thyther. And they shall take awaye all ther Idols Ꟶ all ther abhominacyons from thence.
And I wyll geue you one hert, and I wyll plante a newe sprete wythin your bowels. That stony herte will I take out of your body, and geue you a flesshy herte?
that ye maye walke in my commaundementes, and kepe myne ordinaunces, and do them: that ye maye be my people, Ꟶ I youre God
But loke whose hertes are dysposed to folowe theyr abhominacyons and wycked lyuinges: those mens dedes wyll I brynge vpon theyr awne heades, sayeth the Lorde God.
After thys dyd the Cherubyns lyft vp theyr wynges, and the wheles wente wyth them, and the glory of the Lorde was vpon them.
So the glory of the Lorde wente vp from the myddest of the cyte, and stode vpon the mount of the cyte towarde the east:
But the wynde toke me vp, and in a visyon (whych came by the sprete of God) it brought me agayne into Caldea amonge the presoners. Then the visyon that I had sene vanyshed awaye fro me.
So I spake vnto the presoners, all the wordes of the Lorde, whych he had shewed me.
The worde of the Lord came vnto me, sayinge:
Thou sonne of man, thou dwellest in the myddest of a frowarde housholde: whych haue eyes to se, and yet se not: eares haue they to heare, and yet heare they not, for they are an obstinate housholde.
Therfore (O thou sonne of man) make thy gere redy to flyt, and go forth by fayre daye lyght, that they maye se. Yee, euen in theyr syght shalt thou go from thy place to another place: yf paraduenture they wyll consydre, that they be an vnobedient housholde:
Thy gere that thou hast made redy to flyt wythall, shalt thou beare out by fayre daye lyght that they maye se: and thou thy selfe shalt go forth also at euen in their syght, as a man doth when he flytteth.
Dygge thorowe the wall, that they maye se Ꟶ beare thorow it the same thyng, that thou tokest vp in their syght.
In ther syght that shalt thou beare vpon thy shulders, Ꟶ cary yt forthe in the darke. Hyde thy face that thou se not the earth, for I haue made the a shewtoken vnto the house of Israel.
Nowe as the Lorde commaunded me, so I dyd: the geare that I had made readie brought I out by daye. At euen I brake downe an hole thorow the wall wyth my hande: and when it was darcke, I toke the gere vpon my shoulders, and bare them out in theyr syght.
And in the mornynge, came the worde of the Lorde vnto me, sayinge:
Thou sonne of man, yf Israel that frowarde housholde aske the, and saye: what doest thou there?
Then tell them: Thus sayeth the Lorde God: Thys punyshment toucheth the chefe rulers at Ierusalem, and all the house of Israel, that dwell amonge them:
Tell them: I am youre shewe token: lyke as I haue done, so shall it happen vnto you: Flyt shall ye also, and go into captiuitie.
The chefest that is amonge you, shall lade hys shulders in the darcke, Ꟶ get hym awaye. He shall breake downe the wall, to carye stuffe therthorow: He shall couer his face, that he se not the grounde, with his eyes.
My lyne wyll I sprede out vpon hym, and catch him in my net, and cary hym to Babylon, in the lande of the Caldees: which he shall not se, and yet shalt he dye there.
As for all hys helpers, Ꟶ all hys Hostes, that be about hym. I wyll scatre them towarde all the wyndes, and drawe out a swearde after them.
So when I haue scatred them amonge the Heathen, and strowed them in the landes they shall knowe, that I am the Lorde.
But, I wyll leaue a lytle nombre of them from the swearde, hunger and pestilence: to tell all their abhominacyons amonge the Heathen, where they come: that they maye knowe, howe that I am the Lorde.
Moreouer, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me sayinge:
Thou sonne of man: wyth a fearfull tremblynge shalt thou eate thy bread, wyth carefulnesse Ꟶ sorowe shalt thou dryncke thy water.
And vnto the people of the lande, speake thou on this maner: Thus sayeth the Lord God, to them that dwell in Ierusalem, and to the lande of Israel: Ye shall eate youre bread wyth sorowe, and dryncke youre water wyth heuynesse: Yee, the lande wyth the fulnesse therof shalbe layde waste, for the wyckednesse of them that dwell therin.
And the cyties that now be well occupyed, shall be voyde, and the lande desolate: that ye may knowe, howe that I am the Lorde.
Yet came the worde of the Lorde vnto me agayne, sayinge:
Thou sonne of man, what maner of byworde is that, which ye vse in the lande of Israel, sayinge: Tush, seynge that the dayes are so slacke in commynge, all the visyons are of none effecte:
Tell them therfore, thus sayeth the Lorde God: I wyll make that byworde to ceasse, so that it shall nomore be commenly vsed in Israel. But saye thys vnto them: The dayes are at hande, that euery thynge which hath bene prophecyed, shalbe fulfylled.
There shall no visyon be in vayne, nether eny prophecie fayle amonge the chyldren of Israel:
For it is I the Lorde, that speake it: and whatsoeuer I the Lorde speake, it shall be perfourmed, and not be slacke in commynge. Yee, euen in youre dayes (O ye frowarde housholde) will I deuyse some thynge, and brynge it to passe, sayeth the Lord God.
And the worde of the Lorde came vnto me saying:
Beholde, thou sonne of man: The house of Israel sayeth on thys maner: Tush, as for the visyon that he hath sene, it wyll be many a daye or it come to passe: It is farre of yet, the thynge that he prophecyeth.
Therfore saye vnto them: Thus sayeth the Lorde God: All my wordes shall nomore be slacke: Loke what I speake, that same shall come to passe, sayeth the Lorde.
The worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge:
Thou sonne of man. Speake, prophecye agaynst those prophetes, that preach in Israel Ꟶ saye thou vnto them that prophecye out of theyr awne hertes: Heare the worde of the Lord,
thus sayeth the Lord God: Wo be vnto those folysh prophetes, that folowe theyr awne sprete and speake where they se nothyng.
O Israel, thy prophetes are lyke the foxes vpon the drye felde:
For they stande not in the gappes, nether make they an hedge for the house of Israel, that men myght abyde the battell in the daye of the Lorde.
Uayne thynges they se, and tell lyes, to mayntaine their preachynges wythall. The Lorde (saye they) hath spoken it, whan in very dede the Lorde hath not sent them.
Uayne visyons haue ye sene, and spoken false prophecyes, when ye saye: the Lorde hath spoken it, where as I neuer sayde it.
Therfore, thus sayeth the Lord God: Because youre wordes be vayne, and ye seke out lyes: Beholde, I wyll vpon you, sayeth the Lorde.
Myne handes shall come vpon the prophetes that loke out vayne thinges, and preach lyes: they shall not be in the councell of my people, ner wrytten in the boke of the house of Israel, nether shall they come in the lande of Israel: that ye maye knowe, howe that I am the Lorde God.
And that for by cause: they haue dysceaued my people, and tolde them of peace, where no peace was. One setteth vp a wall, and they dawbe it with lowse claye.
Therfore tell them whych dawbe it with vntempered morter, that it shall fall For there shall come a great shower of rayne greate hayle stones shall fall vpon it, Ꟶ a sore storme of wynde shall breake it,
so shall the wall come downe. Shall it not then be sayde vnto you: where is nowe the morter, that ye dawbed it wyth all?
Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde God: I wyll breake out in my wrothfull displeasure wyth a stormy wynde, so that in myne anger there shall come a myghtye shower of rayne, Ꟶ hayle stones in my wrath, to destroye withall.
As for the wall, that ye haue dawbed wt vntempered morter, I wyll breake it downe, make it euen wyth the grounde: so that the foundacyon therof shall remoue, and it shall fall, yee, and ye youre selues shall perysh in the myddest therof: to learne you for to knowe, that I am the Lorde.
Thus wyll I perfourme my wrath vpon thys wall, and vpon them that haue dawbed it wyth vntempered morter, and then wyll I saye vnto you: The wall is gone, and the dawbers are awaye.
These are the prophetes of Israel, which prophecye vnto the cytie of Ierusalem, and loke out visions of peace for them, where as no peace is, sayeth the Lorde God.
Wherfore (O thou sonne of man) sett thy face agaynst the daughters of thy people, which prophecye out of their awne hertes: and speake thou prophecye agaynst them,
and saye: Thus sayeth the Lorde God: Wo be vnto you, that sowe pylowes vnder all arme holes, and bolsters vnder the heades both of yonge and olde, to catch soules wyth all. For whan ye haue gotten the soules of my people in youre captiuite, ye promyse them lyfe,
and dishonoure me to my people, for an handfull of barly, and for a pece of bread: whan ye kyll the soules of them, that dye not, and promes lyfe to them, that lyue not: Thus ye dissemble wt my people, that beleueth youre lyes.
Wherfore, thus sayeth the Lord God: Beholde, I wyll also vpon the pyllowes, wherwyth ye catch the soules in flyenge: then wyll I take from youre armes, and let the soules go, that ye catch in flyenge.
Youre bolsters also will I teare in peces, and delyuer my people out of youre hand: so that they shall come nomore in youre handes to be spoyled, and ye shall knowe, that I am the Lorde.
Seing that with youre lyes ye discomforte the herte of the ryghteous, whom I haue not discomforted: Agayne: For so moch as ye corage the hande of the wycked, so that he maye not turne from his wicked waye, and lyue:
therfore shall ye spye out nomore vanitie, ner prophecye youre awne gessynges: for I wyll delyuer my people out of youre hande, that ye maye knowe, howe that I am the Lorde.
There resorted vnto me certayne of the elders of Israel, Ꟶ sat downe by me.
Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto me, sayeng:
Thou sonne of man, these men beare their vnclennes in theyr hertes, and go purposly vpon the stomblynge blocke of theyr awne wyckednesse: shulde I then answer at their request?
Therfore speake vnto them, Ꟶ saye: thus sayeth the Lorde God: Euery man of the house of Israel that beareth hys vncleane Idols in hys herte, purposynge to stomble in hys awne wyckednesse, and commeth to a prophet, to enquere eny thinge at me by him: vnto that man wyll I the Lorde myselfe geue answere, accordynge to the multitude of hys Idols:
that the house of Israel maye be snared in their awne hertes, because they be clene gone fro me, for their abhominacions sakes.
Wherfore, tell the house of Israel: thus sayeth the Lorde God: Be conuerted, forsake youre Idols, and turne youre wyues from youre fylthynesse, and turne youre faces from all youre abhominacions.
For euery man, (whether he be of the house of Israel or a straunger, that sogeourneth in Israel) whych departeth fro me, and caryeth Idols in hys herte, purposynge to go styll stomblyng in his awne wyckednesse, and commeth to a Prophet, for to aske councell at me thorow hym: vnto that man will I the Lord geue answere, by myne awne selfe.
I wyll set my face agaynst that man, and wyll make hym to be an example for other, yee, and a comen byworde: and wyll rote him out of my people, that he may know, how that I am the Lorde.
and yf that Prophete be disceaued, when he telleth hym a worde: then I the Lorde my selfe haue disceaued that Prophet, and wyll stretch forth myne hande vpon hym, to rote hym out of my people of Israel:
and they both shalbe punyshed for theyr wyckednes. Accordynge to the synne of hym that asketh, shall the synne of the Prophete be:
that the house of Israel be led nomore fro me thorowe erroure, and be no more defyled in their wyckednesse: but that they maye be my people, Ꟶ I theyr God, sayeth the Lorde God.
And the worde of the Lord came vnto me, sayenge:
Thou sonne of man, when the lande synneth agaynst me, Ꟶ goeth forth in wyckednesse: I will stretch out myne hande vpon it, Ꟶ destroye all the prouisyon of their bred, and sende derth vpon them, to destroye man Ꟶ beest in the lande.
And though Noe, Daniel Ꟶ Iob, these thre men were amonge them, yet shall they in their ryghtuousnesse delyuer but their awne soules, sayeth the Lorde God.
If I brynge noysome beastes into the lande, to waste it vp, Ꟶ it be so desolate, that no man may go therin for beastes:
yf these thre men also were in the lande, as truly as I lyue (sayeth the Lorde God) they shall saue nether sonnes ner daughters, but be only delyuered them selues: and as for the lande, it shall be waste.
Or yf I brynge a swearde into the lande, Ꟶ charge it to go thorowe the lande: so that I slaye downe man Ꟶ beast in it,
Ꟶ yf these thre men were therin: As truly as I lyue (sayeth the Lorde God) they shall delyuer nether sonnes ner daughters, but only be saued them selues.
If I sende a pestilence into the lande, Ꟶ poure out my sore indignacyon vpon it in bloude, so that I rote out of it both man and beast.
And yf Noe, Daniel Ꟶ Iob were therin: as truly as I lyue (sayeth the Lorde God) they shall delyuer nether sonnes ner daughters, but saue their awne soules in their rightuousnes.
Moreouer, thus sayeth the Lorde God: Moch more when I sende my foure troublous plages vpon Ierusalem: the swearde honger, perlous beastes Ꟶ pestylence, to destroye man and beast out of it.
Beholde ther shall be a remnaunt saued therin, which shall bringe forth their sonnes and daughters. Beholde, they shall come forth vnto you, and ye shall se their waye, and what they take in hande, and ye shall be comforted, as touchinge all the plages that I haue brought vpon Ierusalem.
They shall comforte you, when ye se their waye and worckes: and ye shall knowe, howe that it is not without a cause, that I haue done so agaynst Ierusalem, as I dyd, sayeth the Lorde God.
The worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge:
Thou sonne of man: What commeth of the vyne amonge all other trees? Ꟶ of the wylde vyne stock amonge all other tymbre of the groaue?
Do men take wodd of it, to make any worcke with all? Or maye there a nayle be made of it, to hange any thynge vpon?
Beholde, it is cast in the fyre to be brent, the fyre consumeth both the endes of it. the myddest is brent to asshes. Is it mete then for any worcke? No.
Seynge then, that it was mete for no worcke, beinge whole: moch lesse maye there any thinge be made of it, when the fyre hath consumed Ꟶ brent it.
And therfore thus sayeth the Lorde God: Lyke as I cast the vyne into the fyre for to be brent, as other trees of the wodd: Euen so will I do with them that dwell in Ierusalem,
Ꟶ set my face agaynst them: they shall go out from the fyre, Ꟶ yet the fyre shall consume them. Then shall ye knowe, that I am the Lorde, when I set my face agaynst them,
Ꟶ make the lande waste: because they haue so sore offended, sayeth the Lorde God.
Agayne, the worde of the Lorde spake vnto me, sayinge:
Thou sonne of man, shewe the cytie of Ierusalem their abhominacions,
Ꟶ saye: thus sayeth the Lord God vnto Ierusalem: Thy progeny and kynred came out of the lande of Canaan thy father was an Amoryte, thy mother a Cethyte, thus was the maner of thy byrth.
In the daye of thy byrth when thou wast borne, the stringe of thy nauell was not cut of: thou wast not bathed in water to make the clene: Thou wast nether rubbed wt salt, ner swadled in cloutes:
No man regarded the so moch, as to do any of these thinges for the, or to shewe the soch fauoure, but thou wast vtterly cast out vpon the felde, yee, despised wast thou in the daye of thy birth
Then came I by the, and sawe the troden downe in thyne awne bloude, Ꟶ sayde vnto the: Lyue, although thou be defyled in thyne awne bloude, ye euen I (I tell the) sayde vnto the lyue, although thou be defyled in thyne awne bloude.
So I planted the as the blossome of the felde: thou art growen vp, Ꟶ waxen greate: thou hast gotten a maruelous pleasaunt beutie, thy breastes are come vp, thy hearre is goodly growen, where as thou wast naked Ꟶ bare afore.
Nowe whan I wente by the, Ꟶ loked vpon the: beholde, thy tyme was come, yee, euen the tyme to wowe the. Then spred I my clothes ouer the, to couer thy dishonestye: yee, I made an othe vnto the, Ꟶ maried my selfe with the (sayeth the Lord God) and so thou becamest myne awne.
Then washed I the with water, and pourged thy bloude from the. I anoynted the with oyle,
I gaue the chaunge of raymentes, I made the shues of Taxus lether: I gyrded the aboute with white sylcke I clothed the with kerchefes,
I decked the wt costly apparell, I put rynges vpon thy fyngers: a chayne aboute thy necke,
spanges vpon thy fore heade, eare rynges vpon thyne eares, and set a bewtifull crowne vpon thyne head.
Thus wast thou deckte with syluer Ꟶ golde, Ꟶ thy rayment was of fyne white sylke of nedle worke Ꟶ of diuerse coloures. Thou dyddest eate nothinge but symnels, honny Ꟶ oyle: maruelous goodly wast thou Ꟶ beutyfull, yee euen a very Quene wast thou
In so moch, that thy beuty was spoken of amonge the Heythen, for thou wast excellent in my beuty, which I put vpon the sayeth the Lorde God.
But thou hast put confidence in thyne awne beuty, Ꟶ played the harlot, when thou haddest gotten the a name. Thou hast committed whordome, with all that wente by the, Ꟶ hast fulfylled their desyres:
yee, thou hast taken thy garmentes of diuerse colours, Ꟶ deckte thyne aulters therwith, where vpon thou myghtest fulfyll thyne whordome, Ꟶ of soch a fashyon, as neuer was done, ner shalbe.
The goodly ornamentes Ꟶ Iewels which I gaue the of myne awne golde and syluer, hast thou taken, and made the mens ymages therof, Ꟶ commytted whordome withall.
Thy garmentes of diuerse coloures hast thou taken, and deckte them therwith: myne oyle Ꟶ incense hast thou set before them.
My meate which I gaue the, as symnels, oyle Ꟶ hony: (to fede the withall) that hast thou sett before them, for a swete sauoure. And thys came also to passe, sayeth the Lorde God:
Thou hast taken thine awne sonnes Ꟶ daughters, whom thou haddest begotten vnto me: and these hast thou offred vp vnto them, to be their meate. Is this but a small whordome of thine (thinckest thou)
that thou slayest my chyldren, and geuest them ouer, to be brent vnto them?
And yet in all thy abhominacyons and whordome, thou hast not remembred the dayes of thy youth, howe naked Ꟶ bare thou wast at that tyme, and troden downe in thyne awne bloude.
After all these thy wyckednesses (wo wo vnto the, sayeth the Lorde)
Thou hast buylte hye places, yee at the head of euery strete hast thou buylded the an aulter.
Thou hast made thy beuty to be abhorred, thou hast layed out thy legges to euery one that came by, Ꟶ multiplied thyne whoredome.
Thou hast commytted fornicacyon wt the Egypcyans thy neyghbours, which had moch fleshe: and thus hast thou encreased thine whordome, to anger me.
Beholde, I dyd stretch out myne hande ouer the, Ꟶ dyd minishe thy stoare of fode, and delyuer the ouer in to the wylles of the Philistines thine enemyes, which are ashamed of thy abhominable waye.
Thou hast played the whore also with the Assyrians, because thou wast insatiable: Yee, thou hast (I saye) with them played the harlot, Ꟶ yett haddest thou not ynough.
Thus hast thou forthermore commytted thy fornicacyon from the lande of Canaan vnto the Caldees, Ꟶ yet thy lust not satisfyed.
Howe obstinate is thine herte (sayeth the Lorde God) seynge thou doest all these workes of an erraunt whore:
buyldinge thy stewes at the head of euery strete, Ꟶ thy brodell houses in all places? Thou hast not bene as an other whore, that holdeth scorne of a small rewarde,
but a wife that breaketh wedlocke, Ꟶ taketh other in steade of her husbonde.
Gyftes are geuen to all other whores, but thou geuest rewardes vnto all thy louers: Ꟶ offrest them gyftes, to come vnto the out of all places, Ꟶ to commytte fornicacyon wt the.
It is come to passe wt the in thy whordomes contrary to the vse of other women: yee, there hath no soch fornicacyon bene committed after the, seynge that thou profrest gyftes vnto other, and no rewarde is geuen the: this is a contrary thinge.
Therfore, heare the worde of the Lorde, O thou harlot:
thus sayeth the Lorde God: For so moch as thou hast sett forth thy youthe to whordome, Ꟶ discouered thy shame, thorowe thy whordome wt all thy louers, and with all the Idols of thy abhominacyons in the bloude of thy chyldren, whom thou hast geuen them?
Beholde therfore, I will gather together all thy louers, vnto whom thou hast made thy selfe comen: yee, and all them whom thou fauourest, Ꟶ euery one that thou hatest: I wyll (I saye) gather them together rounde aboute the and will discouer thy shame before them, that they maye se all thy fylthynes.
Moreouer, I will iudge the as a breaker of wedlocke and a murtherer, and recompence the thyne awne bloude in wrath and gelousy.
I will geue the ouer in to their power, that shall breake downe thy stues, Ꟶ destroye thy brodell houses: they shall strype the out of thy clothes, all thy fayre Ꟶ beutyfull Iewels shall they take from the, Ꟶ so let the syt naked Ꟶ bare:
yee: they shall bringe the comen people vpon the, which shall stone the, Ꟶ slaye the downe wt their sweardes.
They shall burne vp thy houses, Ꟶ punysh the in the sight of many wemen. Thus will I make thy whordome to ceasse, so that thou shalt geue out no more rewardes.
Shulde I make my wrath to be still, take my gelousy from the, be content, Ꟶ no more to be displeased?
seynge thou remembrest not the dayes of thy youth, but hast prouoked me to wrath in all these thinges? Beholde therfore I wyll brynge thyne awne wayes vpon thyne heade, sayeth the Lorde God: howe be it, I neuer dyd vnto the, accordynge to thy wickednesse Ꟶ all thy abhominacyons.
Beholde, all they that vse comen prouerbes, shall vse thys prouerbe also agaynst the: soche a mother, soch a daughter.
Thou art euen thy mothers awne daughter, that hath cast of hyr housbande Ꟶ hyr chyldren: Yee, thou art the syster of thy systers, which forsoke their husbandes Ꟶ their chyldren. Youre mother is a Cethyte, and youre father an Amoryte.
Thyne eldest syster is Samaria, she and her daughters that dwell vpon thy left hande. But thy yongest syster that dwelleth on thy ryght hande, is Sodoma Ꟶ her daughters.
Yet hast thou not walked after their wayes, ner done after their abhominacyons: but thou stodest a lytell Ꟶ very small tyme, and in all thy wayes thou hast bene more corrupte then they.
As truly as I lyue, sayeth the Lorde God: Sodoma thy syster wt her daughters, hath not done so euell, as thou and thy daughters.
Beholde, the synnes of thy syster Sodoma were these: Pryde, fulnesse of meate, aboundaunce Ꟶ Idilnesse, these thynges had she Ꟶ hir daughters. Besydes that, they reached not their hande to the poore and nedy,
but were proude, and dyd abhominable thynges before me: therfore I toke them awaye, as pleased me.
Nether hath Samaria done half of thy synnes, yee, thou hast exceaded them in wickednesse: In so moch that in comparyson of all the abhominacions which thou hast done, thou hast made thy systers good wemen.
Therfore thou (which dydest condempne thy syster) beare thyne awne shame, for thyne awne offences, that thou hast committed, more abhominable then they dyd, which in dead ar more ryghteous, then thou art, be thou (I seye) ashamed, and beare thy shamfull rebuke, seynge that thou hast proued thy systers in comparyson of the ryghtwyse.
As for their captiuyte, namely the captiuyte of Sodoma, Ꟶ her daughters: the captiuyte of Samaria Ꟶ her daughters: I will bringe them agayne, so will I also bringe agayne thy captiuyte amonge them:
that thou mayest take thyne awne confusion vpon the, Ꟶ be ashamed of all that thou hast done, Ꟶ to comforte them.
Thus thy systers (namely) Sodoma Ꟶ her daughters: Samaria and her daughters, wt thy selfe, Ꟶ thy daughters, shalbe brought agayne to youre olde estate.
When thou wast in thy pryde,
Ꟶ before thy wickednesse came to lyght: thou woldest not heare speake of thy syster Sodoma, vntyll the tyme that the Syrians with all their townes, Ꟶ the Philistines with all that lye rounde aboute them, brought the to shame Ꟶ confusyon:
that thou myghtest beare thyne awne fylthynes Ꟶ abhominacyon, sayeth the Lorde.
For thus sayeth the Lorde God: I shulde (by right) deale with the, as thou hast done. Thou hast despysed the oth, and broken the couenaunte.
Neuerthelesse, I will remembre the couenaunt that I made with the in thy youth in so moch that it shalbe an euerlastinge couenaunt:
so that thou also remembre thy wayes, Ꟶ be ashamed of them: then shalt thou receaue of me thy elder Ꟶ yonger systers, whom I wyll make thy daughters, and that besyde thy couenaunt.
And so will I renue my couenaunt with the, that thou mayest knowe that I am the Lorde:
that thou mayest thincke vpon it, be ashamed, and excuse thyne awne confusyon nomore: when I haue forgeuen the, all that thou hast done, sayeth the Lorde God.
The worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge:
Thou sonne of man: put forth a darcke speakynge and a parable, vnto the house of Israel,
Ꟶ saye: Thus sayeth the Lorde God: There came a great Aegle wt greate wynges, yee, with a myghtye longe bodye, Ꟶ full of fethers of dyuerse coloures, vpon the mount of Libanus, Ꟶ toke the hyest braunch from a Cedre tree,
Ꟶ brake of the toppe of his twygge, Ꟶ caryed it into the lande of Canaan, Ꟶ set it in a cyte of marchauntes.
He toke also of the seade of the lande, Ꟶ planted it in a frutefull grounde, he brought it vnto greate waters, and set it as a wyllowe tree therby.
Then dyd it growe, and was a greate vynestocke, but lowe by the grounde whose braunches turned in to it selfe, and the rotes of it, were fastened vnder it, thus there came of it a vyne, and it brought forth blossomes, Ꟶ spred out braunches.
But there was another Aegle, a great one, which had greate winges Ꟶ many fethers: and beholde, the rotes of thys vyne had an hunger after him, Ꟶ spred out his braunches towarde him, that he myght water her with the orchyerd that he had planted.
Neuertheles, it was planted vpon a good ground besyde greate waters: so that (by reason) it shulde haue brought out braunches Ꟶ frute, Ꟶ haue bene a goodly vyne.
Speake thou therfore, thus sayeth the Lorde God: Shall this vyne prospere? shall not his rotes be pluckte oute, his frute be broken of, his grene braunches, wither Ꟶ fade awaye? ye, without ether stronge arme or many people, shall it be plucked vp by the rotes.
Beholde, it was planted: shall it prospere therfore? Shal it not be dryed vp Ꟶ withered, yee, euen in the shutinge out of his blossomes, as soone as the east winde bloweth?
Moreouer, the worde of the Lord came vnto me sayinge:
Speake to that frowarde housholde: knowe ye not, what these thynges do signifye? Tell them: Beholde, the kynge of Babylon came to Ierusalem, Ꟶ toke the kynge and his prynces, and ledde them to Babylon.
He toke of the kynges sede, and made a couenaunt wyth hym, and toke an othe of him: The Prynces of the lande toke he with him also,
that the lande myght be holden in subieccyon, and not to rebelle, but kepe the couenaunt, and fulfyll it.
But he fell from him, Ꟶ sent his Embassytours into Egypt that he myght haue horses and moche people. Shulde that prospere? Shulde he be kepte safe, that doth soch thynges? Or shulde he escape, that breaketh hys couenaunt?
As truly as I lyue sayeth the Lorde God: He shall dye at Babylon, in the place where the kynge dwelleth, that made hym kynge: whose othe he hath despysed, and whose couenaunt he hath broken.
Nether shall Pharao with his greate host Ꟶ multitude of people, maynteyne him in the warre: when they cast vp dyches, and set vp bulworkes to destroye moch people.
For seynge he hath despysed the othe, and broken the couenaunt (where as he yet gaue his hande ther vpon) and done all these thynges, he shall not escape.
Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde God. As truly as I lyue, I wyll brynge myne othe that he hath despysed, and my couenaunt that he hath broken, vpon his awne head.
I wyll cast my net aboute him, and catch him in my yarne. To Babylon will I carie him, there will I punishe him, because of the greate offence that he made me.
As for those that fle from him out of the hoost, they shalbe slayne with the swearde. The resydue shalbe scatred towarde all the wyndes: and ye shall knowe, that I the Lorde haue spoken it.
Thus sayeth the Lorde God: I wyll also take a braunche from an hye Cedre tree, and will set it, Ꟶ take the vppermost twygge, that yet is but tendre, and plante it vpon an hye hyll:
Namely, vpon the hye hyll of Syon will I plante it: that it maye bringe forth twygges, Ꟶ geue frute, and be a greate Cedre tree: so that all maner of foules maye bylde in it, Ꟶ make their nestes vnder the shadow of his braunches.
And all the trees of the felde shall knowe that I the Lorde haue brought downe the hye tree, and set the lowe tree vp: that I haue dryed vp the grene tree, and made the drye tree to floryshe: Euen I the Lorde that spake it, haue also brought it to passe.
The worde of the Lorde came vnto me, on this maner:
what meane ye by thys comen prouerbe, that ye vse in the lande of Israel, sayinge: The fathers haue eaten soure grapes, Ꟶ the childrens tethe are set on edge:
As truly as I lyue, sayeth the Lorde God, ye shall vse this byworde nomore in Israell.
Beholde all soules are myne. Lyke as the father is myne, so is the sonne myne also. The soule that synneth, shall dye.
If a man be godly, Ꟶ do the thinge that is equall and ryght,
he eateth not vpon the hylles: he lyfteth not hys eyes vp to the foule Idols of Israel: he defyleth not his neyghbours wyfe: he medleth wt no menstruous woman:
he greueth no body: he geueth his detter his pledge agayne, he taketh none other mans good by violence: he parteth his mete wt the hongrye: he clotheth the naked:
he lendeth nothynge vpon vsury he taketh nothynge ouer: he wythdraweth his hande from doynge wronge: he dealeth faythfully betwixte man Ꟶ man:
Ꟶ walketh in my commaundementes, and kepeth my lawes, Ꟶ perfourmeth them faythfully: This is a ryghtuous man, he shall surely lyue sayeth the Lorde God.
If he nowe gett a sonne, that is a murtherer, a sheder of bloude: yf he do one of these thynges
(though he do not all) he eateth vpon the hylles: he defyleth his neyghbours wyfe:
he greueth the poore Ꟶ nedy: he robbeth Ꟶ spoyleth: he geueth not the detter his pledge againe, he lyfteth vp his eyes vnto Idols, Ꟶ medleth with abhominable thinges:
he lendeth vpon vsury, Ꟶ taketh more ouer. Shall this man lyue? He shall not lyue. Seynge he hath done all these abhominacyons, he shall dye, his bloude shalbe vpon him.
Nowe yf this man get a sonne also, that seeth all hys fathers synnes, which he hath done: and feareth, nether doth soch lyke:
Namely, he eateth not vpon the mountaynes: he lyfteth not his eyes vp to the Idols of Israel: he defyleth not his neyghbours wyfe:
he vexeth no man: he kepeth no mans pledge: he nether spoyleth, ner robbeth eny man: he dealeth his meate wt the hongrye: he clotheth the naked:
he oppresseth not the poore: he receaueth no vsury, ner any thynge ouer: he kepeth my lawes, Ꟶ walcketh in my commaundementes. This man shall not dye in his fathers synne, but shall lyue without fayle.
As for his father: because he oppressed Ꟶ spoyled hys brother, and dyd wyckedly amonge his people: lo, he is deed in his awne synne.
And yet saye ye: Wherfore then shulde not thys sonne beare his fathers synne? Therfore: because the sonne hath done equytie Ꟶ ryght, hath kepte all my commaundementes, Ꟶ done them: therfore shall he lyue in dede.
The same soule that synneth, shall dye. The sonne shall not beare the fathers offence, nether shall the father beare the sonnes offence. The ryghteousnes of the ryghtuous shall be vpon him, Ꟶ the wickednes of the wicked shall be vpon him self also.
But yf the vngodly wyll turne awaye from all his synnes that he hath done, and kepe all my commaundementes, and do the thinge that is equall and ryght: doutles he shall lyue, and not dye.
As for all his synnes that he dyd before, they shall not be thought vpon: but in his righteousnes that he hath done, he shall lyue.
For haue I eny pleasure in the death of a synner, sayeth the Lord God, but rather that he conuerte, and lyue?
Agayne: yf the ryghtuous turne awaye from his ryghtuousnes, and do iniquyte, accordynge to all the abhominacyons, that the wicked man doth: shall he lyue? All the ryghtuousnes that he hath done, shall not be thought vpon: but in the faute that he hath offended withall, and in the synne that he hath done, he shall dye.
And yet ye saye: Tush the waye of the Lord is not indifferent. Heare therfore ye house of Israel: Is not my waye ryght? Or, are not youre wayes rather wicked:
When a ryghtuous man turneth awaye from hys ryghtuousnesse, and medleth wyth vngodlynes: he must dye therin: yee, for the vnrightuousnes that he hath done, must he dye.
Agayne: when the wycked man turneth awaye from his wickednesse, that he hath done, and doth the thinge which is equall and ryght: he shall saue his soule alyue.
For in so moch as he remembreth him selfe, Ꟶ turneth him from all the vngodlynes that he hath vsed, he shall lyue and not dye.
And yet sayeth the house of Israel: Tush, the waye of the Lorde is not equall. Are my wayes vnryght? O ye house of Israel: Are not youre wayes rather vnequall?
As for me, I wyll iudge euery man, accordynge to his wayes, O ye house of Israel, sayeth the Lorde God. Wherfore, be conuerted, and turne you cleane from all your wyckednesse, so shall there no synne do you harme.
Cast awaye from you all youre vngodlynesse, that ye haue done: make you newe hertes and a newe sprete. Wherfore wyll ye dye, O ye house of Israell?
seynge I haue no pleasure in the death of him that dyeth, sayeth the Lord God. Turne you then, and ye shall lyue.
But thou sonne of man mourne thou for the princes of Israel,
Ꟶ saye. Wherfore laye thy mother the lyonesse amonge the lyons, Ꟶ noryshed her yonge ones amonge the lyons whelpes?
One of her whelpes she brought vp, and it became a lyon, it learned to spoyle, and to deuoure folke.
The Heathen herde of him, and toke him in their nettes, and brought him in chaynes vnto the lande of Egypte.
Nowe when the damme sawe, that all her hope and comforte was awaye, she toke another of her whelpes, and made a lyon of him:
which wente amonge the lyons, Ꟶ became a fearce lyon: learned to spoyle and to deuoure folcke:
he destroyed their palaces, and made their cyties waste. In so moch that the whole lande Ꟶ euery thinge therin, were vtterly desolate, thorow the very voyce of his roaringe.
Then came the Heathen together on euery syde oute of all countrees agaynst hym, layed their nettes for hym, and toke hym in their pytte.
So they bounde him with chaynes, and brought him to the kyng of Babylon: which put him in preson, that his voyce shulde nomore be herde vpon the mountaynes of Israel.
As for thy mother, she is lyke a vyne in thy bloude, planted by the water syde: her frutes and braunches are growen out of many waters,
her stalkes were so stronge, that men myght haue made staues therof for officers: she grewe so hye in her stalkes. So whan men sawe that she exceaded she heygth Ꟶ multitude of her braunches,
she was roted out in displeasure, and cast downe to the grounde The East winde dryed vp her frute, her stronge stalkes were broken of, withered and brent in the fyre.
But now she is planted in the wyldernesse, in a drye Ꟶ thurstye grounde.
And there is a fyre gone out of her stalckes, which hath brent vp her braunches and her frute: so that she hath no mo stronge stalckes, to be staues for offycers. This is a pyteous and miserable thinge.
In the .vij. yeare the .x. daye of the .v. moneth, it happened, that certayne of the elders of Israel came vnto me, for to aske councell at the Lorde, Ꟶ sat them downe by me.
Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto me on thys maner:
Thou sonne of man: speake vnto the elders of Israel, Ꟶ saye vnto them: Thus sayeth the Lord God: Are ye come hyther to aske eny thynge at me? As truly as I lyue (sayeth the Lorde)
I will geue you no answere. Wilt thou not reproue them (thou sonne of man) wilt thou not reproue them? Shewe them the abhominacyons of their fore fathers,
Ꟶ tell them. Thus sayeth the Lorde God: In the daye when I chose Israel, and lyft vp myne hande vpon the sede of the house of Iacob, Ꟶ shewed my selfe vnto them in the lande of Egypte: Yee, when I lyfte vp myne hande ouer them, and sayde: I am the Lorde youre God,
euen in the daye that I lyft vp myne hande ouer them, to bringe them out of the lande of Egypte, into a lande that I had prouyded for them, which floweth with mylcke Ꟶ hony, Ꟶ is a pleasaunt lande amonge all other.
Then sayde I vnto them: Cast awaye euery man the abhominacions that he hath before him, and defyle not youre selues with the Idoles of Egypte, for I am the Lorde youre God.
But they rebelled agaynst me, and wolde not folowe me: to cast awaye euery man the abhominacyons of hys eyes, and to forsake the Idoles of Egypte. Then I made me to poure myne indignacyon ouer them, Ꟶ to satisfye my wrath vpon them: yee, euen in the myddest of the lande of Egypte.
But I wolde not do it, for my names sake: that it shulde not be vnhalowed before the Heathen, amonge whom they dwelt, Ꟶ amonge whom I shewed my selfe vnto them, that I wolde brynge them out of the lande of Egypte.
Now when I had caryed them out of the lande of Egypte, and brought them into the wyldernesse:
I gaue them my commaundementes, Ꟶ shewed them my lawes, which whoso kepeth shall lyue in them:
I gaue them also my holy dayes, to be a token betwixte me Ꟶ them, Ꟶ therby to knowe, that I am the Lorde, which halowe them.
And yet the house of Israel rebelled agaynst me in the wyldernesse, they wolde not walcke in my commaundementes, they haue cast a waye my lawes (which whoso kepeth shulde lyue in them) and my Sabboth dayes haue they greatly vnhalowed. Then I made me to poure out myne indignacyon vpon them, Ꟶ to consume them in the wyldernesse.
Yet I wolde not do it, for my names sake: lest it shulde be dishonoured before the Heathen, from the whych I had caryed them awaye.
But I swore vnto them in the wyldernesse, that I wolde not brynge them in to the lande, which I gaue them: a lande that floweth with mylcke and hony, Ꟶ is a pleasure of all landes:
and that because they refused my lawes, and walcked not in my commaundementes, but had vnhalowed my Sabbathes, for their herte was gone after their ydoles.
Neuerthelesse, myne eye spared them, so that I wolde not vtterly slaye them and consume them in the wyldernes.
Moreouer, I sayde vnto their sonnes in the wyldernesse: walcke not in the statutes of youre fore fathers, kepe not their ordinaunces, and defyle not your selues with their ydoles,
for I am the Lorde youre God. But walcke in my statutes, kepe my lawes Ꟶ do them,
halowe my Sabbathes: for they are a token betwixte me Ꟶ you, that ye maye knowe howe that I am the Lorde your God.
Notwythstandynge, their sonnes rebelled agaynst me also: they walked not in my statutes they kepte not my lawes to fulfyll them (which he that doth shall lyue in them) nether halowed they my Sabboth dayes. Then I made me agayne to poure out my indignacion ouer them, Ꟶ to satisfye my wrath vpon them in the wyldernesse.
Neuerthelesse, I wythdrewe my hande for my names sake, lest it shulde be vnhalowed amonge the Heathen, before whom I had brought them forth.
I lyft vp myne hande ouer them also in the wyldernesse, that I wolde scatre them amonge the Heathen, Ꟶ strowe them amonge the nacyons,
because they had not kepte my lawes, but cast asyde my commaundementes, vnhalowed my Sabbathes, and lyft vp their eyes to their fathers Idoles.
Wherfore I gaue them also commaundementes not good, Ꟶ lawes thorowe the whych they shulde not lyue,
Ꟶ I vnhalowed them in their awne giftes (when I appointed for my selfe all their fyrst borne) to make them desolate: that they myght knowe, howe that I am the Lorde.
Therfore (O thou sonne of man, tell the house of Israel, thus sayeth the Lorde God) Besyde all thys, youre fore fathers haue yet blasphemed me more, and greatly offended agaynst me.
For after I had brought them in to the lande, that I promysed to geue them, when they sawe euery hye hyll Ꟶ all the thicke trees: they made there their offrynges, Ꟶ prouoked me wyth their oblacyons, makynge swete sauoures there, and powred out their drinckoffrynges.
Then I asked them what is that hyll altare that ye go to it? And therfore is it called the hye place vnto this daye.
Wherfore, speake vnto the house of Israel: Thus sayeth the Lorde God: ye are euen as vnclene as youre fore fathers Ꟶ commytte whordome also with their abhominacyons.
In all youre ydoles, where vnto ye brynge your oblacyons, and to whose honoure ye burne youre chyldren: ye, defyle youre selues, euen vnto thys daye: howe darre ye then come, and aske any questyon at me? O ye housholde of Israel? As truly as I lyue (sayeth the Lorde God) ye get no answere of me:
and as for the thynge that ye go aboute, it shall not come to passe, where as ye saye: we wyll be as the Heathen, Ꟶ do as other people in the lande, wod and stone wyll we worshyppe.
As truly as I lyue, sayeth the Lord God, I my selfe wyll rule you wt a mightye hande, with a stretched out arme, Ꟶ with indignacyon powred out ouer you:
and will brynge you out of the nacyons and landes, wherin ye are scatred, and gather you together with a myghtye hande, with a stretched out arme Ꟶ wt indignacyon poured out vpon you:
and wyll bringe you in to the wyldernesse of the people, Ꟶ there I will reason with you face to face.
Lyke as I punyshed youre fore fathers in the wildernesse, so will I punyshe you also, sayeth the Lorde God.
I will bringe you vnder my iurisdiccyon, and vnder the bonde of the couenannt.
The forsakers also and the transgressours will I take from amonge you, Ꟶ bringe them out of the lande of youre habitacyon: as for the lande of Israel, they shall not come in it: that you maye knowe howe that I am the Lorde.
Go to nowe then (sayeth the Lorde God) ye house of Israel Euery one of you folowe your ydols, and serue them seynge ye refuse to obeye me. And my holy name shall ye nomore vnhalowe with your offringes and Idoles.
For vpon my holy hyll, euen vpon the hye hill of Israel sayth the Lord God, shall all the house of Israel and all that is in the lande, worshyppe me: and in the same place will I fauoure them, and there will I requyre your heaue offringes and the fyrstlynges of your oblacyons, with all youre holy thynges.
I will accepte youre swete sauoure, when I bringe you from the nacyons, and gather you together out of the landes, wherin ye be scatred: that I maye be halowed in you before the Heathen,
and that ye maye knowe, that I am the Lorde, whych haue brought you into the lande of Israel: yee, into the same lande, that I swore to geue vnto youre forefathers.
There shall ye call to remembraunce your awne wayes Ꟶ all your ymaginacyons, wherin ye haue bene defyled: and ye shall iudge youre selues worthy to be destroyed, for all youre wickednes, that ye haue done.
And ye shall knowe, that I am the Lord: when I entreate you after my name, not after youre wycked wayes, ner accordinge to youre corrupte workes: O ye house of Israel, sayeth the lord.
Moreouer, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge:
Thou sonne of man, set thy face towarde the south, Ꟶ speake to the south wynde,
Ꟶ saye to the wod towarde the south: Heare the worde of the Lorde, thus sayeth the Lorde God: Beholde, I wyll kyndle a fyre in the, that shall consume the grene trees with the drye. No man shalbe able to quench hys flame, but all that loketh from the south to the north, shalbe brent therin:
Ꟶ all fleshe shall se, that I the Lorde haue kyndled it, so that no man maye quench it.
Then sayde I: O Lord, they wyll saye of me: Tush, they are but fables, that he telleth.
The worde of the Lord came to me, sayinge:
Thou sonne of man, set thy face towarde Ierusalem, speake agaynst the Sanctuary, and prophecye agaynst the lande of Israel, saye to the lande of Israel.
Thus sayeth the Lorde: Beholde, I wyll vpon the, Ꟶ will drawe my swearde out of the sheath, Ꟶ rote out of the both the ryghtuous Ꟶ the wycked
Seynge then that I will rote out of the both the ryghtuous and wycked, therfore shall my swearde go out of his sheath against all flesh from the north to the south:
that all flesh maye knowe howe that I the Lord haue drawen my swearde out of the sheath, Ꟶ it shall not be put in again
Mourne therfore (O thou sonne of man) that thy loynes crack withall, ye mourne bitterly for them in their presence.
And yf they saye, wherfore mournest thou? Then tell them: for the tidynges that commeth, at the whych all hertes shall melt, all handes shalbe letten downe, all stomackes shall faynte, Ꟶ all knees shall waxe feble. Beholde, it commeth Ꟶ shalbe fulfylled, sayeth the Lorde God.
Agayne, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge.
Thou sonne of man, prophecye, and speake. Thus sayeth the Lord God: speake. The swearde, the swearde is sharpened Ꟶ well scoured.
Sharpened is it for the slaughter, Ꟶ scoured that it maye be bryght. Shall we then make myrthe? Agenst the tribe of my sonne it is gone forthe destroyinge all trees.
He hath putt his swearde to the dyghtinge, that good holde maye be taken of it. This swearde is sharpened Ꟶ dyght, that it maye be geuen in to the hande of the manslayer.
Crye (O thou sonne of man, Ꟶ howle, for this swearde shall smyte my people, Ꟶ all the rulers in Israel) my people shalbe fearede thorowe this swearde.
Smite therfore thou vpon thy thyghe, for it is gone forthe to make a tryall. And what a tryall shall this be, when euen my scepter shall be reproued? Yt shall not be sayeth the Lorde God.
Prophecy thou sonne of man, Ꟶ smyte thyne handes together: make the swearde two edged, ye make it thre edged, that manslayers swearde, that swearde of the greate slaughter, whych shall smyte them, euen in their preuychambres:
to make them abashed Ꟶ faynt at the hertes, Ꟶ in all gates to make some of them fall. I haue geuen that fearfull swerde. O howe bryght and sharpe is it, howe well dight Ꟶ mete for the slaughter.
Gett the some place alone, ether vpon the ryght hande or on the lefte, whyther so euer thy face turneth.
I wyll smyte my handes together also Ꟶ satysfye my wrothfull indignacyon: Euen I the Lorde haue sayde it.
The worde of the Lorde came yet vnto me agayne sayinge.
Thou sonne of man, make the two stretes, that the swearde of the kynge of Babylon maye come. Both these stretes shall go out of one kynges lande. And chose the a place, at the heade of the strete chose out a corner.
Make the a strete, that the swearde maye come to warde Rabath of the Ammonites, Ꟶ to the stronge cytie of Ierusalem.
For the kynge of Babylon shall stande in the turnynge of the waye, at the head of the two stretes: to aske councell at the sothe sayers, castinge the lottes wt his arowes, to aske councell at the Idole, and to loke in the lyuer.
But the sothe sayinge shall poynte to the ryght syde vpon Ierusalem, that he maye set men of warre, to smyte it wt a greate noyse, to crye out Alarum, to sett batell rammes agaynst the gates, to graue vp dyches, Ꟶ to make bulworkes.
Neuertheles, as for the sothe sayinge, they shall holde it but for vanite. And esteame them as those to whome they haue often sworne. Notwithstandynge he shall remembre their wyckednesse, so that by ryght they must be taken Ꟶ wonne.
Therfore sayeth the Lorde God. For so moch as ye youre selues shewe your offence, and haue opened youre wickednesse, so that in all youre workes men maye se your synnes: therfore ar ye come to remembrance, and ye shalbe taken by violence.
O thou shamefull wicked guyde of Israel whose daye is come: euen the tyme that wickednesse shall haue en ende.
Thus sayeth the Lorde God: take awaye the garland, Ꟶ put of the crowne, and so is it awaye: the humble is exalted, and the proude brought lowe.
Punyshe, punyshe, yee, punyshe them will I, Ꟶ destroye them: and that shall not be fulfylled vntyll he come, to whom the iudgement belongeth, Ꟶ to whom I haue geuen it.
And thou (O sonne of man) prophecy, Ꟶ speake: Thus sayeth the Lorde God to the chyldren of Ammon, Ꟶ to their blasphemy, speake thou: The swearde, the swearde, is drawen forth all redy to the slaughter, Ꟶ scoured to consume that it glystreth
(because thou hast loked the out vanyties, and prophecyed lyes) that it maye come vpon thy necke, lyke as vpon the other vngodly, whych be slayne: whose daye came, whan their wyckednesse was full.
Shulde I put it vp agayne? Naye I wyll punyshe the, in the lande where thou wast norished Ꟶ borne,
and poure my indignacyon vpoon the and wyll blowe vpon the in the fyre of my wrath, and delyuer the vnto cruel people, which are lerned to destroye.
Thou shalt fede the fyre and thy bloude shall be shed in the lande, that thou mayest be put out of remembraunce. Euen I the Lorde haue spoken it.
Moreouer, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, Ꟶ sayde:
thou sonne of man, wylt thou not reproue thys bloudthurstye cyte? Shew them their abhominacyons,
and tell them: Thus sayeth the Lorde God: O thou cyte, that sheddest bloude in the myddest of the, that thy tyme maye come also: Ꟶ makest the Idoles to defyle the wythall.
Thou hast made thy selfe gylty, in the bloude that thou hast shed: and defyled the in the Idoles, which thou hast made. Thou hast caused thy dayes to drawe nye, Ꟶ made the tyme of thy yeares to come. Therfore wyll I make the to be confounded amonde the Heathen, Ꟶ to be despysed in all the landes,
whether they be nye or farre from the: they shall laugh the to scorne, thou that hast gotten the so foule a name, Ꟶ art full of myschefe.
Beholde, the rulers of Israel haue brought euery man hys power, to shed bloude in the.
In the haue they despysed father Ꟶ mother, in the haue they oppressed the straunger, in the haue they vexed the wydowe and the fatherlesse.
Thou hast despysed my Sanctuary, and vnhalowed my Sabbath.
Murtherers are there in the, that shede bloude, Ꟶ eate vpon the hylles, and in the they vse abhominacyon.
In the haue they discouered their fathers shame, in the haue they vexed wemen in their sicknesse.
Euery man hath dealte shamefully with his neyghbours wyfe, Ꟶ abhominably defyled hys daughter in lawe. In the hath euery man forced his awne syster, euen his fathers daughter:
yee, gyftes haue bene receaued in the, to shede bloude. Thou hast taken vsury and encreace, thou hast oppressed thy neyghbours by extorcyon, and forgotten me, sayeth the Lorde God.
Beholde, I haue smyten my handes vpon thy couetousnesse, that thou hast vsed, and vpon the bloude whych hath bene shed in the.
Is thy herte able to endure it, or may thy handes defende them selues, in the tyme that I shall brynge vpon the? Euen I the Lorde that speake it, wyll brynge it also to passe.
I wyll scatre the amonge the Heathen, Ꟶ strowe the aboute in the landes, Ꟶ wyll cause thy fylthynesse to ceasse out of the:
yee, and thou shalt be thyne awne enheritaunce Ꟶ not myne in the syght of the Heathen, that thou mayest knowe, that I am the Lorde.
And the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge:
Thou sonne of man, the house of Israel is turned to drosse. All they that shulde be brasse, tynne, yron, Ꟶ leade, are in the fyre become drosse.
Therfore, thus sayeth the Lord God. For so moche as ye all are turned in to drosse, beholde: I wyll brynge you together vnto Ierusalem,
lyke as syluer, brasse, yron, tynne and leade are put together in the fornace, and the fyre blowen there vnder to melt them. Euen so will I gather you, put you in together, and melt you in my wrath Ꟶ indignacyon.
I wyll brynge you together, and kyndle the fyre of my cruell displeasure vnder you, that ye maye be melted therin.
Lyke as the syluer is melted in the fyre, so shall ye also be melted therin: that ye maye knowe, howe that I the Lorde haue powred my wrath vpon you.
And the worde of the Lorde came vno me, sayinge.
Thou sonne of man, tell her. Thou art an vnclene lande, which is not rayned vpon in the daye of the cruell wrath:
thy Prophetes that are in the, are sworne together to deuoure soules, lyke as a roarynge Lyon, that lyueth by his praye. They receaue ryches and good, Ꟶ make many wyddowes in the.
Thy prestes breake my lawe, and defyle my Sanctuary. They put no difference betwene the holye Ꟶ vnholye, nether discerne betwene the cleane Ꟶ vncleane: they turne their eyes fro my sabbathes, Ꟶ I am vnhalowed amonge them.
Thy rulers in the are lyke rauyshynge wolues, to shed bloude, and to destroye soules, for their awne couetous lucre.
As for thy Prophetes, they dawbe with vntempered claye, they se vanytyes, and prophecye lyes vnto them, sayinge: the Lorde God sayeth so, where as the Lorde hath not spoken.
The people in the lande vseth wycked extorcyon Ꟶ robbery. They vexe the poore Ꟶ nedye and oppresse the straunger agaynst ryght.
And I sought in the lande for a man, that wolde make vp the hedge, and sett him selfe in the gappe before me in the landes behalfe, that yt shulde not be corrupted: but I could fynde none.
Therfore, I will poure out my cruell dyspleasure vpon them, Ꟶ burne them in the fyre of my wrath: theyr awne wayes will I recompence vpon theyr heades saieth the lord God.
The worde of the Lord came vnto me sayeng:
Thou sonne of man, there were two wemen, that had one mother.
These (when they were yonge) beganne to playe the harlottes in Egypt. There were theyr brestes brosed, Ꟶ the pappes of theyr maydenhead did the Egyptians destroye.
The eldest of them was called Oholah Ꟶ her yongest syster Oholibah. These two were my wyues, Ꟶ bare sonnes Ꟶ daughters. Theyr names were Samaria, Ꟶ that was Oholah: Ꟶ Ierusalem, that was Oholibah.
As for Oholah she beganne to go a whoring, when I had taken her to me. She was sett on fyre vpon her louers the Assirians
as her neybours which had to do wt her: euen the princes Ꟶ Lordes that were deckte in costly araye fayre yonge men, lusty ryders of horses.
Thus thorow her whordome, she cleued vnto all the yonge men of Assiria. Yee, she was madd vpon them, Ꟶ defyled her selfe wt all theyr Idols.
Nether ceassed she from the fornicacyon, that she vsed wt the Egypcians: for in her youth they laye wt her, they brosed the brestes of her maydenhead, Ꟶ poured theyr whordome vpon her.
Wherfore, I delyuered her into the handes of her louers, euen the Assirians, whom she so loued.
These discouered her shame, toke her sonnes Ꟶ daughters, Ꟶ slewe her wt the sweard: An euel name gat she of all people, and they punished her.
Her sister Oholibah sawe this, and destroyed her selfe wt inordynate loue, more then she, Ꟶ exceded her syster in whordom
she loued the Assirians (which also laye wt her) namely, the princes Ꟶ greate lordes, that were clothed wt al maner of gorgious apparell all lusty horsmen Ꟶ fayre yonge personnes.
Then I sawe, that they both were defyled a lyke.
But she increased styll in whordome, for when she sawe men paynted vpon the wall, the ymages of the Caldees sett forth wt fressh couloures,
wt fayre gyrdles about them Ꟶ goodly bonettes vpon theyr heades, lokynge all lyke prynces (after the maner of the Babylonyans and Chaldees in theyr awne lande where they be borne)
immediatly, as soone as she sawe them, she brent in loue vpon them, and sente messaungers for them into the lande of the Chaldees.
Now when the Babylonyans came to her, they laye with her and defyled her with theyr whordome, and so was she polluted with them. And when her lust was abated from them,
her whordome and shame was discouered and sene: then my herte forsoke her, lyke as my herte was gone from her syster also.
Neuerthelesse, she vsed her whordome euer the longer the more, and remembred the dayes of her youth, wherin she had played the harlot in the lande of Egypt:
she brent in lust vpon them, whose fleshe was lyke the flesh of Asses, and theyr sede lyke the sede of horses.
Thus thou hast renued the fylthynesse of the youth, when thy louers brosed thy pappes, and marred thy brestes in Egypte.
Therfore (O Oholibah) thus sayeth the Lord God: I will rayse vp thy louers (wt whom thou hast satysfyed thy lust) against the, and gather them together rounde about the:
namely the Babylonians, and all the Chaldees, rulers, mightye men Ꟶ tyrauntes, wt all the Assirians: all yonge Ꟶ fayre louers: princes and Lordes, knyghtes and gentelmen, which be all good horsmen.
These shall come vpon the with horses, charrettes, and a greate multitude of people: which shalbe harnessed aboute the on euery syde, wt brestplates, shyldes Ꟶ helmettes. I wyll punish the before them, yee, they them selues shall punysh the, accordynge to theyr awne iudgement.
I will put my gelousy vpon the, so that they shal deale cruelly with the. They shall cut of thy nose and thyne eares, and the remnaunt shall fall thorow the swearde. They shall cary awaye thy sonnes and daughters, and the resydue shalbe brent in the fyre.
They shall strype the out of thy clothes, and cary thy costly Iewels awaye with them.
Thus wyll I make an ende of thy fylthynesse and whordome, which thou hast brought oute of the lande of Egypte: so that thou shalt turne thyne eyes nomore after them, and cast thy mynde nomore vpon Egypte.
For thus sayeth the Lorde beholde I will delyuer the into the handes of them, whom thou hatest, yee, euen into the handes of them, with whom thou hast fulfylled thy lust,
whych shall deale cruelly wyth the. All thy laboure shall they take with them, and leaue the naked and bare, and thus the shame of thy fylthye whordome shall come to lyght.
All these thynges shall happen vnto the, because of thy whordome which thou hast vsed amonge the Gentyls wyth whose Idols thou hast defyled thy self.
Thou hast walcked in the waye of thy syster, therfore wyll I geue the her cuppe in thy hande.
Thus sayeth the Lord God: Thou shalt dryncke of thy systers cuppe, how depe and farre so euer it be to the botome. Thou shalt be laughed to scorne, and had as greatly in derisyon, as is possible.
Thou shalt be full of dronkennes and sorowe, for the cuppe of thy syster Samaria is a cuppe of destruccion and wastynge:
the same shalt thou dryncke, and suppe it out euen to the dregges, yee, thou shalt eat vp the broken peces of it, Ꟶ so teare thyne awne brestes: For euen I haue spoken it sayeth the Lorde God.
Therfore, thus sayeth the Lorde God: For so moch as thou hast forgotten me, and cast me aside behinde the, so beare now thyne awne fylthines and whordome.
The Lorde sayde moreouer vnto me: Thou sonne of man wilt thou not reproue Oholah and Oholibah? Shewe them theyr abhominacions:
namely that they haue broken theyr wedlocke, Ꟶ stayned theyr handes wt bloude: yee, euen wt theyr ydoles haue they commytted aduoutry and offred them by the fyre theyr awne children (to be deuoured) whom they had borne vnto me.
Yee, Ꟶ thys haue they done vnto me also: they haue defyled my Sanctuary in that same daye, Ꟶ haue vnhalowed my Sabboth.
For when they had slayne theyr children for theyr Idols, they came the same daye into my Sanctuary to defyle it. Lo, thys haue they done in my house:
Besyde all thys, thou hast sent they messaungers for men out of farre countrees: Ꟶ when they came, thou hast bathed Ꟶ painted thyne eyes wt colours, trymmed Ꟶ set forth thy self of the best fassion:
thou sattest vpon a goodly bed and a table spred before the: wherupon thou hast set myne incense and myne oyle.
Then was there great chere with her to optayne peace, and though with those men many men came, yet were ther also brought, men of Sabba from the wildernesse: which gaue them bracelettes vpon theyr handes, Ꟶ sett glorious crownes vpon theyr heades:
and I sayde vnto her: that seynge she was stryken in age in her whordommes: now shall her fornycations come to an end wt her.
And they wente into her as vnto a comen harlot Euen so went they, (I say) to Oholah Ꟶ Oholibah those fylthy wemen.
O all ye that loue vertue Ꟶ ryghteousnes, iudge them, punishe them: as aduoutrers Ꟶ murtherers ought to be iudged Ꟶ punished. For they are breakers of wedlocke, Ꟶ the bloude is in theyr handes.
Wherfore thus sayeth the Lorde God I wil bringe a greate multitude of people vpon them, Ꟶ make them be scatred Ꟶ spoyled:
these shall stone them, Ꟶ gore them wt theyr sweardes. They shal slaye theyr sonnes Ꟶ daughters, and burne vp theyr houses with fyre.
Thus wyll I destroye all soch fylthynes out of the land: that all wemen maye learne, not to do after your vnclennes.
And so they shall laye your fylthynes vpon your awne selues, and ye shalbe punyshed for the synnes that ye haue commytted with your Idols: and ye shall knowe that I am the Lorde God.
In the nynth yeare, in the tenth moneth, the tenth daye of the moneth, came the worde of the Lord vnto me, sayenge.
O thou sonne of man, wryte vp the name of thys daye, yee, euen the houre of this present daye: when the kyng of Babylon sett hym selfe against Ierusalem.
Shew that obstinate housholde a parable, and speake vnto them: Thus sayeth the Lorde God: Gett the a potte, sett it on, and powre water into it:
put all the peces together in it, all the good peces: the loyne Ꟶ the shulder, and fyl it with the best bones.
Take one of the best shepe, Ꟶ an heape of bones withall: let it boyle well, Ꟶ lett the bones sethe well therin.
With that sayde the Lorde God on thys maner. Wo be vnto the bloudy cytie of the pot, wherupon the rustynes hangeth, Ꟶ is not yet scoured awaye. Take out the peces that are in it, one after another: there neade not lottes be cast therfore,
for the bloude is yet in it. Upon a playne drye stone hath she powred it, Ꟶ not vpon the grounde, that it myght be couered wt dust.
And therfore haue I letten her powre her bloude vpon a playne drye stony rocke, because it shulde not be hyd, and that I myght brynge my wrothfull indignacyon Ꟶ vengeaunce vpon her.
Wherfore, thus sayth the Lord God: O, wo be vnto the bloud thurstye cyte, for whom euen I my selfe will make a grett fyre and sett moche woode,
and kyndell the fyre and seath the fleashe, and spice the pott, so that the very bones shall be brent.
Moreouer I will sett the pott empty vpon the coles, so that his metall shall be brent Ꟶ molten also for heate, Ꟶ the fylthynes of yt shall be molten in yt, Ꟶ the drosse of yt shal be consumed.
Thou tokest great payne thys to defyle thy selfe. And yt will not be purged from the exceadinge drosse in yt: but thorow fyre shall the drosse of yt be puryfyed.
In thy fylthynes euen in thy myscheuous dedes, thou dost contynue Ꟶ because thy fylthynesse is abhominable, for I haue clensed the, but thou art not clensed. Thou shalt not be pourged from thyne vnclennesse, tyll I haue powred my wrothful indygnacion vpon the.
Euen I the Lorde haue so deuysed. Yee, it is come therto all redy, that I wyll do it. I will not go backe, I will not spare, I will not be intreated: but accordinge to thy wayes Ꟶ ymaginacions, thou shalt be punyshed, sayeth the Lorde God.
And the worde of the Lord came vnto me, saieng:
Thou sonne of man, beholde, I will take awaye the pleasure of thyne eyes wt a plage: yet shalt thou nether mourne, ner wepe, ner water thy chekes therfore:
thou mayest mourne by thy self alone, but vse no deadly lamentacion. Holde on thy bonet, and put on thy shoes vpon thy fete, couer not thy face, Ꟶ eat no mourners bread.
So I spake vnto the people by times in the mornyng, Ꟶ at euen my wyfe dyed: then vpon the next morowe, I dyd as I was commaunded.
And the people sayd vnto me, wilt thou not tell vs what thys signifyeth towarde vs, for this thou doest for our sake.
I answered them, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me sayeng:
Tell the house of Israell, thus sayeth the Lorde God: beholde, I will suspende my sanctuary: euen the glory of your power, the pleasure of your eyes, and the thing that ye loue: your sonnes and daughters whom ye haue left, shal fall thorow the swearde.
Lyke as I haue done, so shall ye do also: Ye shall not hyde your faces, ye shall eate no mourners bread:
your bonnettes shall ye haue vpon your heades, Ꟶ shoes vpon your fete. Ye shall nether mourne ner wepe, but, in your synnes ye shalbe sorowfull, Ꟶ one repente with another.
Thus Ezechiel is your shew token. For loke as he hath done, so (when this commeth) ye shall do also: that ye maye lerne to knowe, that I am the Lorde God.
But beholde, O thou sonne of man: In the daye when I take from them theyr power, theyr ioye Ꟶ honour, the lust of theyr eyes, the burthen of theyr lyfes: namely, theyr sonnes and daughters, shall not this be knowen?
Then shall there one escape, and come vnto the, for to shew the.
In that daye shall thy mouth be opened to him, which is escaped, that thou mayest speake, and be nomore domme. Yee, and thou shalt be theyr shewtoken that they maye knowe, howe that I am the Lord.
The worde of the Lord came vnto me, sayenge:
Thou sonne of man, set thy face agaynst the Ammonytes, prophecye vpon them,
and saye vnto the Ammonytes: heare the worde of the Lord God. Thus sayeth the Lord God: For so moch as thou speakest ouer my sanctuary. A, ha, I trowe it be nowe suspended: Ꟶ ouer the land of Israel, I trowe it be now desolat, yee, Ꟶ ouer the house of Iuda, I trowe they be now led a waye presonners:
Behold, I will delyuer the to the people of the east, that they maye haue the in possession: these shall set theyr castels and houses in the. They shall eate thy frute, Ꟶ dryncke vp thy milcke.
As for Rabath, I will make of it a stal for camels, and of Ammon a shepefolde: and ye shall knowe that I am the Lorde.
For thus sayeth the Lord God: In so moch as thou hast clapped with thyne handes, Ꟶ stamped with thy fete, yee, reioysed in thyne herte ouer the lande of Israel with despite:
beholde, I will stretch out myne hande ouer the also, and delyuer the, to be spoyled of the Heathen, and rote the out from amonge the people, and cause the to be destroyed oute of all landes: yee, I will make the to be layed waste, that thou mayest knowe, that I am the Lorde.
Thus sayeth the Lord God: For so moch as Moab Ꟶ Seir do saye: As for the house of Iuda, it is but lyke as all other Gentyles be:
Therfore beholde, I will open the syde of Moab, Ꟶ take awaye theyr strength, their cyties Ꟶ chefe coastes of theyr lande, which are the pleasures of the countre. As namely. Bethiesimoth, Baalmeon and Cariathaim:
these will I open vnto them of the east, that they maye fall vpon the Ammonites: Ꟶ will geue it them in possession: so that the Ammonites shall nomore be had in remembraunce amonge the Heathen
Euen thus will I punysh Moab also, that they maye know, how that I am the Lorde.
Moreouer, thus sayeth the Lord God: Because that Edom hath auenged and eased hym selfe vpon the house of Iuda, and haue done great offence Ꟶ auenged him selfe vpon them
therfore, thus sayeth the Lord: I will reach out myne hande vpon Edom, Ꟶ take awaye man Ꟶ beast out of it. From Theman vnto Dedan will I make it desolate, they shall be slayne wt the swerde.
Thorow my people, of Israel will I auenge me agayne vpon Edom they shall handle him, according to my wrath and indygnacyon, so that they shall knowe my vengeaunce, sayeth the Lorde God.
Thus sayeth the Lord God: For so moch as the Philistines haue done this: namely taken vengeaunce with despytefull stomackes, and of an olde euell will set them selues to destroye.
Therfore, thus sayeth the Lord God: Behold, I will stretch out myne hand ouer the Philistynes, Ꟶ destroye the destroyer, and cause all the remnaunt of the see coast, to perysh.
A great vengeaunce wyll I take vpon them, and punysh them cruelly: that they maye knowe, how that I am the Lord, which haue auenged me of them.
It happened, that in the eleuenth yeare, the fyrst daye of the moneth the worde of the Lord came vnto me, sayenge:
Thou sonne of man, because that Tyre hath spoken vpon Ierusalem: A, ha, now I trowe the portes of the people be broken, and she turned vnto me, for now that she is destroyed I shall be fylled.
Yee, therfore, sayeth the Lord God: Beholde O Tyre, I will vpon the, I will bringe a great multitude of people agaynst the, lyke as when the see aryseth with his waues:
These shall breake the walles of Tyre, and cast downe her towres: I will scrape the grounde from her, and make her a bare stone:
yee, as the dryenge place, where the fysshers hange vp theyr nettes by the see syde. Euen I haue spoken it, sayeth the Lorde God. The Gentyls shall spoyle her:
her daughters vpon the felde shall perysh wt the swearde, that they maye knowe how that I am the Lorde.
For thus sayeth the Lord God: Behold, I will bring hither Nabuchodonosor (which is the kynge of Babylon, and a kynge of kynges) from the North vpon Tyre: wt horses, charettes, horssmen, and with a greate multitude of people.
Thy daughters that are in the land, shall he slaye with the sweard: but agaynst the, he shall make bullworkes and graue vp dyches aboute the, and lyft vp hys shylde agaynst the.
Hys slynges and batelrammes shal he prepare for thy walles, and wt his weapens breake downe thy towres.
The dust of hys horses shall couer the, they shalbe so many: thy walles shall shake at the noyse of the horsmen, charettes and wheles when he commeth to thy portes, as men do into an open cytie.
With the hoffes of his horse fete, shall he treade downe all thy stretes. He shal slaye the people with the sweard, and breake downe the pylers of thy strength.
They shall waste awaye thy ryches, and spoyle thy marchaundyse. Thy walles shall they breake downe, and destroye thy houses of pleasure. Thy stones, thy tymbre and foundacyons shall they cast in the water.
Thus will I bring the melody of thy songes, and the voyce of thy mynstrelsy to an ende, so that they shall nomore be herde.
I will make a bare stone of the, yee, a dryinge place for nettes, Ꟶ thou shalt neuer be buylded agayne: For euen I the Lord haue spoken it, sayeth the Lorde God:
thus hath the Lorde God spoken concernynge Tyre. The Iles shall be moued at the noyse of thy fall, Ꟶ at the crye of the slayne, that shall be murthered in the.
All kynges of the see shall come downe from theyr seates regall: they shall laye awaye theyr roabes, and put of theyr costly clothynge. Yee, with tremblinge shall they be clothed, they shall syt vpon the ground: they shalbe afrayed at thy soden fall, and be abasshed at the.
They shall mourne for the, and saye vnto the. O thou noble cytie, that hast bene so greatly occupyed of olde, thou that hast bene the strongest vpon the see with thyne inhabytours, of whom al men stode in feare. How arte thou nowe so vtterly destroyed?
Now at the tyme of thy fall the inhabytours of the Iles, yee, and the Iles them selues, shall stande in feare at thy ende.
For thus sayeth the Lorde God: when I make the a desolate cytie (as other cyties be, that no man dwell in) and when I bringe the depe vpon the that greate waters maye couer the.
Then wil I cast the downe vnto them, that descende into the pitte: vnto a people that hath bene longe deed, and set the in a lande that is beneth, lyke the olde wildernes, with them which go downe to theyr graues, so that no man shall dwell more in the. And I will make the to be nomore in honoure, in the lande of the lyuinge.
I will make an ende of the, and thou shalt be gone. Though thou be sought for, yet shalt thou not be founde for euermore, sayeth the Lorde God.
The worde of the Lord came vnto me sayenge:
O thou sonne of man, make a lamentable complaynte vpon Tyre,
and saye vpon Tyre, thou which art a porte of the see, that occupieth with moche people, Ꟶ many Iles: thus speaketh the Lord God: O Tyre, thou hast sayd: what, I am a noble cyti
thy borders are in the middest of the see, and thy buylders haue made the maruelous goodly,
Al thy tables haue they made of cypres trees of the mount Sanyr, From Libanus haue they taken Cedre trees, to make the mastes:
and the Okes of Basan to make the rowers. Thy boordes haue they made of yuery, Ꟶ of costely wood out of the Ile of Cethim.
Thy sayle was of dyuers colours, small nedle worke out of the lande of Egypt, to hange vpon thy mast: Ꟶ thy hanginges of yelow sylcke purple, out of the Iles of Elisah.
They of Sydon Ꟶ Arnad were thy maryners, and the wysest in Tyre were thy shypmasters.
The eldest and wysest at Gebal were they, that mended Ꟶ stopped thy shyppes. All shyppes of the see wt theyr shypmen occupyed theyr marchaundies in the.
The Perses, Lydians and phutens were in thyne host, Ꟶ helped the to fyght: these hanged vp theyr shyldes Ꟶ helmettes with the, these sett forth they bewty.
They of Arnad were with thyne hoost rounde aboute thy walles, Ꟶ the Pigmenians were thy watchmen vpon thy towres, these hanged vp theyr quivers rounde aboute thy walles, and made the maruelous goodly.
Tharsis occupyed with the in all maner of wares, in syluer, yron, tynne and lead, and made thy marckett greate.
Iauan, Tubal, and Mesech were thy marchauntes, which brought the men, and ornamentes of metall for thy occupienge.
They of the house of Thogarma brought vnto the at the tyme of thy marte, horse, horsmen and mules.
They of Dedan were thy marchauntes: and many other Iles that occupyed with the, brought the weathers, Elephant bones Ꟶ Peacockes for a present.
The Sirians occupied with the, because of thy diuerse worckes, and increased thy marchaundies, with Smaragdes, with scarlet, with nedle worcke, with whyte lynen cloth, with sylcke, and with crystall.
Iuda and the lande of Israel occupied wt the Ꟶ brought vnto thy markettes, wheat, of Minnith and pannag, balme, hony, oyle, Ꟶ tryacle.
Damascus also vsed marchaundyes wt the, in the best wyne of Helbon Ꟶ wt woll: because thy occupieng was so greate, and thy wares so many,
Dan, Iauan Ꟶ Meusall haue brought vnto thy marckettes, yron redy made, with Cassia Ꟶ Calamus, accordinge to thine occupyenge.
Dedan occupied with the in fayre tapestrye worcke and cusshyns.
Arabia Ꟶ al the princes of Cedar haue occupied wt the, in shepe, wethers and goates.
The marchauntes of Seba and Rema haue occupied also with the, in all costly spyces, in all precyous stones and golde, which they brought vnto thy marckettes.
Haram, Chene and Eden, the marchauntes of Saba, Assiria, and Chelmad, were all doers wt the,
and occupyed with the. In costly rayment, of yelow sylcke Ꟶ nedle worcke (very precyous, Ꟶ therfore packte and bounde together with roapes.) Yee, and in Cedre woodde, at the tyme of thy marckettes.
The shyppes of Tharsis were the chefe of thy occupyenge. Thus thou art full, and in greate worship, euen in the myddest of the see.
Thy robbers shall brynge the into grett waters, the easte winde shall ouerbeare the into the myddest of the see:
so that thy wares, thy marchaundies, thy ryches, thy maryners, thy shypmasters, thy buylders of thy broken places, thy occupiers (that brought the thynges necessary) the men of warre that are in the: yee, and all thy comens shall perysh in the myddest of the see: in the daye of thy fall.
The suburbes shall shake at the loude crye of thy shypmen.
All whyry men, Ꟶ all maryners vpon the see, shall leape out of theyr boates, Ꟶ set them selues vpon the lande.
They shall lyft vp theyr voyce because of the and make a lamentable cry. They shall cast dust vpon theyr heades, and lye downe in the asshes.
They shall shaue them selues, and put sacke cloth vpon them for thy sake. They shall mourne for the with hertfull sorow,
and heuy lamentacion, yee, they also shall wepe for the. Alas, what cytie hath so bene destroyed in the see, as Tyre is?
When thy wares and marchaundies came from the sees, thou gauest al people ynough. The kinges of the earth hast thou made ryche, thorow the multitude of thy watres Ꟶ occupieng.
But thou art now cast downe in to the depe of the see, all thy resorte of people is perished with the.
All they that dwell in the Iles are abashed at the, Ꟶ all theyr kynges are afrayed, yee, theyr faces haue chaunged couloure.
The marchauntes of the nacyons wondre at the. In that thou art so cleane brought to naught, and commest nomore vp.
The worde of the Lorde came vnto me sayenge:
thou sonne of man, tell the prince of Tyre: Thus sayeth the Lorde God, because thou hast a proude hert and hast sayde: I am a God, I haue my seate in the myddest of the see lyke a God: where as thou art but a man and not God, and yet standest in thyne awne conceate, that thou arte God:
Beholde, thou thynckest thy selfe wyser then Daniel, that there is no secretes hyd from the.
Wyth thy wysdome and thy vnderstandyng, thou hast gotten the great welthynes, and gathered treasure of syluer and golde.
With thy greate wysdome and occupyenge, hast thou increased thy power, and because of thy greate rychesse, thy herte is proude.
Therfore, thus sayeth the Lorde God: For so moch as thou hast lyft vp thyne hert as though thou were God:
Beholde, I will brynge ennemyes vpon the, euen the tyrauntes of the Heathen: these shall drawe out their sweardes vpon thy bewty and wysdome, Ꟶ shal defyle thy glory.
They shall cast the downe to the pitte, so that thou shalt dye in the myddest of the see,
as they that be slayne. Lett se, yf thou wilt saye then (before them that slaye the) I am God: where as thou art but a man and not God, in the handes of them that slaye the.
Dye shalt thou, euen as the vncircumcised in the handes of the enemyes for I my selfe haue spoken it, sayeth the Lorde God.
Moreouer, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayeng:
Thou sonne of man, make a lamentable complaynte ouer the kynge of Tyre, and tell hym: Thus sayeth the Lorde God: thou art a seale of a lykenesse, full of wysdome Ꟶ excellent bewty.
Thou hast bene in the pleasaunt garden of God: thou art deckte with al maner of precious stones: with Ruby, Topas, Crystall, Iacynte, Onix, Iaspis, Saphyr, Smaragde, Carbouncle, and golde. Thy bewty and the holes that be in the, were sett forth in the daye of thy creacyon.
Thou art a fayre Cherub exalted by the anoyntyng, stretched wyde out for to couer. I haue sett the in this dignyte vpon the holy mount of God, there hast thou bene, Ꟶ walcked amonge the fayre glysteringe stones.
From the tyme of thy creacyon thou hast bene ryght excellent, tyll wickednes was founde in the.
Because of thy great marchaundise, thy hert is full of wyckednesse, Ꟶ thou hast offended. Therfore, wyll I cast the from the mount of God (O thou couering Cherub) and destroye the amonge the glysterynge stones.
Thy hert was proude in thy fayre beuty, and thorow thy bewty thou hast destroyed thy wysdome. I will cast the downe to the grounde, Ꟶ that in the sight of kynges.
Thou hast defyled thy Sanctuary, wt the greate wyckednes of thy vnryghteous occupyenge. I wyll bringe a fyre from the myddest of the, to consume the: Ꟶ wyll make the to asshes, in the sight of all them that loke vpon the.
All they that haue bene acquaynted with the amonge the Heathen shalbe abasshed at the, seyng thou art so clene brought to naught, and commest nomore vp.
And the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayeng:
Thou sonne of man, set thy face agaynst Sydon. Prophecye vpon it,
and speake: Thus sayeth the Lorde God: Beholde, O Sydon, I will vpon the, and gett me honoure in the: that it maye be knowne, how that I am the Lorde: when I punyshe her, and gett me honoure in her.
For I will sende pestilence and bloudsheddyng into her streates, so that those which be slayne with the swearde, shall lye rounde aboute in the myddest of her: and they shall knowe, that I am the Lorde.
She shall nomore be a pryckyng thorne, and an hurtyng breer vnto the house of Israell, ner vnto them that lye rounde aboute her, and hate her, Ꟶ they shal knowe that I am the Lorde.
Thus sayeth the Lord God: whan I gather the housholde of Israel together agayne from the nacions amonge whom they be scatered then shall I be sanctifyed in them, in the syght of the Gentyles, Ꟶ they shall dwell in the land, that I gaue to my seruaunt Iacob.
They shall dwell safely therin, buylde houses, Ꟶ plante vyneyardes: yee, safely shall they dwell therin: when I haue punyshed all those, that despyse them rounde aboute: Ꟶ then shall they knowe, that I am the Lorde theyr God.
In the tenth yeare, vpon the twelueth daye of the tenth moneth, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayenge:
O thou sonne of man (set now thy face agaynst Pharao the kynge of Egypte) Prophecye agaynst him, and agaynst the whole lande of Egypt.
Speake, and tell him, thus sayeth the Lorde God: behold, O pharao thou kynge of Egypte, I will vpon the thou great dragon, that lyest in the waters: thou that sayest: the water is myne. I haue made it my selfe.
I will put an hoke in thy chawes and hange all the fysh in thy waters vpon thy skales: after that I will drawe the out of thy waters, yee, and all the fysh of thy waters that hange vpon thy skales.
I will cast the out vpon the drye lande wt the fysh of thy waters, so that thou shalt lye vpon the feld. Thou shalt not be gathered ner taken vp: but shalt be meate for the beastes of the felde, Ꟶ for the foules of the ayre:
that all they which dwell in Egypte, maye knowe, that I am the Lorde: because thou hast bene a staf of rede to the house of Israel.
When they toke holde of the with theyr hande thou brakest Ꟶ pryckedst them on euery syde: and yf they leaned vpon the, thou brakest and hurtdest the reynes of theyr backes.
Therfore, thus sayeth the Lorde God: beholde, I wyll brynge a swearde vpon the, Ꟶ rote out of the bothe man Ꟶ beast.
Yee, the lande of Egypte shalbe desolate Ꟶ waste, and they shall knowe, that I am the Lorde. Because he sayde: the water is myne, I my selfe haue made it.
Beholde therfore, I wyll vpon the, and vpon thy waters: I will make the lande of Egypt waste Ꟶ desolate Ꟶ in abashment, from the tower of Syenes vnto the borders of the Morians lande:
so that in fourty yeares there shall no fote of man walke there, nether fote of catell go there, nether shall it be inhabited.
I will make the land of Egypte to be desolat, amonge other waste conntrees, and her cyties to lye voyde fourty yeares, amonge other voyde cyties. And I will scatre the Egypcians among the Heathen and nacyons.
Agayne, thus sayeth the Lorde God: When the .xl. yeares are expyred, I wyll gather the Egypcians together agayne, out of the nacions, among whom they were scatred,
and wyll bryng the presoners of Egypt agayne into the land of Pathures theyr awne natyue countre, that they maye be there a lowly small kyngdome:
yee, they shalbe the smallest amonge other kyngdomes, lest they exalte them selues aboue the Heathen: for I will so mynysh them that they shall nomore rule the Heathen.
They shall nomore be an hope vnto the house of Israel, nether prouoke them any more to wyckednes, to cause them turne backe, and to folowe them: and they shall knowe that I am the Lorde God.
In the .xxvii. yeare, the fyrst daye of the fyrst moneth, came the worde of the Lord vnto me sayeng:
Thou sonne of man, Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon hath made his hoost, with great trauayle Ꟶ labour to come before Tyre: that euery head maye be balde Ꟶ euery shoulder bare. Yet hath Tyre geuen nether hym ner hys hoost any rewarde, for the great trauayl that he hath taken there.
Therfore, thus sayeth the Lord God: beholde, I will geue the lande of Egypt vnto Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babylon, that he maye take awaye all her substaunce, robbe her roberyes, Ꟶ spoyle her spoyles, to paye his hoost theyr wagyes withall.
I will geue hym the lande of Egypte for hys labour, that he toke for me before Tyre.
At the same tyme will I cause the horne of the house of Israell to growe forth, and open thy mouth agayne among them: that they maye knowe, how that I am the Lorde.
The worde of the Lorde came more ouer vnto me, sayeng:
thou sonne of man, prophecye and speake: thus sayeth the Lorde God: Mourne, wo worth this daye,
for the daye is here, the daye of the Lord is come: the darke daye of the Heathen, the houre is at hande,
the swearde commeth vpon Egypte. When the wounded men fall downe in Egypte, when her people are taken awaye, and when her foundacyons are destroyed,
the Moryans lande shall be afrayed, yee, the Moryans lande, Libia and Lidia, all theyr comen people, and Chub, and all that be confederat vnto them, shall fall with them thorow the swearde.
Thus sayeth the Lorde: The maynteyners of the lande of Egypte shall fall, the pryde of her power shall come downe euen vnto the tower of Syenes shall they be slayne downe with the swearde, sayeth the Lorde God:
amonge other desolate countrees they shalbe made desolate, Ꟶ amonge other waste cyties they shalbe wasted.
And they shall knowe, that I am the Lorde, when I kyndle a fyre in Egypte, and when all her helpers are destroied.
At that tyme, shall theyr messaungers go forth from me in shyppes, to make the carelesse Morians afrayed, and sorow shall come vpon them acordinge to the daye of Egypte, for doubtles it shall come.
Thus sayeth the Lord God: I wil make an ende of the people of Egypt thorow the hand of Nabuchodonosor the kinge of Babylon.
He and his people with him: yee, and the cruell tyrauntes of the Heathen shalbe brought to destroye the lande. They shall drawe out theyr sweardes vpon Egypte, Ꟶ fyll the lande full of slayne men.
I will drye vp theyr floudes of water, and sell the lande into the handes of wicked people. The lande Ꟶ all that is therin, will I destroye thorow the enemyes. Euen I the Lord haue sayde it.
And thus sayeth the Lord God: I will destroye the Idols, and bringe the ymages of Noph to an ende. There shall nomore be a prince of Egypte, Ꟶ a fearfulnes will I sende into the Egypcians land.
As for Pathures, I wyll make it desolate, Ꟶ kyndle a fyre in zoan the cyty. No, I punysh,
and poure my wrathfull indignacyon vpon Sin, which is the strength of Egypt. All the substaunce of Alexandria will I destroye,
and kyndle a fyre in Egypte. Sin shalbe in greate heuynesse, Alexandria shalbe roted out, and Noph shall haue daylye sorow.
The best men of Helyopolys and Bubasto shalbe slayne with the swearde, and caryed awaye captyue.
At Caphnis the daye shalbe darcke, when I breake there the scepter of the lande of Egypt, Ꟶ when the pompe of her power shall haue an ende, A cloud shall couer her, and her daughters shalbe led awaye into captiuite.
Thus will I punysh Egypt, that they maye knowe how that I am the Lorde.
It happened in the eleuenth yeare, vpon the seuenth daye of the fyrst moneth, that the Lordes worde came vnto me, sayenge:
Beholde, thou sonne of man, I will breake the arme of Pharao kyng of Egypte: and lo it shall not be bounde vp to be healed, nother shall eny playstre be laied vpon it, for to ease it, or to make it so stronge, as to holde a swearde.
Therfore, thus sayeth the Lorde God: Beholde, I will vpon Pharao the king of Egypte, and bruse his stronge arme (yet is it but a broken one) Ꟶ will smyte the swearde out of his handes.
As for the Egypcians. I will scatre them among the Heathen, and strowe them in the landes aboute.
Agayne I will strength the arme of the kyng of Babylon, Ꟶ geue him a sweard in his hand: but I will breake Pharaos arme so that he shall holde it before him pyteously, lyke a wounded man.
Yee, I wyll stablysh the kynge of Babilons arme, Ꟶ the armes of Pharao shall fall downe: that it maye be knowne, that I am the Lord, which geue the kynge of Babylon my swearde in his hand, that he maye drawe it out vpon the lande of Egypte,
Ꟶ that when I scatre the Egypcians amonge the Gentils and strowe them in the landes aboute, they maye knowe, that I am the Lorde.
Moreouer, it happened in the eleuenth yeare, the fyrst daye of the thyrd moneth, that the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayeng:
thou sonne of man, speake vnto Pharao the kynge of Egypte, and to al hys people. Whom art thou lyke in thy greatnesse?
Beholde, Assur was lyke a Cedre tre vpon the mount of Lybanus with fayre braunches: so thycke, that he gaue shadowes and shot out very hye. Hys toppe reached vnto the cloudes.
The waters made hym great, and the depe set him vp an hye. Rounde aboute the rotes of hym ranne there floudes of water, he sent out his lytle ryuers vnto all the trees of the felde.
Therfore was he hyer then all the trees of the felde, and thorow the multytude of waters that he sent from him, he optayned many longe braunches.
All foules of the ayre made theyr nestes in his braunches, vnder his bowes gendred all the beastes of the felde, and vnder his shadow dwelt all people.
Fayre Ꟶ bewtifull was he in his gretnes Ꟶ in the length of hys braunches, for hys rote stode besyde great waters,
no Cedre tre myght hyde hym. In the pleasaunt garden of God, there was no fyrre tre lyke hys braunches, the playne trees were not lyke the bowes of hym. All the trees in the garden of God myght not be compared vnto him in his bewty,
so fayre and goodly had I made hym wt the multytude of hys braunches. In so moch that all the trees in the pleasaunt garden of God had enuye at hym.
Therfore, thus sayeth the Lorde God: for so moch as he hath lyft vp him selfe so hye, and stretched hys toppe into the cloudes, and seinge his hert is proude in his hyghnesse.
I wyll delyuer hym into the handes of the myghtyest among the Heathen, which shall rote him out. Accordynge to his wyckednesse wyll I cast him awaye,
the enemye shall destroye hym, and the myghty men of the Heathen shall so scatre him that his braunches shall lye vpon all mountaynes and in all valleyes: his bowes shalbe broken downe to the grounde thorow out the lande. Then all the people of the lande shall go from his shadowe, and forsake him.
When he is fallen, all the foules of the ayre shall syt vpon hym, and all wylde beastes of the felde shall go aboute amonge his braunches:
so that from hence forth, no tre in the water shall attayne to his highnesse, nor reach his toppe vnto the cloudes, nether shall eny tre of the water stande so hye, as he hath done. For vnto death shall they all be delyuered vnder the earth, and go downe to the graue lyke other men.
Moreouer, thus sayeth the Lord God: In the daye when he goeth downe to the graue I will cause a lamentacyon to be made, I will couer the depe vpon him, I will staunch his floudes, and the great waters shalbe restrayned. I shall cause Lybanus to be sorowfull for his sake, and all the trees of the felde shall be smytten.
I will make the Heathen shake at the sounde of his fall, when I cast him downe to hell with them that descende into the pytte. All the trees of Eden, with all the chosen and best trees of Lybanus, yee, and all they that are planted vpon the waters, shall mourne with hym also in the lower habitacyons:
for they shal go downe to hell with him, vnto them that be slayne with the swearde, which dwelt a fore vnder the shadowe of his arme among the Heathen.
To whom shalt thou be lykened, that art so gloryous and greate, among the trees of Eden? Yet art thou cast downe vnder the earth (amonge the trees of Eden) where thou must lye amonge vncircumcysed, wt them that be slayne wt the swearde. Euen thus is it wt Pharao Ꟶ all his people, sayeth the Lorde God.
In the eleuenth yeare, the fyrst daye of the twelueth moneth, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me sayenge:
thou sonne of man, take vp a lamentacyon vpon Pharao the king of Egypt, Ꟶ saye vnto him: thou art reputed as a lyon of the Heathen, Ꟶ as a whalfysh in the see: Thou castest thy waters about the, thou troublest the waters with thy fete and stampest in theyr floudes.
Thus sayeth the Lord God: I wyll sprede my net ouer the, namely, a greate multytude of people: these shall dryue the into my yarne,
for I wyll cast the vpon the lande, and let the lye vpon the felde, that all the foules of the ayre maye sytt vpon the. I will geue all the beastes of the felde ynough of the.
Thy flesh will I cast vpon the hylles, and fyll the valleyes with thy hyghnesse.
I wyll water the lande with the aboundaunce of thy bloude euen to the mountaynes, and the ryuers shal be full of thy bloude.
When thou art put out, I will couer the heauen, and make his starres dymme. I will sprede a cloude ouer the Sunne, and the Mone shal not geue her light.
All the lightes of heauen will I put out ouer the, Ꟶ bring darckenes vpon thy lande, sayeth the Lord God.
I will trouble the hertes of many people, when I bryng thy destruccion among the Heathen Ꟶ countrees, whom thou knowest not.
Yee, I will make many people wt theyr kinges so afrayed thorow the, that theyr heare shall stande vp, when I shake my sweard at theyr faces. Sodenly shall they be astonyed, euery man in hym selfe, at the daye of thy fall.
For thus sayeth the Lord God, the king of Babylons swearde shal come vpon the,
with the sweardes of the worthyes wyll I smyte downe thy people. All they that be myghtye amonge the Gentyles shal waste the proude pompe of Egypte, Ꟶ bryng downe all her people.
All the catell also of Egipte will I destroye, that they shall come nomore vpon the waters: so that nether mans fote ner beastes clawe, shall stere them eny more.
Then will I make their waters depe, Ꟶ cause their floudes to runne lyke oyle, sayeth the Lord God.
When I make the lande of Egypte desolate, and when the countre with all that is therin, shalbe layde waste, Ꟶ when I smyte all them which dwell in it, that they may knowe, that I am the Lord.
This is the mournyng, that the daughters of the Heathen shal make: Yee, a sorow Ꟶ lamentacion shal they take vp, vpon Egypte, and all her people, sayeth the Lord God.
In the .xii. yeare, the .xv. daye of the moneth, came the worde of the Lorde vnto me, sayinge:
Thou sonne of man. Take vp a lamentacion vpon the people of Egypte, Ꟶ cast them downe, yee, them I saye, Ꟶ the myghtye people of the heathen also, euen with them that dwell beneth: and with them that go downe into the graue.
Downe (how fayre so euer thou be) Ꟶ laye the with the vncircumcised.
Amonge those that be slayne with the swearde, shall they lye. To the swerde is she all redy delyuered: therfore pluck downe to the grounde, her Ꟶ all her multitude.
The myghtie worthies shal speake to him out of the hell Ꟶ to his helpers, that be gone downe Ꟶ lye vncircumcised and wt them that be slayne with the swearde.
Assur is there also wyth hys company, Ꟶ their graues rounde aboute, which were slayne and fell all with the swearde,
whose graues lye besyde him in the lowe pytte. Hys comens are buried rounde aboute hys graue, all together wounded and slayne with the swearde, which men afore tyme brought feare into the lande of the lyuynge.
There is Elam also wyth all hys people, and their graues rounde aboute: which all beynge wounded Ꟶ slayne with the swearde, are gone downe vncircumcysed vnder the earth, which neuertheles somtime brought feare into the lande of the lyuynge: for the which they beare their shame, with the other that be gone downe to the graue.
Their burial is geuen them and all their people, amonge them that be slayne. Their graues are rounde aboute al them, whych be vncircumcised, Ꟶ with them that be slayne thorow the swearde: for seyng that in times past they made the lande of the lyuynge afrayed they must now beare their awne shame, wt them that go downe to the pytte, and lye amonge them that be slayne.
There is Mesech also and Tubal, and their people, Ꟶ their graues rounde aboute. These all are among the vncircumcised, and them that be slayne wyth the swearde, because afore tyme they made the lande of the lyuynge afrayed.
Shulde not they then lye also amonge the worthyes, Ꟶ vncircumcised Gyauntes? which with their weapens are gone downe to hell whose sweardes are layed vnder their heades, whose wyckednesse is vpon their bones: because that as worthyes, they haue brought feare into the lande of the lyuing
Yee, amonge the vncircumcised shalt thou be destroyed, Ꟶ slepe wyth them, that perished thorowe the swearde.
There is the lande of Edom wyth her kynges and princes also, which with theyr strength are layed by them that were slayne with the swearde, yee, amonge the vncircumcised, and them which are gone downe into the pytte.
Moreouer, there be all the prynces of the north, with all the Sidonyans which are gone downe to the slayne. With their feare and strength they are come to confusion, and lye there vncircumcised, among those that be slayne with the swearde: and beare their awne shame, with them that be gone downe to the pytte.
Now whan Pharao seyth this, he shalbe conforted ouer all hys people, that is slayne with the swearde: both Pharao and all his hoost, sayeth the Lord God.
For I haue geuen my feare in the lande of the lyuinge. But Pharao and all his people shall lye among the vncircumcised, and amonge them that be slayne with the swearde sayeth the Lorde God.
Agayne, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me: sayenge.
Thou sonne of man, Speke to the children of thy people, and tell them: Whan I sende a swearde vpon a lande, yf the people of the lande take a man of their countre, Ꟶ set hym to be their watchman,
the same man (whan he seyth the swearde come vpon the lande) shall blowe the trompet, and warne the people.
If a man now heare the noyse of the trompet Ꟶ wyll not be warned, and the swearde come: and take him awaye: his bloude shall be vpon his awne head:
for he herde the sound of the trompet, Ꟶ wolde not take hede, therfore his bloude be vpon him. But yf he will receaue warninge, he shall saue his lyfe.
Agayne, yf the watch man se the swearde come, and shewe it not with the trompet, so that the people is not warned: yf the swearde come then, Ꟶ take eny man from among them: the same shall be taken awaye in his awne synne, but his bloude wyll I require of the watchmans hande.
And now (O thou sonne of man) I haue made the a watchman vnto the house of Israel: that where as thou hearest eny thinge out of my mouth, thou mayest warne them on my behalfe.
If I saye vnto the wycked thou wycked, thou shalt surely dye, Ꟶ thou geuest him not warnynge, that he maye bewarre of his vngodly waye: then shall the wycked dye in his awne synne, but his bloude wyll I require of thy hande.
Neuertheles, yf thou warne the wycked of hys waye, to turne from it, where as he yet wyll not be turned from it, then shal he dye because of his synne, but thou hast deliuered thy soule.
Therfore (O thou sonne of man) speake vnto the house of Israel. Ye, saye thus: Oure offences and synnes lye vpon vs, and we be corrupte in them: how shulde we then be restored vnto lyfe?
Tell them: As truly as I lyue saieth the Lord God, I haue no pleasure in the death of the wycked, but moch rather that the wycked turne from his waye, Ꟶ lyue. Turne you, turne you from your vngodly wayes, O ye of the house of Israell. Oh wherfore wyll ye dye?
Thou sonne of man, tell the chyldren of thy people: The righteousnes of the ryghteous shal not saue him, whansoeuer he turneth awaye vnfaithfully. Agayne, the wyckednesse of the wycked shall not hurt hym, whan soeuer he conuerteth from hys vngodlynesse. And the ryghteousnesse of the ryghteous shall not saue his lyfe, whansoeuer he synneth.
If I saye vnto the ryghteous, that he shal surely lyue, and so he trust to his awne ryghteousnesse, and do synne, then shall hys righteousnesse be nomore thought vpon, but in the wyckednesse that he hath done he shal dye.
Agayne, yf I saye vnto the wycked: thou shalt surely dye: and so he turne from his synnes, and do the thinge that is lawfull and right:
In so moch that the same wicked man geueth the pledge agayne, restoreth that he had taken awaye by robbyry, walcketh in the commaundementes of lyfe, and doth no wronge. Then shall he surely lyue, and not dye.
Yee, the synnes that he hath done, shall neuer be thought vpon. For in so moch as he doth now the thinge that is lawfull Ꟶ ryght, he shall lyue.
And yet the chyldren of thy people saye: Tush: the waye of the Lorde is not ryght, but they lye, where as their awne waye is rather vnright.
When the ryghteous turneth from his ryghteousnes and doth the thing that is wicked he shall dye therfore.
But yf the wicked turne from his wickednesse, doing the thinge that is lawfull and right, he shall lyue therfore.
Yet ye saye: the waye of the Lorde is not equall. O ye house of Israell I will iudge euery one of you after his wayes.
In the .xii. yeare, the .v. daye of the tenth moneth of oure captiuite, it happened, that one which was fled out of Ierusalem, came vnto me, and sayd: the citye is destroyed.
Now the hande of the Lord had bene vpon me the euening afore this man (which was escaped) came vnto me, Ꟶ had opened my mouth, vntyll the mornyng that he came to me: yee, he opened my mouth, so that I was nomore domme.
Then came the worde of the Lord vnto me, Ꟶ sayd.
Thou sonne of man, these that dwell in the wasted lande of Israel, saye: Abraham was but one man, and he had the lande in possession: now are we many Ꟶ the lande is geuen vs to possesse also.
And therfore tell them. Thus sayeth the Lord: In the bloud haue ye eaten, youre eyes haue ye lyft vp to Idoles, and haue shed bloud: shall ye then haue the lande in possession?
Ye leane vpon your sweardes, ye worcke abhominacions, euery one defileth his neyghbours wife: and shall ye then possesse the lande?
Saye thou these wordes vnto them. Thus saieth the Lord God. As truly as I lyue all ye that dwell in thys wyldernesse, shalbe slayne with the swearde: whatsoeuer is vpon the felde, will I geue vnto the beastes to be deuoured: those that be in strong holdes Ꟶ dennes, shall dye of the pestilence.
For I wyll make the lande so desolate and waste, Ꟶ the pompe of her strength shal come to an ende. The mountaynes in Israel shalbe so waste that noman shall trauayle therby.
Then shall they lerne to knowe, that I am the Lord, when I make the lande waste Ꟶ desolate, because of all their abhominacions, that they haue wrought.
And thou sonne of man, the children of thy people that talcke of the, by the walles and in the dores of their houses, sayinge one to another: Come, let vs heare, what worde is gone forth from the Lord.
These come vnto the, after the maner of a greate people: yee, as who sayth they were my people, they syt downe before the, and heare thy wordes, but they do not therafter for in their mouthes they make a Ieste of them, and theyr herte goeth after theyr awne couetous lucre.
And as a balet that hath a swete tune, and is pleasaunt to synge, so shalt thou be vnto them: thy wordes shal they heare, but they will not do therafter.
Whan this commeth to passe (for lo, it commeth in dede) then shall they knowe, that there hath bene a prophet amonge them.
And the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge.
Thou sonne of man, prophecye agaynst the shepherdes of Israel, prophecy and speake vnto them. Thus sayeth the Lord God. Wo be vnto the shepherdes of Israell, that fede them selues. Shulde not the shepherdes fede the flockes?
Ye haue eaten vp the fatt, ye haue clothed you with the woll: the best fedde haue ye slayne, but the flocke haue ye not norished.
The weake haue ye not holden vp the sicke haue ye not healed: the broken haue ye not bounde together, the out castes haue ye not brought agayne: the lost haue ye not sought, but churlishly Ꟶ cruelly haue ye ruled them.
Thus are they scatred here Ꟶ there without a shepherde: yee, all the beastes of the feld deuoure them, and they go astraye.
My shepe go wandring vpon all mountaynes and vpon euery hye hyll. Yee, they be scatred abrode in all feldes, and there is no man, that careth for them, or seketh after them.
Therfore, O ye shepherdes, heare the worde of the Lorde.
Thus sayeth the Lord God: As truly as I lyue, for so moch as my shepe are robbed, and deuoured of all the wylde beastes of the felde, hauynge no shepherde: and seinge that my shepherdes take no regarde of my shepe, but fede them selues onely, and not my shepe.
Therfore, heare the worde of the Lord (O ye shepherdes)
Thus sayeth the Lord God: Beholde, I my selfe wyll vpon the shepherdes: and require my shepe from their handes, and make them ceasse from fedynge of my shepe: yee, the shepherdes shall fede them selues nomore. For I wyll deliuer my shepe out of their mouthes, so that they shall not deuoure them after this.
For thus sayeth the Lorde God: Beholde, I wyll loke to my shepe my selfe, and seke them.
Like as a shepherde among the flocke seketh after the shepe that are scatered abroade, euen so wil I seke after my shepe, Ꟶ gather them together out of all places, where they haue bene scatred in the cloudy and darcke daye.
I will bringe them out from all people, and gather them together out of all landes. I will bringe them into their awne lande, and fede them vpon the mountaines of Israel, by the ryuers, and in all the places of the countre.
I will fede them in ryght good pastures and vpon the hie mountaynes of Israel shall there foldes be. There shal they lye in a good folde, and in a fat pasture shal they fede: euen vpon the mountaynes of Israell.
I will fede my shepe my selfe, and bringe them to their rest, sayeth the Lorde God.
Soch as be lost, will I seke: soch as go astraye: will I bring agayne: soch as be wounded, will I bynde vp: soch as be weake, will I make strong: soch as be fat Ꟶ stronge, those will I rote oute, and fede them with the thing that is laufull.
And as for you (O my shepe) sayeth the Lorde God. I wyll put a difference amonge the shepe, among the wethers Ꟶ the goates.
Was it not ynough for you, to eate vp the good pasture, but ye must treade downe the residue of youre pasture wt your fete also? Was it not ynough for you to drincke cleare water, but ye must trouble the residue also with youre fete?
Thus my shepe must be fayne to eate the thinge, that ye haue troden downe wt youre fete, and to drincke it, that ye with your fete haue defiled.
Therfore, thus sayeth the Lord God vnto them: Beholde, I wyll seuer the fatt shepe from the leane:
for so moch as ye haue shot the weake shepe vpon the sydes Ꟶ shoulders, and runne vpon them with your hornes, so longe tyll ye haue vtterly scatred them abrode.
I will helpe my shepe, so that they shal nomore be spoyled: yee, I will discerne one shepe from another.
I wyll rayse vp vnto them one onely shepherde, euen my seruaunt Dauid, he shall fede them and he shall be their shepherde.
I the Lorde will be their God, and my seruaunt Dauid shall be their prince: Euen I the Lorde haue spoken it.
Moreouer, I wyll make a couenaunt of peace with them and dryue al euell beastes out of the lande: so that they maye dwell safely in the wildernesse, and slepe in the woddes.
Good fortune and prosperite will I geue them, and vnto all that be rounde aboute my hyll. A prosperous shower and rayne will I sende them in due season,
that the trees in the wodde maye bring forth their frutes and the grounde her increase. They shalbe safe in their lande, and shall knowe, that I am the Lord, which haue broken their yock and deliuered them oute of the handes of those, that helde them in subieccyon.
They shal nomore be spoyled of the Heathen, ner deuoured wyth the beastes of the lande: but safely shal they dwell, and no man shall fraye them,
I will set vp an excellent plante for them, so that they shall suffre nomore hunger in the lande, nether beare the reprofe of the Heathen eny more.
Thus shall they vnderstande, that I the Lorde theyr God am with them, and that they (euen the house of Israel) are my people saieth the Lorde God.
Ye men are my flocke ye are the shepe of my pasture: and I am youre God, sayeth the Lorde God.
Moreouer, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying.
Thou sonne of man, turne thy face towarde the mount Seyr, prophecye vpon it,
Ꟶ saye vnto it. Thus sayeth the Lord God: Beholde (O thou mount Seyr) I wyll vpon the, I wyll reach out myne hande ouer the, yee, waste and desolate wil I make the.
Thy cities will I breake downe, and thou shalt lye voyde: that thou mayst knowe, how that I am the Lorde.
For so moch as thou bearest an olde enemyte agaynst the chyldren of Israel, and hast drawne the chylderne of Israell vpon the swerde, what tyme as they were troubled and punished for their synne:
Therfore, as truly as I lyue, sayeth the Lord God, I will prepare the vnto bloude, yee, bloude shall folow vpon the: seinge thou layest wayte for bloude, therfore shall bloude persecute the.
Thus will I make the mount Seir desolate and waste, and bringe to passe, that there shall no man goo thyther, ner come from thence.
His mountaynes will I fyll with his slayne men: thy hilles, valleys and ryuers, shall lye full of them, that are slayne with the swearde.
I will make the a perpetuall wildernesse, so that thy cityes shall not returne to their former estate that ye maye knowe, how that I am the Lorde.
And because thou hast sayde: what, both these nacions and both these landes must be myne, Ꟶ I will haue them in possession where as the Lorde was there. Therfore, thus sayeth the Lord God:
As truly as I lyue, I will handle the accordinge to thy wrath and gelousy, lyke as thou hast dealt cruelly wt them, that I maye be knowen among them, how I haue punished the.
Yee, and that thou also mayest be sure, that I the Lorde haue herde al thy despyteful wordes, which thou hast spoken agaynst the mountaynes of Israell, sayinge: Lo, they are made waste, and geuen vs to deuoure.
Thus with your mouthes ye haue made youre boast agaynst me, yee, and multiplied your proude wordes agaynst me, which I haue herde altogether.
Where vnto, thus sayeth the Lord God: to the ioye of all the worlde will I make the waste.
And lyke as thou (O mount Seyr) wast glad, because the heritage of the house of Israel was destroyed: euen so wyll I do vnto the also, that thou and whole Edom shal be destroyed, Ꟶ knowe, that I am the Lorde.
Thou sonne of man, prophecye vpon the mountaynes of Israell, and speake: Heare the worde of the Lorde, O ye mountaynes of Israel.
Thus sayeth the Lord God. Because your enemye hath sayde vpon you: A, ha, the hye euerlastynge places are now become ours,
prophecy therfore, Ꟶ speake: thus sayeth the Lord God. Seynge ye be wasted and trode downe on euery syde, and become a possession vnto the residue of the Gentiles, which haue brought you into mens mouthes and vnto an euell name amonge the people.
Therfore, heare the worde of the Lord God, O ye mountaynes of Israell. Thus sayeth the Lord God vnto the mountaynes and hilles, valleys and dales, to the voyde wyldernesse and desolate cityes, which are spoyled, Ꟶ had in derision on euery syde, amonge the residue of the Heathen.
Yee, euen thus sayeth the Lord God. In the fyre of my gelousy haue I taken a deuyce, agaynst the residue of the Gentiles, Ꟶ agaynst all Edom: which haue taken in my lande vnto them selues for a possession: which also reioysed from their whole hert with a despitefull stomacke, to waste it, and to spoyle it.
Prophecy therfore vpon the lande of Israell, speake vnto the mountaynes Ꟶ hilles to valleys and dales, thus sayeth the Lord God. Behold, this haue I deuised in my gelousy Ꟶ terrible wrath. For so moche as ye haue suffred reprofe of the Heathen,
therfore thus saieth the Lord God. I haue sworne, that the Gentiles which lye aboute you, shal beare their confusion them selues.
And as for you (O mountaynes of Israel) ye shall shute out your braunches, and bringe forth your frute to my people of Israell, for it is hard by, that it will come.
Beholde, I come vnto you, and vnto you wyll I turne me, that ye maye be tylled and sowne.
I wyll sende you moch people, which shalbe all of the house of Israell, the cityes shalbe inhabited, Ꟶ the decayed places shalbe repaired agayne,
I wil prouide you with moch people and catell, which shal increase and bringe frute, I wyll restore you also to your olde estate Ꟶ shewe you more kyndnes then euer ye had before: wherby ye shal knowe, that I am the Lord.
Yee, people wyll I send vnto you (O my folke of Israel) which shall haue the in possession, and thou shalt be their inheritaunce, so that thou shalt nomore be without them.
Agayne, thus sayeth the Lorde God. For so moch as they saye vnto you, thou art an eater vp of men, and a waster of thy people:
therfore thou shalt eate no mo men, nether destroye thy people eny more, sayeth the Lord God.
And I will not suffre the, for to heare thine awne confusion amonge the Gentiles from hensforth. Thou shalt not beare the reprofe of the nacions, ner cast out thyne awne people eny more, saieth the Lord God.
Moreouer, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying.
O thou sonne of man, when the house of Israell dwelt vpon their awne grounde, they defiled them selues wt their awne wayes Ꟶ ymaginacions: so that in my sight their waye was lyke the vnclennesse of a menstruous woman.
Wherfore, I poured my wrothfull displeasure vpon them, because of the bloude that they had shed in the lande, Ꟶ because of their Idols, wherwith they had defiled them selues.
I scatred them also amonge the Heathen, so that they were strawed aboute in the landes. Accordinge to their wayes Ꟶ after theyr awne inuencyons, so dyd I punishe them.
Now, when they were gone vnto the Heathen, Ꟶ come in amonge them, they dishonoured my holy name: so that it was sayde of them. Are these the people of God, Ꟶ must go out of their awne land?
Then spared I my holy name, which the house of Israel had dishonoured amonge the Gentiles, to whom they came.
Therfore tell the house of Israel: Thus sayeth the Lord God: I do not this for your sakes (O house of Israell) but for my holy names sake, whych ye dishonoured amonge the Heathen, when ye came to them.
Therfore, I wyll halowe my greate name agayne, which amonge the Gentiles is euell spoken of: for ye your selues haue dishonoured it amonge them. And the Gentiles shal knowe that I am the Lord, whan I am honoured in you before their eyes, sayeth the Lorde God.
As for you, I will take you from amonge the Heathen, and gather you together out of all countres, and brynge you agayne into your awne lande.
Then will I poure cleare water vpon you, and ye shalbe clene: yee, from all your vnclennesse and from all your Idols shall I clense you.
A new herte also will I geue you, and a new sprete will I put into you. As for that stony herte, I will take it out of youre body, Ꟶ geue you a fleshly herte.
I will geue my sprete amonge you Ꟶ cause you to walcke in my commaundementes to kepe my lawes, and to fulfill them.
And so ye shall dwell in the land, that I gaue to your forefathers, and ye shalbe my people, and I wilbe your God.
I will helpe you out of all your vnclennes. I will call for the corne, and will increase it, Ꟶ let you haue no honger.
I will multiplie the frutes of the trees and the increase of the felde for you, so that ye shall beare no more reprofe of honger, amonge the Heathen.
Then shal ye remembre your awne wicked wayes, Ꟶ your ymaginacions, which were not good: so that ye shal thinke that ye were worthy to be destroyed: for your synnes and abhominacyons.
But I wyll not do thys for youre sakes (saieth the Lord God) be ye sure of it. Therfore, O ye house of Israell, be ashamed of your sinnes.
Moreouer, thus saieth the Lord God: what tyme as I shall clense you from all youre offences, then will I make the cyties to be occupied agayne, and will repaire the places that be decayed.
The desolate lande shal be builded agayne, which afore time laye waste in the sight of all them that wente by.
Then shal it be sayde: this waste lande is become lyke a garden of pleasure, and the voyde, desolate Ꟶ broken downe cityes are now strong, Ꟶ defensed agayne.
Then the residue of the Heathen that lye rounde about you, shal knowe that I am the Lorde, which repaire that was broken downe, and plante agayne, that was made waste. Euen I the Lord haue spoken it, and will do it in dede.
Thus sayeth the Lorde God: I wyll yet once be founde agayne of the house of Israel, and do this for them: I shal increase them as a flocke of men.
Lyke as the holy flocke Ꟶ the flocke of Ierusalem are in the hye solempne feastes: so shall also the wilde wasted cyties be filled with flockes of men: and they shall knowe that I am the Lorde.
The hande of the Lorde came vpon me and caried me out in the sprete of the Lorde, and let me downe in a playne felde, that laye ful of bones,
and he led me rounde about by them: and beholde, the bones that laye vpon the felde, were very many, and maruelous drye also.
Then sayd he vnto me. Thou sonne of man: thinkest thou these bones maye lyue agayne? I answered O Lorde God, thou knowest.
And he sayde vnto me. Prophecy thou vpon these bones, and speake vnto them. Ye drye bones, heare the worde of the Lord.
Thus sayeth the Lorde God vnto these bones: Beholde, I wyll put breth into you, that ye may lyue:
I will geue yow synowes, and make fleshe growe vpon you, and couer you ouer with skinne: and so geue you breth, that ye may lyue, Ꟶ knowe, that I am the Lorde.
So I prophecied, as he had commaunded me. And as I was prophecyinge, there came a noyse Ꟶ a great mocyon, so that the bones ranne euery one to another.
Now when I had loked, beholde, they had synowes, and fleshe grewe vpon them: and aboue they were couered with skynne, but there was no breth in them.
Then sayde he vnto me. Thou sonne of man, prophecye thou towarde the wynde: prophecy: and speake to the wynde. Thus sayeth the Lord God. Come (O thou ayre) from the foure wyndes, Ꟶ blowe vpon these slayne that they may be restored to lyfe.
So I prophecied, as he had commaunded me: then came the breth into them, and they receaued lyfe, and stode vp vpon their fete, a maruelous greate sorte.
Moreouer, he sayde vnto me: Thou sonne of man, these bones are the whole house of Israell. Beholde, they saye: Oure bones dried vp, oure hope is gone, we are clene cut of.
Therfore prophecie thou, and speake vnto them: thus saieth the Lord God. Beholde, I will open your graues (O my people) and take you out of your sepulcres, Ꟶ brynge you into the lande of Israel agayne.
So shall ye knowe that I am the Lorde, when I open your graues, and bringe you out of them.
My sprete also will I put in you, and ye shall lyue: I will set you agayne in your awne lande, and ye shall knowe, that I am the Lord, which haue sayde it, and fulfilled it in dede.
The worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge:
thou sonne of man, take a stycke Ꟶ wryte vpon it. Unto Iuda and to the chyldren of Israell his companions. Then take another sticke, and write vpon it: Unto Ioseph the stock of Ephraim, Ꟶ to all the housholde of Israell his companions.
And than, take both these together in thyne hande, so shall there be one stycke therof.
Now yf the chyldren of thy people saye vnto the: wilt thou not shewe vs, what thou meanest by these?
Then geue them this answere: thus sayeth the Lord God: beholde, I will take the stock of Ioseph, which is in the hande of Ephraim and of the tribes of Israell his felowes, and will put them to the stock of Iuda, and make them one stock, and they shall be one in my hande.
And the two stickes where vpon thou writest, shalt thou haue in thyne hand, that they may se,
and shalt saye vnto them. Thus sayeth the Lord God: beholde, I will take awaye the children of Israel from amonge the Heathem, vnto whom they be gone, and will gather them together on euery syde, and bringe them agayne into theyr awne lande:
yee, I will make one people of them in the lande, vpon the mountaynes of Israel, and they all shal haue but one kyng. They shall no more be two peoples from hence forth, nether be deuided into two kingdomes:
they shal also defile them selues nomore with their abhominacions, Idoles, Ꟶ all their wycked doinges. I will helpe them out of all their dwellinge places, wherin they haue synned: and wil so clense them, that they shalbe my people, and I their God.
Dauid my seruaunt shalbe their kyng, Ꟶ they al shal haue one shepherde onely. They shall walcke in my lawes, Ꟶ my commaundementes shall they both kepe and fulfyll.
They shall dwell in the lande, that I gaue vnto Iacob my seruaunt, where as your fathers also haue dwelt. Yee, euen in the same lande shal they, their chyldren, Ꟶ their chylders chyldren dwell for euermore, Ꟶ my seruaunt Dauid shalbe their euerlastinge prince.
Moreouer, I wil make a bonde of peace wt them, which shalbe vnto them an euerlastinge couenaunt. I wil setle them also, Ꟶ multiply them, my Sanctuary wil I set among them for euermore.
My dwellynge shalbe with them: yee, I will be their God, Ꟶ they shal be my people.
Thus the Heathen also shal knowe, that I the Lord am the holy maker of Israell: when my Sanctuary shalbe amonge them for euermore.
And the worde of the Lord came vnto me, sayinge.
Thou sonne of man, turne thy face towarde Gog the lande of Magog which is the chefe prince at Mesech and Tubal: prophecy agaynst hym,
Ꟶ saye. Thus sayeth the Lord God. O Gog thou chefe prince of Mesech and Tubal: beholde, I will vpon the,
Ꟶ will turne the aboute and put a bytt in thy chawes: I will bringe the forth and all thine hoost, both horse and horsmen, which be all weapened of the best fassion: a great people, that handle altogether speares, shildes, Ꟶ swerdes:
the Perses, Morians and with them the Libians, which all beare shildes and helmettes:
Gomer and all his hoostes: the house of Thogorma out of the north quarters, and all his hoostes, yee, and moch people with the.
Therfore prepare the, set thy selfe in araye with all thy people, that are come vnto the by heapes, and be thou their defence.
After many dayes thou shalt be visited, and in the latter yeares thou shalt come into the lande that hath bene destroyed with the swearde, Ꟶ now is replenished agayne with diuerse people vpon the mountaines of Israel, which haue longe lyen waste. Yee, they be brought out of the nacions, and dwell all safe.
Thou shalt come vp like a stormy wether, to couer the lande, Ꟶ as it were a darck cloude, thou with all thine hostes, and a greate multitude of people with the.
Moreouer, thus sayeth the Lord God: At the same tyme shal many thinges come into thy mynde, so that thou shalt ymagyn myschefe,
and saye: I wyll vp to yonder playne lande, seinge they syt at ease, Ꟶ dwell so safely (for they dwell all without any walles they haue nether barres nor dores)
to spoyle them, to robbe them, to laye hande vpon their so well inhabited wyldernesses: against that people, that is gathered together from amonge the Heathen, which haue gotten catell and good, and dwell in the middest of the lande.
Then shall Saba, and Dedan, and the marchauntes of Tharsis with all their worthies saye vnto the: Art thou come to robbe? Hast thou gathered thy people together, because thou wilt spoyle? to take syluer and golde: to cary awaye catell and good, and to haue a greate praye?
Therfore, O thou sonne of man, thou shalt prophecie, and saye vnto God. Thus saieth the Lord God. In that daye thou shalt knowe that my people of Israel dwelleth safe:
and shalt come from thy place out of the north partes, thou Ꟶ moch people with the which ryde vpon horses, whereof there is a greate multitude and an innumerable sorte.
Yee, thou shalt come vpon my people of Israell, as a cloude to couer the lande. Thys shall come to passe in the latter dayes: I will bringe the vp into my lande, that the heathen maye knowe me, when I get me honoure vpon the (O Gog) before their eyes.
Thus sayeth the Lorde God: Thou art he, of whom I haue spoken afore tyme by my seruauntes the prophetes of Israel, which prophecied in those dayes and yeares, that I shuld bringe the vpon them.
At the same tyme, when Gog commeth vp into the land of Israel (saieth the Lord God) shal my indignacion go forth in my wrath.
For in my gelousy and hote displeasure I haue deuysed that there shalbe a greate trouble in the lande of Israell at that tyme.
The very fishes in the see, the foules of the ayre, the beastes of the felde, and all the men that are vpon the earth, shall tremble for feare of me. The hilles also shalbe turned vp side downe, the stayres of stone shal fall, and all walles shal syncke to the grounde.
I will cal for a swearde vpon them in all my mountaines sayeth the Lorde God: so that euery mans swearde shall be vpon another.
With pestylence and bloude will I punishe him: stormy rayne and hayle stones, fyre and brimstome will I cause to rayne vpon him and all his heape, yee, and vpon all that greate people that is with hym.
Thus will I be magnifyed, honoured, Ꟶ knowne amonge the Heathen: that they maye be sure, howe that I am the Lorde.
Therfore, O thou sonne of man, prophecie agaynst Gog, and speake. Thus sayeth the Lorde God: Beholde O Gog: thou chefe prince at Mesech and Tubal, I wyll vpon the,
and punyshe the with sixe plages, Ꟶ leade the from the north partes, and bring the vp to the mountaines of Israell.
As for thy bowe, I will smyte it out of thy left hande, and cast thyne arowes out of thy ryght hande.
Thou with all thine heape, and all the people that is wt the, must fall vpon the mountaynes of Israell. Then will I geue the vnto foules and wilde beastes of the felde, to be deuoured:
there must thou lye vpon the felde: for euen I the Lord haue spoken it, sayeth the Lord God.
Into Magog, and among those that syt so carelesse in the Iles: will I send a fyre, Ꟶ they shal knowe, that I am the Lord,
I wil make also the name of my holinesse to be knowne among my people of Israel: and I will not let my holy name be euel spoken of enymore: but the very Heathen also shall knowe, that I am the Lord, the holy one of Israel.
Beholde, it commeth, and shalbe fulfilled in dede, sayeth the Lord God. This is the daye wherof I haue spoken.
They that dwel in the cities of Israell, shall go forth and set fyre vpon the weapens, and burne them: shyldes and speres, bowes and arowes, bylles Ꟶ clubbes: seuen yeares shal they be burnynge therof,
so that they shal els bringe no stickes from the felde, nether haue nede to hewe downe eny out of the wodde. For they shal haue weapens ynowe to burne. They shal robbe those that robbed them, Ꟶ spoyle those that spoyled them sayeth the Lord God.
At the same tyme wil I geue vnto God, a place to be buried in Israel, euen the valley, where thorow men go from the east to the see warde. Those that trauayle therby, shall stoppe ther noses for stenche. There shall Gog Ꟶ all hys people be buried: and it shalbe called the valley of the people of God.
Seuen monethes longe shall the house of Israell be buryenge of them that they maye clense the lande.
Yee, all the people of the lande shall burie them. O, it shall be a glorious daye, when I gett me that honoure, saieth the Lord God.
They shal ordeyne men also to be deed buriers, euer goynge thorow the lande, Ꟶ appoynte them certayne places to bury those in, which remayne vpon the felde, that the lande maye be clensed. From ende to ende shall they seke, Ꟶ that seuen monethes longe.
Now those that go thorow the lande, where they se a mans bone, they shalt set vp a token by it, tyll the deed buryers haue buried it also, in the valley of the people of Gog.
And the name of the citie shalbe called, hamonah (that is a multitude.) Thus shall they make the lande clene.
And thou sonne of man: thus sayeth the Lord God. Speake vnto all the foules and euery byrde, yee, and to al the wilde beastes of the felde, heape you together and come, gather you rounde aboute vpon my slaughter, that I haue slayne for you: euen a greate slaughter vpon the mountaynes of Israell eate flesh and drincke bloude.
Ye shall eate the flesh of the worthies, Ꟶ drinke the bloud of the princes of the lande: of the wethers, of the lambes, of the goates, and of the oxen that be all slayne at Basan.
Eate the fat your belyfull, and drincke bloude, tyll ye be dronken of the slaughter, whych I haue slayne vnto you.
Fill you at my table with horses and stronge horsmen: with captaynes and men of warre, sayeth the Lord God.
I will bringe my glory also amonge the Gentyles, that all the heathen maye se my iudgement, that I haue kepte, and my hand which I haue layed vpon them:
that the house of Israell maye knowe, how that I am the Lord their God from that daye forth.
And the heathen shall knowe, that where as the house of Israell were led into captiuyte: it was for their wyckednes sake, because they offended me. For the which cause I hyd my face from them, and delyuered them into the handes of their enemies, that they might all be slaine with the swearde.
Accordinge to their vnclennesse Ꟶ vnfaithfull dealinges, so haue I entreated them, and hyd my face from them.
Therfore, thus sayeth the Lord God: Now will I bringe agayne the captiues of Iacob Ꟶ haue mercy vpon the whole house of Israel, and be gelous for my holy names sak
All their confusion and offence that they haue done agaynst me shall be taken awaye: Ꟶ so safely shal they dwell in their lande, that no man shall make them afrayed.
And when I haue brought them agayne from amonge the people, when I haue gathered them together out of their enemies landes, Ꟶ am praysed in them before many Heathen:
then shal they knowe, that I am the Lord their God which suffred them to be led into captiuite amonge the Heathen, but now haue I brought them agayne into their awne lande, and not left one of them yonder.
After that, will I hyde my face nomore from them but will poure out my sprete vpon the house of Israell, sayeth the Lorde God.
In the .xxv. yeare of oure captiuite, in the begynnynge of the yeare, the .x. daye of the moneth: that is the .xiiii. yeare, after that the cyte was smyten downe: the same daye came the hand of the Lorde vpon me, and caried me forth:
euen into the lande of Israel brought he me in the visyons of God: Ꟶ set me downe vpon a maruelous hye mountayne, wher vpon there was a buylding (as it had bene of a cyte) toward the north.
Thyther he caried me, and beholde, there was a man, whose similitude was like brasse, which had a threde of flax in his hande, Ꟶ a meterode also. He stode in the dore,
and sayd vnto me: marcke well with thine eyes, herken to with thine eares, and fasten it in thine hert, whatsoeuer I shal shewe the, for to that intent that they myght be shewed the therfore art thou brought hyther. And whatsoeuer thou seyst, thou shalt certyfye the house of Israell therof.
Beholde, there was a wall on the out syde rounde aboute the house: the meterodde that he had in his hande, was sixe cubytes longe Ꟶ a spanne. So he measured the bredth of the buyldinge, which was a meterodde, and the heygth also a meterode.
Then came he vnto the east dore, Ꟶ wente vp the steares, Ꟶ measured the postes of the dore, wherof euery one was a meterodde thicke. Euery chambre was a meterodde longe Ꟶ brode:
betwene the chambers were fyue cubytes. The poste of the dore within the porche, was one meterodde.
He measured also the porche of the ynnermer dore, which conteyned a meterodde.
Then measured he the entrye of the dore, that conteyned eyght cubytes, Ꟶ his pylers two cubytes: and this entrye stode inwarde.
The chambers of the dore eastwarde, were thre on euery syde: a lyke brode and longe. The pilers also that stode of both the sydes were of one measure.
After this, he measured the wydenesse of the dore, which was .x. cubytes, Ꟶ the heygth of the dore .xiii. cubytes.
The edge before the chambers was one cubyte brode vpon both the sydes, and the chambres six cubytes wyde of eyther syde.
He measured the dore from the rydge of one chambre to another, whose wydenesse was .xxv. cubytes, Ꟶ one dore stode agaynst another.
He made pilers also .lx. cubites hye, rounde about the courte dore.
Before the inwarde parte vnto the fore entre of the ynnermer dore, were .L. cubytes.
The chambers and their pylers within, rounde about vnto the dore, had syde wyndowes. So had the fore entries also, whose wyndowes wente rounde about within. And vpon the pylers there stode date trees.
Then brought he me into the fore courte where as were chambers Ꟶ paued worckes, made in the fore courte rounde aboute .xxx. chambres vpon one paued worcke.
Now the paued worke was a longe besyde the dores Ꟶ that was the lower paued worke.
After this he measured the bredth from the lower dore, vnto the ynnermer courte of the outsyde, which had an .C. cubytes vpon the east Ꟶ the north parte.
And the dore in the vttermoste court towarde the north, measured he after the length and bredth:
hys thre chambres also on ether syde with his pillers and forentryes: which had euen the measure of the first dore. His heyght was .l. cubytes, the bredth .xxv. cubites,
hys wyndowes Ꟶ porches with hys date trees, had euen lyke measure as the dore towarde the east: there were .vij. steppes to go vp vpon, and their porche before them.
Nowe the dore of the ynnermer court stode streyght ouer agaynst the dore, that was towarde the northeast. From one dore to another he measured .C. cubytes.
After that, he brought me to the southsyde, where there stode a dore towarde the south: whose pillers and porches he measured, these had the fyrst measure,
and with their porches they had windowes rounde about, like the fyrst wyndowes. The heyght was .l. cubites, the bredth .xxv.
with steppes to go vp vpon: hys porche stode before with hys pyllers and date trees on ether side.
And the dore of the ynnermer courte stode towarde the south, and he measured from one dore to another an .C. cubites.
So he brought me into the ynnermer court, thorowe the dore of the southsyde, which he measured: and it had the measure aforsayde.
In lyke maner, hys chambres, pyllers and forentreys, had euen the foresayde measure also. And he had with hys porches rounde about windowes of fifty cubites heyght, and .xxv. cubytes broade.
The porches round about were .xxv. cubites longe, and .v. cubites broad:
and his porche reached vnto the vttermost court, vpon his pyllers, there were date trees, and eyght steppes to go vp vpon.
He brought me also into the ynmost court vpon the east syde, and measured the dore, according to the measure aforsayd.
His chambers, pyllers and porches had euen the same measure, as the fyrst had: and with hys porches, he had wyndowes rounde about. The heyght was .l. cubytes, the bredth .xxv. cubites:
hys porche reached vnto the vttermost court: his pillers also had date trees on ether syde, Ꟶ .viij. steppes to go vp vpon.
And he brought me to the north dore Ꟶ measured it: which also had the forsayde measure.
His chambres, pillers Ꟶ porches had windowes rounde about: whose heyght was .l. cubites, and the bredth .xxv.
Hys pyllers stode towarde the vtmost court, and vpon them both were date trees, and .viij. steppes to go vp vpon.
Ther stode a chambre also, whose intraunce was at the dore pyllers, and there the burntofferynges were wasshed.
In the dore porche, there stode on eyther syde two tables for the slaughtinge: to sleye the brentofferinges, synofferynges and trespace offeringes therupon.
And on the outside as men go forth to the north dore, ther stode two tables.
Foure tables stode on ether side of the dore, that is .viij. tables: wherupon they slaughted.
Foure tables were of hewen stone for the burntoffringes, of a cubite and a halfe longe and brode, and one cubite hye: wherupon were layed the vessels and ornamentes, which were vsed to the burnt and slayne offeringes: whan they were slaughted.
And within, there were hokes foure fingers brode, fastened rounde about, to hange flesh vpon, and vpon the tables was layed the offryng fleshe.
On the out syde of the innermer dore were the syngers chambers in the inwarde court besyde the north dore oueragaynst the south. There stode one also, besyde the east dore northwarde.
And he sayde vnto me: This chambre on the south syde belongeth to the prestes, that kepe the habytatyon:
and this towarde the north, is the prestes that wayte vpon the aulter: which be the sonnes of Sadoch, that do seruice before the Lorde in steade of the chyldren of Leui.
So he measured the fore court, which had in length an .C. cubites, and asmoch in bredth by the foure corners. Now the aulter stode before the house.
And he brought me to the fore entrye of the house, and measured the walles by the entry dore: which were .v. cubites longe on eyther syde. The thycknes also of the dore on eyther syde was thre cubites.
The length of the porche was .xx. cubites, the bredth .xi. cubites, and vpon steppes went men vp to it: by the walles also were pyllers on eyther syde one.
After this, he brought me to the temple, and measured the postes, which were of both sydes syxe cubites thicke, accordyng to the widenes of the tabernacle.
The bredth of the dore was .x. cubites, Ꟶ the walles of the dore on eyther syde .v. cubites. He measured the length therof, which conteyned .xl. cubites, Ꟶ the bredth .xx.
Then went he in Ꟶ measured the dore postes: which were two cubites thicke: but the dore it selfe was syxe cubites, and the bredth of the dore was, .vij. cubites.
He measured the length and bredth therof, which were euery one .xx. cubites, before the temple. And he sayde vnto me: this is the holiest of all.
He measured also the wall of the house, which was .vi. cubites. The chambres that stode rounde about the house, were euery one .iiij. cubites wyde:
and one stode harde vpon another, wherof ther were .xxxiij. ther stode postes beneth by the walles rounde about the house, to beare them vp: but in the wall of the house, they were not fastened.
The syde chambres were, the hyer the wyder, Ꟶ had steppes thorowe them rounde about the house. Thus was it wyder aboue, that from the lowest men myght go to the hyest by the mydd chambres.
I sawe also that the house was very hye rounde aboute. The foundacyon of the syde chambres was a meterodde, that is .vi. cubites broade.
The thicknes of the syde wall without, conteined .v. cubites, and so dyd the outwall of the chambres in the house.
Betwene the chambres was the wydenes .xx. cubites rounde about the house.
The chambre dores stode ouer agaynst the outwall, the one dore was toward the north, the other towarde the south: and the thycknesse of the outwall was .v. cubites rounde about
Nowe the buylding that was separated towarde the west, was .lxx. cubites wyde: the wall of the buylding was .v. cubytes thicke rounde about, and the length foure score cubites Ꟶ ten.
So he measured the house which was an .C. cubytes longe, and the separated buylding with the wall were an .C. cubytes longe also.
The wydenes before the house, and of it that was separated towarde the east, was an .C. cubytes.
And he measured the length of the buylding before and behynde with the chambres vpon both the sydes: and it conteyned an .C. cubytes. The ynnermer temple, the porch of the fore court,
the syde postes, these thre had syde wyndowes and pyllers rounde about ouer agaynst the postes, from the grounde vp to the wyndowes. The wyndowes them selues were syled ouer with bordes:
and thus was it aboue the dore vnto the ynmost house: and without also. Yee, the whole wall on euery syde both within and without was silled ouer with great borders.
There were cherubins and date trees made also, so that one date tree stode euer betwixte to cherubyns. One cherub had two faces,
the face of a man lokyng asyde toward the date tree, Ꟶ a lions face on the other syde. Thus was it made rounde about in all the house.
Yee, the cherubyns and date trees were made from the grounde vp aboue the dore, and so stode they also vpon the wall of the temple.
The bypostes of the temple were fouresquared, and the fashyon of the sanctuarye was euen as it appeared vnto me afore in the vision.
The table was of wodde .iij. cubites hye and .ij. cubytes longe: hys corners, the length Ꟶ the walles were of wodde. And he sayde vnto me: Thys is the table, that shall stande before the Lorde.
The temple and the holyest of all had eyther of them two dores.
and euery dore had .ij. lytle wyckettes which were folden in one vpon another, on euery side two.
And vpon the dores of the temple, ther were made cherubins and date trees, like as vpon the walles: and a greate thycke balke of wodde was before on the out syde of the porche.
Upon both the sydes of the walles of the porch, there were made depe wyndowes and date trees, hauyng beames and balkes, lyke as the house had.
Then caryed he me out into the fore court towarde the north, Ꟶ brought me into the chambre that stode oueragaynst the backbuyldinge north ward, which had the length of an .C. cubytes: whose dore turned toward the north.
The wydenes conteyned .l. cubytes:
oueragaynst the .xx. cubytes of the ynnermer court, and agaynst the paued worke that was in the court, besyde all these thre, ther stode pillers, one oueragaynst another:
And before thys chambre there was a walkyng place of .x. cubites wyde, and within was a waye of one cubite wyde and their dores towarde the north.
Thus the hyest chambres were alwaye narower then the lowest and myddelmost of the buyldynge:
for they bare chambre vpon chambre, and stode thre together one vpon another, not hauyng pillers lyke the fore court: therfore were they smaller then those beneth and in the middest to reken from the grounde vpwarde.
The wall without that stode by the chambres towarde the vtmost court vpon the fore syde of the chambres, was .l. cubytes longe:
for the length of the vtmost chambres in the fore court was .l. cubytes also: but the length therof before the temple was an .C. cubytes.
These chambres had vnder them an intraunce of the east syde, wherby a man myght go in to them out of the fore court,
thorowe the thicke wall of the fore court towarde the east, ryght oueragaynst the separated buylding.
Before the same buyldyng vpon thys syde, there were chambres also which had a waye vnto them, lyke as the chambre on the north syde of the same length and wydenesse. Theyr intraunce, fashyon and dores were also of the same maner.
Yee, euen lyke as the other chambre dores were: so were those also of the south syde. And before the waye towarde the syngers steppes on the east syde, there stode a dore to go in at.
Then sayde he vnto me: The chambers towarde the north Ꟶ the south which stande before the backe buyldynge: those be holy habytatyons, wherein the prestes that do seruyce before the Lorde, must eate the most holy offeringes: and there must they laye the most holy offeringes, meatofferynges, synne offerynges, and trespace offerynges: for it is an holy place.
When the prestes come therin, they shall not go out into the fore courte: but (seynge they be holy) they shall leaue the clothes of their ministracyon, and put on other garmentes, when they haue any thyng to do with the people.
Nowe when he had measured all the ynnermer house, he brought me forth thorowe the east porte, and measured the same rounde about.
He measured the east syde with the meterode, which rounde about conteyned .v.C. meteroddes:
And the north syde measured he which conteyned rounde about euen so moch.
The other two sydes also towarde the south
and the west, which he measured, conteyned ether of them .v.C. meteroddes.
So he measured all the foure sydes, where there went a wall rounde about .v.C. meteroddes longe, and as broade also which separated the holy from the vnholy.
So he brought me to the dore that turneth toward the east.
Behold, then came the glory of the God of Israel from out of the east, whose voyce was lyke a great noyce of waters, and the earth was lyghtened with his glory.
His syght to loke vpon was lyke the fyrst, that I sawe when I went in, what tyme as the cytie shuld haue bene destroyed: and like the visyon that I sawe by the water of Cobar. Then fell I vpon my face:
but the glory of the Lord came into the house, thorowe the east dore.
So a wynde toke me vp, and brought me into the ynnermer court: and beholde, the house was full of the glory of the Lorde.
I hearde one speaking vnto me out of the house: and there stode one by me,
that sayde vnto me: O thou sonne of man, this rowme is my seate, Ꟶ the place of my fotsteppes, where as I wyll dwell amonge the children of Israel for euermore: so that the house of Israel shall nomore defyle my holy name: nether they, ner their kynges thorowe theyr whordome, thorowe their hye places, Ꟶ thorowe the deed bodyes of their kinges:
which haue builded their thresholdes in maner hard vpon my thresholdes, Ꟶ their postes almost at my postes: Ꟶ a wall betwyxte me and them. Thus haue they defyled my holy name wt their abhominations, that they haue commytted. Wherfore, I haue destroyed them in my wrath.
But now they shal put awaye their whordome Ꟶ the deed bodies of their kinges out of my syght, that I maye dwell among them for euermore.
Therfore, O thou sonne of man, shewe thou the housholde of Israel a temple, that they maye be ashamed of their wickednes, Ꟶ measure them selues an example therat.
And when they be ashamed of all theyr worckes, then shewe them the fourme Ꟶ fashyon of the temple, the comming in, the goynge out, all the maner and descripcyon therof: yee, all the vses Ꟶ ordinaunces of it, that they maye kepe and fulfyll all the fashyons and customes therof.
This is the descripcion of the house. Aboue, vpon the mount rounde about all the corners, it shalbe the holyest of all. Beholde, that is the descripcyon and fashyon of the house.
Thys is the measure of the aultar, after the true cubite: which is a spanne longer then another cubyte, his botome in the middest was a cubite longe and wyde, and the ledge that went rounde about it, was a spanne broade. This is the heyght of the aulter.
From the ground to the lower steppes, the length is two cubites: and the bredth one cubite: and from the lower steppes to the hygher, are foure cubytes, and the bredth but one cubite.
The aultar was .iiij. cubytes hye, and from the aultar vpwarde stode .iiij. hornes,
and it was .xij. cubytes longe and .xij. cubites broade, vpon the foure corners:
the couering of the aultar was .xiiij. cubites longe Ꟶ broad vpon the foure corners, and the ledge that went rounde about had halfe a cubite, and the botome therof rounde about one cubite: hys steppes stode towarde the east.
And he sayd vnto me: Thou sonne of man, thus sayth the Lorde God: these are the ordynaunces and lawes of the aultar: in the daye, whan it is made to offer burntofferinges, and to sprenckle bloude therupon.
To the prestes, to the leuites that be of the sede of Sadoch, and treade before me to do me seruyce, sayeth the Lorde God. Unto these geue thou a yonge bullocke for a synoffering:
Ꟶ take the bloude of hym, and sprenckle his foure hornes withall: and the foure corners of the aultar couering, with the ledge that goeth rounde about, herwith shalt thou clense it, and reconcyle it.
Thou shalte take the bullocke also of the synoffering, and burne him in a seuerall place without the sanctuary.
The next daye, take a goatbucke, wtout blemysh for a synofferynge, to reconcyle the aultar withall, lyke as it was reconcyled wt the bullocke.
Nowe whan thou hast made it cleane, then offre a yonge bullocke without blemysh, and a ramme out of the flocke without blemysh also.
Offer them before the Lord: and let the preste cast salt therupon, and geue them so vnto the Lord for a burntofferyng.
Seuen dayes shalt thou brynge euery daye a goatbuck. A yonge bullocke and a ramme of the flocke, both without blemysh, shall they offre.
Seuen dayes shall they reconcyle and clense the aultar, and offre vpon it.
When these dayes are expyred, then vpon the eight daye and so forth, the prestes shall offre their burntofferinges and healthofferinges vpon the aultar: so will I be mercyfull vnto you, sayth the Lorde God.
After this, he brought me againe to the outwarde dore of the sanctuary on the east syde, and that was shut.
Then sayd the Lord vnto me: This dore shalbe styll shut: Ꟶ not opened for eny man to go thorowe it: but only for the Lorde God of Israel: yee, he shall go thorowe it, els shall it be shut styll.
The prince hym selfe shall come thorowe it, that he maye eate bread before the Lorde. At the porche shall he come in, and there shall he go out againe.
Then brought he me to the dore vpon the north syde of the house. And as I loked aboute me, beholde, the glory of the Lord fylled the house: and I fell downe vpon my face.
So the Lorde spake vnto me: O thou sonne of man, fasten thys to thyne herte: beholde, and take diligent hede to all that I wyll saye vnto the, concernyng all the ordynaunces of the Lord, Ꟶ all his lawes: pondre well with thyne hert the commynge in of the house and the goyng forth of the sanctuary:
Ꟶ tell that obstynate housholde of Israell. Thus sayth the Lorde God: O house of Israel, ye haue nowe don ynough withall your abhominacyons,
seyng that ye haue brought into my sanctuary straungers, hauyng vncircumcysed hertes and fleshe, where thorowe my sanctuary is defyled, when ye offre me bread, fatt, and bloude. Thus with all youre abhominacions ye haue broken my couenaunt,
and not kepte the holy ordynaunces of my sanctuary: but sett kepers of my sanctuary, euen after youre awne mynde.
Therfore thus sayth the Lorde God: Of all the straungers that dwell among the chyldren of Israel, no straunger (whose hert and fleshe is not circumcised) shall come within my sanctuary.
No, ner the leuites that ben gone backe fro me: and haue disceaued the people of Israel with all erroures, goyng after theyr ydoles: therfore shall they beare their awne wyckednes.
Shulde they be set and ordeined to ministre vnder the dores of the house of my sanctuary? And to do seruyce in the house: to slaye burntofferynges and sacrifyces for the people: to stande before them, and to serue them,
seynge the seruyce that they do them, is before theyr ydoles, and cause the house of Israel to stomble thorowe theyr wickednes? For the which cause I haue pluckte oute myne hande ouer them, sayth the Lorde, so that nowe they must beare theyr awne iniquitie,
and not to come nye me, to serue me with theyr presthode, in my sanctuary, and moost holyest of all: that they maye beare theyr awne shame and abhominations, which they haue done.
Shulde I vse them to be porters of the house, and to all the seruyce that is done therin?
But the prestes, the leuites, the sonne of Sadoch, that kepte the holy ordynaunces of my sanctuary, when the chyldren of Israel were gone fro me, shall come to me, to do me seruyce, to stande before me, and to offre me the fat and the bloude, sayth the Lorde God.
They shall go into my sanctuary, and treade before my table: to do me seruyce, and to wayte vpon myne ordynaunces.
Nowe when they go in at the dores of the ynnermer court: they shall put on lynen clothes, so that no wollyne come vpon them whyle they do seruice vnder the dores of the innermer court, and within.
They shall haue fayre linen bonettes vpon their heades, and lynen breches vpon their loynes, which in their labour they shall not put about them.
And when they go forth to the people into the outwarde court, they shall put of the clothes wherin they haue ministred, and laye them in the habitation of the sanctuary, and put on other apparell, lest they vnhalowe the people with theyr clothes.
They shall not shaue theyr heades, ner norysh the bushe of theyr heare, but rounde theyr heades onely.
All the prestes that go into the inmost court, shall dryncke no wyne.
They shall mary no wedowe, nether one that is put from her husbande: but a mayde of the seede of the house of Israel, or a wedowe that hath had a preste before.
They shall shewe my people the difference betwene the holy and vnholy, betwixt the cleane and vncleane.
If any discord arise, they shall discerne it: Ꟶ geue sentence after my iudgementes. My solempne feastes, my lawes and ordinaunces shall they kepe, and halowe my sabbathes.
They shall come at no deed persone to defyle them selues, except it be father or mother, sonne or daughter, brother or syster, that hath had yet no husbande, in soch maye they be defyled.
And when he is clensed, ther shalbe rekened vnto him .vij. dayes:
and yf he go into the sanctuary agayn to do seruice, he shall bring a synoffering, sayth the Lorde God.
They shall haue an heritage: yee, I my selfe wyll be their heritage: els shall ye geue them no possession in Israel, for I am their possessyon.
The meatofferynges, synofferyng and trespaceofferinge shall they eate, Ꟶ euery dedicate thynge in Israel, shalbe theyrs.
The fyrstlinges of all the fyrst frutes, and all frewyllofferinges shalbe the prestes. Ye shall geue vnto the preste also all the fyrst frute of your first borne, all I say, Ꟶ all that is separated vnto God, all youre heueofferinges (I saye) shalbe the prestes, Ꟶ also the fyrstlinges of your dough, that God maye prospere the residue.
But no deed caryon shall the prest eate, ner soch as is deuoured of wilde beastes, foules or catell:
When ye deuyde the lande by the lot, ye shall put asyde one parte for the Lorde, to be holy from other landes: namely .xxv.M. meteroddes longe, and .x.M. broade. This shalbe holy, as wyde as it is rounde about.
Of thys parte there shall belonge vnto the sanctuary .v.C. meteroddes in all the foure corners, Ꟶ .l. cubites wyde rounde about to the suburbes
And from this measure, namely of .xxv.M. meteroddes longe, Ꟶ .x.M. broade, thou shalt measure, wherin the sanctuary and the holyest of all maye stande.
The resydue of that holy grounde shalbe the prestes, which do seruyce in the sanctuary of the Lorde, and goo in before the Lorde to serue hym, that they maye haue rowme to dwell in.
As for the sanctuary, it shall stande for it selfe: and to the leuites that serue in the house, there shalbe geuen .xx. habitatyons, of the .xxv.M. length and .x.M. bredth:
ye shall geue also vnto the citye a possession of .v.M. meteroddes brode, and .xxv.M. longe, beside the parte of the sanctuary: that shalbe for the whole house of Israel.
Upon both the sydes of the sanctuaryes parte, and by the cytie, there shalbe geuen vnto the prince, whatsoeuer lyeth oueragaynst the citye, as farre as reacheth westwarde Ꟶ eastwarde: which shalbe as longe as one parte, from the west vnto the east.
This shalbe hys awne lande in Israel, that my prynces be nomore chargeable vnto my people. And soch as remayneth yet ouer in the lande, shalbe geuen to the house of Israel according to theyr tribes.
Thus sayth the Lord God: O ye princes, ye haue nowe oppressed and destroyed ynough: nowe leaue of, handle nowe according to the thinge that is equall and lawfull: Ꟶ thrust out my people nomore sayth the Lorde God.
Ye shall haue a true weyght, a true ephah, and a true bath.
The ephah and the bath shalbe a lyke. One bath shall conteyne the tenth parte of an homer, and so shall one ephah do: their measure shall be after the homer.
One syckle maketh .xx. geras. So twentye sycles, and .xxv. and .xv. sycles make a pounde.
Thys is the heaueofferynge, that ye shall geue to be heaued: namely, the .xvj. parte of an ephah, out of an homer of wheate, and the .xvj. parte of an ephah, out of an homer of barly.
The oyle shalbe measured with the bath: euen the tenth parte of one bath out of a cor. Ten bathes make one homer: for one homer fylleth ten bathes.
And one lambe from two hundred shepe out of the pasture of Israel: for a meatofferyng, burntofferyng, and healthofferyng, to reconcyle them, sayth the Lorde God.
All the people of the lande shall geue thys heaueofferynge with a fre wyll.
Agayne, it shalbe the princes parte to offre burntofferynges, meateofferinges Ꟶ drinckofferinges vnto the Lord, in the holy dayes, newe moones, sabbathes, and in all the hye feastes of the house of Israel. The synoffering, meateofferyng, burntoffring Ꟶ healthofferyng shall he geue to reconcyle the house of Israel.
Thus sayth the Lorde God: The fyrst daye of the first moneth thou shalt take a yonge bullocke without blemysh, and clense the sanctuarye.
So the preste shall take of the bloude of the synofferyng, and sprynckle it vnto the postes of the house, and vpon the foure corners of the aulter, with the dorepostes of the ynnermer courte.
And thus shalt thou do also the seuenth daye of the moneth (for soch as haue synned of ignoraunce, or beynge disceaued) to reconcyle the house wt all.
Upon the .xiiij. daye of the fyrst moneth, ye shall kepe easter. Seuen dayes shall the feaste contynue, wherin there shall no sowre ner leuened breed be eaten.
Upon the same daye shall the prince geue for him selfe Ꟶ all the people of the lande, a bullocke for a synofferyng.
And in the feast of the seuen dayes he shall offre euery daye a bullocke and a ram, that are without blemysh, for a burntoffering vnto the Lorde: and an hegoate daylye for a synoffering.
For the meatofferynges he shall geue euer an ephah to a bullocke, an ephah to a ram, and an hyn of oyle to an ephah.
Upon the fyftenth daye of the seuenth moneth, he shall kepe the seuen dayes holy, one after another, euen as the other seuen dayes: wt the synoffering, burntoffering, meatoffering, and with the oyle.
Thus saith the Lorde God: the dore of the innermer court towarde the east shalbe shut the .vj. worcking dayes: but in the sabboth and in the daye of the newe moone, it shalbe opened.
Then shall the prince come vnder the dore porche, and stande still wtout by the dore check. So the prestes shall offre vp his burnt and healthofferinges. And he shall worshyp at the doreposte, and go hys waye forth agayne: but the dore shall nomore be shut tyll the euenynge.
On the same maner shall the people of the lande also do their worshyp before the Lorde without thys dore vpon the sabbathes and newe moones.
This is nowe the burntofferyng, that the prince shall bryng vnto the Lorde vpon the sabboth: syxe lambes without blemysh, and a ram without blemish,
Ꟶ an ephah for a meatoffering, with the ram. As for the lambes, he maye geue as many meateofferinges to them as he will: and an hyn of oyle to an ephah.
In the daye of the newe moneth, it shalbe a yonge bullocke without blemish, syxe lambes and a ram also without blemish.
With the bullocke he shall geue an ephah, Ꟶ with the ram an ephah also for a meateoffering: but to the lambes, what he maye come by. And euer an hyn of oyle to an ephah.
When the prynce commeth, he shall go vnder the dore porche, and euen there departe forth agayne.
But when the people of the lande come before the Lord in the hye solempne feaste, as many as come in by the north dore to do worshyp, shall go out agayne at the south dore. And they that come in at the south dore, shall go forth agayne at the north dore. There shall none goo out at the dore, where he came in, but shall go ryght forth ouer on the other syde,
and the prynce shall go in and out amonge them.
Upon the solempne and hye feaste dayes this shalbe the meatofferyng. An epha to a bullocke and an ephah to a ram, and to the lambes, as many as he will: but euer an hyn of oyle to an ephah.
Nowe when the prynce bryngeth a burntofferyng or an healthofferinge with a fre wyll vnto the Lorde, the east dore shalbe opened vnto hym, that he maye do with his burnt and healthofferinges, as he doth vpon the sabboth: and when he goth forth, the dore shalbe shut after him agayne.
He shall dayly bryng vnto the Lorde a lambe of a yeare olde without blemysh for a burntoffering: this shall he do euery morning.
And for a meatoffering, he shall geue the syxte parte of an epha, and the thyrd part of an hyn of oyle, to myngle with the cakes, euery morning. Yee, this shalbe a dayly meatofferinge vnto the Lorde: for an euerlasting ordinaunce:
and thus shall the lambe meateoffering and oyle be geuen euery morning, for a daylye burntofferinge.
Moreouer, thus sayeth the Lorde God: If the prynce gyue a gyfte vnto any of hys sonnes, then shall it be hys sonnes herytage perpetuall, that he maye possesse it.
But yf he wyll geue one of hys seruauntes, some of hys heritage, it shalbe hys to the fre yeare, and then to returne agayne vnto the prince: for hys herytage shalbe hys sonnes onely.
The prince also shall take none of the peoples enheritaunce, ner put them from their possession: but to his awne sonnes shall he geue his possession, that my people be not scatered abroade, but that euery man maye haue hys awne.
And he brought me thorowe the intraunce at the syde of the dore to the habitatyon of the sanctuary, that belongeth to the prestes and stode towarde the north, and beholde, there was a place vpon the west syde,
then sayde he vnto me. This is the place where the prestes shall dyght the trespace and synofferynges, and bake meateofferinges, that they nede not beare them into the outwarde court: and so to vnhalowe the people.
So he brought me into the vtmost courte, rounde about all the foure corners. Beholde, in euery corner of the court, there was yet a lytle courte.
Yee in all the foure corners of the court, there was made a lytle court of .xl. cubites longe, Ꟶ .xxx. cubites broade: these foure lytle courtes were of one like measure:
and there went a ridge wall rounde about them all foure, vnder the which there were harthes made rounde about.
Then sayde he vnto me: Thys is the kechin where the ministers of the house shall dyght the slayne offeringes of the people.
After this, he brought me agayne before the dore of the house: and beholde, there gushed oute waters from vnder the postes of the house eastwarde, for the house stode towarde the east, that ran downe vpon the ryght syde of the house, which lyeth to the aulter southwarde.
Then caryed he me out to the north dore, and brought me forth there rounde about by the vtmost dore that turneth eastwarde. Beholde, there came forth the water vpon the right syde:
Now whan the man that had the meterodde in hys hande went vnto the east dore, he measured a .M. cubites, and then he brought me thorowe the water, euen to the ancles:
so he measured yet a thousande, and brought me thorowe the water agayne vnto the knees: yet measured he a thousande, and brought me thorowe the water vnto the loynes.
After this he measured a thousande agayne, then was it soch a ryuer, that I myght not wade thorowe it. The water was so depe, that it was nedeful to haue swimmed, for it might not be waded ouer.
And he sayde vnto me: hast thou sene thys, O thou sonne of man? and with that, he brought me to the ryuer banck agayne.
Nowe when I came there, there stode many trees vpon ether syde of the ryuer bancke.
Then sayde he vnto me: Thys water that floweth oute towarde the east, and runneth downe into the playne felde, commeth into the see: and from the see runneth out: Ꟶ maketh the waters whole.
Yee, all that lyue Ꟶ moue, wherunto thys ryuer commeth, shall recouer. And where thys water commeth, ther shalbe moch fysh. For all that commeth to this water, shalbe lusty and whole.
By this ryuer shall the fysshers stande from Engaddy vnto En Eglaim, Ꟶ there spread out their nettes: for there shalbe great heapes of fysh, lyke as in the mayne see.
As for his claye and pyttes, they shall not be whole, for why? it shalbe occupyed for salt.
By this ryuer vpon both the sides of the shore, there shall growe all maner of frutefull trees, whose leaues shall not fall of, nether shall their frute perysh: but euer be rype at theyr monethes: for theyr water runneth oute of theyr sanctuarye. Hys frute is good to eate, and his leafe profytable for medicyne.
Thus sayth the Lorde God: Let thys be the border, wherin ye shall deuyde the lande vnto the .xii. tribes of Israel, with the lyne.
Parte it indyfferently vnto one as vnto another: of the which lande I swore vnto yor fathers, that it shulde fall to youre enherytaunce.
This is the border of the lande vpon the northsyde, from the mayne see, as men go to zadada:
namely Hemath, Berotha, Sabarim: from the borders of Damascus and Hemath vnto Hazar Tichon, and that lieth vpon the coastes of Haueran.
Thus the borders from the see forth, shalbe Hazar Euan the border of Damascus, the north and the borders of Hemath, that is the north parte.
The east syde shall ye measure from Haueran and Damascus, from Galead and the lande of Israel by Iordane and so forth, from the see coast, that lyeth easte warde: and this is the east parte.
The southsyde is, from Thamar forth to the waters of stryfe vnto Cades the ryuer to the mayne see: and that is the south parte.
The west parte: namely the greate see from the borders therof, tyll a man come vnto Hemath: thys is the west parte.
Thys lande shall ye parte among you, according to the trybes of Israel,
and deuyde it to be an heritage for you, and for the straungers that dwell amonge you, and beget children. For ye shall take them amonge the chyldren of Israel, lyke as though they were of youre awne housholde and contrey, and they shall haue heritage wt you amonge the chyldren of Israel.
Loke in what trybe the straunger dwelleth, in the same trybe shall ye geue hym hys heritage, sayth the Lorde God.
These are the names of the trybes that lye vpon the northsyde, by the waye of Hetlon, tyll thou commest vnto Hemath and Hazar Enam, the borders of Damascus towarde the north besyde Hemath: Dan shall haue hys porcyon from the easte quarter vnto the west.
Upon the borders of Dan from the east syde vnto the west, shall Asser haue his porcion.
Upon the borders of Asser from the east parte vnto the west shall Nephtaly haue his porcion.
Upon the borders of Nephtaly from the east quarter vnto the west, shall Manasses haue his porcyon.
Upon the borders of Manasses from the east side vnto the west, shall Ephraim haue hys porcyon.
Upon the borders of Ephraim from the east parte vnto the west, shall Ruben haue hys porcyon.
Upon the borders of Ruben from the east quarter vnto the west, shall Iuda haue his porcyon.
Upon the borders of Iuda from the east part vnto the west, ye shall set asyde one porcion of .xxv.M. meteroddes longe and brode, like as an another porcyon from the east syde vnto the west, wherin the sanctuary shall stande.
As for the porcyon that ye shall separate, out for the Lorde, it shalbe .xxv.M. longe Ꟶ .x.M. brode.
Which separated holy porcion shall belonge vnto these: namely to the prestes, towarde the north .xxv.M. and towarde the west .x.M. brode, towarde the east .x.M. brode also, Ꟶ towarde the south .xxv.M. longe, wherin the sanctuary of the Lord shall stande.
Yee, this same place shalbe the prestes, that are of the children of Sadoch and haue kept my holy ordinaunce: which went not astraye in the erroure of the children of Israel, lyke as the leuites ar gone astraye:
and thys separated pece that they haue of lande, shalbe the most holy, harde vpon the borders of the leuites.
And next vnto the prestes shall the leuites haue .xxv.M. longe, and .x.M. broade. Thys shalbe on euery syde .xxv.M. longe, and .x.M. brode.
Of this porcyon they shall sell nothing, ner make any permutation therof, lest the chefe of the lande fall vnto other, for it is halowed vnto the Lorde.
The other .v.M. after the bredth that lyeth by the .xxv.M. shalbe comen: it shall belonge to the citye and to the suburbes for habitations, and the citie shall stande in the middest therof.
Let this be the measure: towarde the north parte .v.C. Ꟶ .iiij.M. towarde the south parte .v.C. Ꟶ .iiij.M. towarde the east part, .v.C. Ꟶ .iiij.M. towarde the west parte .v.C. and .iiij.M.
The suburbes harde vpon the citye, shall haue towarde the north .l. and .ij.C. toward the south .l. and .ij.C. towarde the east .l. and .ij.C. towarde the west also .l. and .ij.C.
As for the residue of the length, that lyeth harde vpon the separated holy grounde: namely .x.M. towarde the east, and .x.M. towarde the the west, nexte vnto the holy porcion: it and the increase therof shall serue for their meat: that laboure in the citye.
They that laboure for the wealth of the citye, shall maynteyne thys also, out of what trybe soeuer they be in Israel.
All that is separated of the .xxv.M. longe and .xxv.M. brode on the foure partes, that shall ye put asyde for the separated porcyon of the sanctuary, and for the possession of the citye.
The residue vpon both the sides of the sanctuary and possessyon of the citye, shall belonge to the prynce, before the place of the .xxv.M. vnto the eastende, Ꟶ before the place of the .xxv.M. westwarde vnto the borders of the citye: this shalbe the prynces porcyon. Thys shalbe the holy place, and the house of the sanctuary shall stande in the myddest.
Moreouer, from the leuytes and the cityes possession, that lye in the middest of the princes parte: loke what remayneth betwixt the border of Iuda and the border of Beniamin, it shalbe the prynces.
Nowe of the other trybes. From the east parte vnto the west, shall Beniamin haue his porcyon.
Upon the borders of Beniamin from the eastsyde vnto the west, shall Simeon haue his porcion.
Upon the borders of Symeon from the east parte vnto the west, shall Isakar haue his porcion.
Upon the borders of Isakar from the east syde vnto the west, shall zabulon haue hys porcion.
Upon the borders of zabulon from the east parte vnto the west, shall Gad haue his porcyon.
Upon the borders of Gad southward, the coastes shall reach from Thamar forth vnto the waters of stryfe to Cades, Ꟶ to the floude, euen vnto the mayne see.
Thys is the lande with hys porcyons, which ye shall dystribute vnto the trybes of Israel, sayeth the Lorde God.
Thus wyde shall the citye reach vpon the north parte .v.C. and .iiij.M. measures.
The portes of the citye, shall haue the names of the trybes of Israel. Thre portes of the northsyde: one Ruben, another Iuda, the thyrde Leui.
Upon the eastsyde .v.C. and .iiij.M. measures, with thre portes: the one Ioseph, another Beniamin, the thyrde Dan.
Upon the southsyde .v.C. and .iiij.M. measures, with the thre portes: the one Symeon, another Izachar, the thyrde zabulon.
And vpon the westsyde .v.C. and .iiij. measures, with thre portes also: the one Gad, another Asser, the thyrde Nephtali.
Thus shall it haue .xviij.M. measures rounde about. And from that tyme forth, the name of the citye shalbe, the Lorde is there.
In the thyrde yeare of the rayne of Iehoakim king of Iuda, came Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babilon vnto Ierusalem, Ꟶ beseged it:
and the Lorde delyuered Iehoakim the kynge of Iuda into hys hande, with certayne ornamentes of the house of God, which he caryed awaye vnto the lande of Sennar, to the house of his God, and there he brought them into hys goddes treasury.
And the kynge spake vnto Asphanaz the chefe chamberlayne, that he shulde brynge hym certayne of the chyldren of Israel, that were come of the kynges sede and of prynces,
yonge spryngaldes without eny blemysh, but fayre and welfauored, instruct in all wysedome, comynge and vnderstandynge: which were able to stande in the kinges palace, to reade and to learne for to speake Chaldeysh.
Unto these the kynge appoynted a certayne porcion of his awne meate, and of the wyne, which he drancke hym selfe, so to norysh them thre yeare: that afterwarde they myght stande before the kynge.
Amonge these nowe were certayne of the chyldren of Iuda: namely Daniel, Ananias, Misael and Azarias.
Unto these, the chefe chamberlayne gaue other names, and called Daniel, Balthasar: Ananias, Sidrach, Misael, Misach: and Asarias, Abednago.
But Daniel was at a poynt with hym selfe, that he wolde not be defyled thorowe the kynges meate, ner the wyne which he droncke. And this he desyred of the chefe chamberlayn, lest he shuld defyle hym selfe.
So God gaue Daniel fauoure and grace before the chefe chamberlay
that he sayde vnto him: I am afrayde of my Lorde the kyng, which hath appoynted you your meate and drincke: lest he spye your faces to be worse lykyng then the other springaldes of your age, and so ye shall make me lose my head vnto the kynge.
Then Daniel answered Melassar, whom the chefe chamberlayne had set ouer Daniel, Ananias, Misael and Asarias, and sayd:
O proue but ten dayes with thy seruauntes, and let vs haue potage to eate, Ꟶ water to drincke:
then loke vpon oure faces, Ꟶ theyrs that eate of the kinges meate. And as thou seyst, so deale with thy seruauntes.
So he consented to them in thys matter, Ꟶ proued them .x. dayes.
And after the ten dayes, theyr faces were better lykinge and fatter, then all the yonge springaldes, which dyd eate of the kynges meate.
Thus Melassar toke awaye their meate and wyne, and gaue them potage therfore.
God gaue nowe these foure springaldes connynge and lernyng in all scripture and wysdome: but vnto Daniel specially, he gaue vnderstandynge of all visyons and dreames.
Nowe when the tyme was expyred, that the kynge had appoynted to bryng in these yong spryngaldes vnto hym: the chefe chamberlayne brought them before Nabuchodonosor,
and the kinge communed with them. But among them all were founde none soche as Daniel, Ananias, Misael, and Asarias. Therfore stode they before the kinge
which in all wysdome and matters of vnderstandinge, that he enquered of them, founde them ten tymes better, then all the sothsayers and charmers, that were in all his realme.
And Daniel abode styll, vnto the fyrst yeare of kynge Cyrus.
In the seconde yeare of the raygne of Nabuchodonosor, had Nabuchodonosor a dreame, where thorow his sprete was vexed, and his slepe brake from hym.
Then the kynge commaunded to call to gether all the sothsayers, charmers, witches and caldees, for to shewe the kynge hys dreame. So they came, and stode before the kynge.
And the kynge sayde vnto them: I haue dreamed a dreame, and my sprete was so troubled therwith, that I haue clene forgotten, what I dreamed.
Upon this the Caldees answered the kynge in the Syrians speache: O kynge, God saue thy lyfe for euer. Shewe thy seruauntes the dreame, and we shal shewe the, what it meaneth.
The kynge gaue the Caldees theyr answere and sayde: It is gone fro me. Yf ye wyll not make me vnderstande the dreame with the interpretacyon therof, ye shall dye, and youre houses shalbe prysed.
But yf yee tell me the dreame and the meanynge therof, ye shall haue of me gyftes, rewardes and greate honoure: onely, shewe me the dreame and the signifycacyon of it.
They answered agayne, and sayde: the kynge must shewe his seruauntes the dreame, and so shall we declare what it meaneth.
Then the kynge answered, saying: I perceaue of a trueth, that ye do but prolonge the tyme: for so moche as ye se, that the thynge is gone fro me.
Therfore ye wyll not tell me the dreame, ye shall all haue one iudgement. But ye fayne Ꟶ dissemble wt vayne wordes, which ye speake before me, to put of the tyme. Therfore tell me the dreame, Ꟶ so shall I knowe, yf ye can shewe me, what it meaneth.
Upon this, the Caldees gaue answere before the kynge, and sayde: there is no man vpon earth, that can tell the thinge, which the kynge speaketh of: yee, there is nether kynge, prince ner Lorde, that euer asked soche thynges at a sothsayer, charmer or Caldeer:
for it is a very harde matter, that the kynge requyreth. Nether is there any, that can certifye the kynge therof, excepte the goddes: whose dwellynge is not amonge the creatures.
For the which cause the kynge was wroth with greate indignacion, and commaunded to destroye all the wyse men at Babylon:
Ꟶ the proclamacyon wente forth, and the wyse men were slayne. They sought also to slaye Daniel with his companyons.
Then Daniel enquered of Arioch the kinges stewarde, of the iudgement and sentence, that was gone forth alredy to kyll soch as were wyse at Babylon.
He answered and sayde vnto Arioch beynge then the kynges debyte. Why hath the kynge proclamed so cruell a sentence? So Arioch tolde Daniel the matter.
Upon this, wente Daniel vp, and desyred the kynge, that he myght haue leysoure, to shewe the kynge the interpretacyon,
Ꟶ then came he home agayne Ꟶ shewed the thynge vnto. Ananias, Misael Ꟶ Asarias his companions:
that they shulde beseche the God of heauen for grace in thys secret, that Daniel Ꟶ hys felowes with other soche as were wyse in Babylon, perished not.
Then was the mystery shewed vnto Daniel in a visyon by nyght. And Daniel praysed the God of heauen.
Daniel also cried loude, Ꟶ sayde: O that the name of God myght be praysed for euer and euer, for wysdome and strength are hys awne:
he chaungeth the tymes and ages he putteth downe kynges, he setteth vp kynges: he geueth wysdome vnto the wyse, Ꟶ vnderstandinge to those that vnderstande,
he openeth the depe secretes: he knoweth the thinge that lyeth in darcknesse for the lyght dwelleth with hym.
I thancke the, Ꟶ prayse the (O thou God of my fathers) that thou hast lent me wysdome Ꟶ strength, Ꟶ hast shewed me the thynge, that we desyred of the, for thou hast opened the kynges matter vnto me.
Upon this went Daniel in vnto Arioch, whom the kynge had ordened to destroye the wyse at Babylon he went vnto him, Ꟶ sayde: destroye not soche as are wyse in Babylon, but brynge me in vnto the kyng, and I shall shewe the kynge the interpretacyon.
Then Arioch brought Daniel into the kynge in all the haste, and sayde vnto hym: I haue founde a man amonge the presoners of Iuda, that shall shewe the kynge the interpretacyon.
Then answered the kynge, Ꟶ sayde vnto Daniel, whose name was Balthazar. Art thou he that canst shewe me the dreame, whiche I haue sene, Ꟶ the interpretacyon therof?
Daniel answered the kynge to his face, Ꟶ sayde: As for thys secrete, for the which the kynge maketh inquisicyon: it is nether the wyse, the sorcerer, the charmer ner the deuell coniurer, that can certifye the kynge of it.
Only God in heauen can open secretes, and he it is, that sheweth the kynge Nabuchodonosor, what is for to come in the latter dayes. Thy dreame, Ꟶ that which thou hast sene in thyne head vpon thy bed, is this:
O kynge thou dydest cast in thy mynde, what shulde come herafter. So he that is the opener of mysteries, telleth the, what is for to come.
As for me, this secrete is not shewed me, for eny wysdome that I haue, more then eny other lyuinge: but onely that I myght shewe the kynge the interpretacyon, and that he myght knowe the thoughtes of his awne herte.
Thou kynge sawest, and beholde: there stode before the a greate Image, whose fygure was maruelous greate, and hys visage grymme.
The Image heade was of fyne golde, hys brest Ꟶ armes of siluer, his body and loynes were of copper,
his legges were of yron, hys fete were parte of yron, and parte of earth.
This thou sawest tyll, the tyme that, without eny handes, there was hewen of, a stone which smote the Image vpon the fete, that were both of yron and earth, and brake them to poulder:
then was the yron, the earth, the copper, the syluer and golde broken altogether in peces: and became lyke the chaffe of corne, that the wynde bloweth awaye from the somer floores, that they can no more be founde. But the stone that smote the ymage, became a greate mountayne, which fulfylleth the whole earth:
This is the dreame. And nowe wyll we shewe before the kyng, what it meaneth.
O kynge, thou art a kynge of kynges: For the God of heauen hath geuen the a kyngdome, ryches, strength and maiesty:
Ꟶ hath delyuered the all thynges, that are amonge the children of men: the beastes of the felde, Ꟶ the foules vnder the heauen, and geuen the dominion ouer them all. Thou art that golden head.
After that there shall aryse another kingdome, which shall be lesse then thyne. The thyrde kyngdome shalbe lyke copper, Ꟶ haue dominacyon in all landes.
The fourth kyngdome shall be as stronge as yron. For lyke as yron broseth and breaketh all thynges: Yee, euen as yron beateth euery thynge downe, so shall it beate downe and destroye.
Where as thou sawest the fete and toes, parte of earth and parte of yron: that is a deuyded kyngdome, whyche neuertheles shall haue some of the yron grounde mixte with it for so moche as thou hast sene the yron mixte with the claye.
The toes of the fete that were parte of yron and parte of claye, sygnifyeth: that it shalbe a kyngdome partely stronge and partely weake.
And where as thou sawest yron myxte wyth claye: they shall myngle them selues wyth the sede of symple people, Ꟶ yet not contynue one wyth another, lyke as yron wyll not be souldered wyth a potsherde.
In the dayes of these kynges, shall the God of heauen set vp an euerlasting kyngdome whych shall not perish, Ꟶ his kyngdome shal not be geuen ouer to another people: yee, the same shall breake Ꟶ destroye all these kyngdomes, but it shall endure for euer.
And where as thou sawest, that wythout eny handes there was cut out of the mounte a stone, which brake the yron, the copper, the earth, the syluer and golde in peces: by that hath the greate God shewed the kyng, what wyll come after this. This is a true dreame, and the interpretacyon of it is sure.
Then the kynge Nabuchodonosor fell downe vpon his face, Ꟶ bowed him selfe vnto Daniel, and commaunded that they shuld offre meatofferinges and swete odoures vnto hym.
The kynge answered Daniel, and sayde: yee, of a trueth youre God is a God aboue all goddes, a Lorde aboue all kynges, and an opener of secretes: seynge thou canst discouer this mysterie.
So the kynge made Daniel a greate man, and gaue hym many Ꟶ greate gyftes. He made him ruler of all the countrees of Babylon, and Lord of all the nobles, that were at Babylon.
Nowe Daniel intreated the kynge for Sidrach, Misach and Abednago, so that he made them rulers ouer all the officers in the lande of Babylon: But Daniel hym selfe remayned styll in the courte by the kynge.
Nabuchodonosor the kynge caused a golden Image to be made, whych was .lx. cubytes hye, and syxe cubytes thycke. This he made to be set vp in the felde of Dura in the land of Babylo
Ꟶ sent oute to gather together the dukes, Lordes and nobles, the iudges and officers, the debytes and shreues: with all the rulers of the lande: that they myght come to the dedicacyon of the Image which Nabuchodonosor the kynge had set vp.
So the dukes, Lordes and nobles, the iudges and offycers, debytes and shreues with all the rulers of the lande gathered them together, and came vnto the dedycatynge of the Image, that Nabuchodonosor the kynge had set vp. Nowe when they stode before the Image, which Nabuchodonosor set vp,
the bedel cried out with all his might: O ye people, kynreddes and tunges, to you be it sayde:
that when ye heare the noyse of the trompettes, which shalbe blowen, with the harpes, shawmes, Psalteries, Symphonies and all maner of Musick: ye fall downe and worshippe the golden Image, that Nabuchodonosor the kynge hath set vp.
Whoso then falleth not downe Ꟶ boweth him selfe, shall euen the same houre be cast into an hote burnynge ouen.
Therfore, when all the folcke herde the noyse of the trompettes that were blowen, with the harpes, shawmes, Psalteries, Symphonies and all kynde of Melody, then all the people, kynreddes and nacyons fell downe, and bowed them selues vnto the golden Image, that Nabuchodonosor the kynge had set vp.
Now were there certayne men of the Caldees, that wente euen then and accused the Iewes,
and sayde vnto the kynge Nabuchodonosor: O kyng, God saue thy lyfe for euer,
Thou beynge kynge hast geuen a commaundement, that all men when they heare the noyse of the trompettes, harpes, shawmes, psalteries, symphonies and all the other melodies: shall fall downe and bowe them selues towarde the golden Image:
whoso then fell not downe Ꟶ worshypped not that, he shulde be cast into an hote burnynge ouen.
Nowe are there certayne Iewes, whom thou hast set ouer the offyces of the lande of Babylon: namely, Sydrach: Mysach and Abednago. These men (O kyng) regarde not thy commaundment, yee, they wyll not serue thy goddes, ner bowe them selues to the golden Image, that thou hast set vp.
Then Nabuchodonosor in a cruell wrath and displeasure, commaunded, that Sidrach Misach and Abednago shulde be brought vnto hym. So these men were brought before the kynge.
Then Nabuchodonosor spake vnto them, Ꟶ sayde: what? O Sidrach Misach and Abednago, wyll not ye serue my goddes? nor bowe youre selues to the golden Image, that I haue set vp.
Well, be redy herafter, when ye heare the noyse of the trompettes blowe with the harpes, shawmes, psalteries, symphonyes and all the other melodyes: that ye fall downe, and worshyppe the Image which I haue made. But yf ye worshyppe it not, ye shall be cast immediatly into an hote burnyng ouen. Let se, what God is there, that maye delyuer you oute of my handes?
Sydrach, Misach and Abednago answered the kynge, Ꟶ sayde: O Nabuchodonosor, we ought not to consente vnto the in this matter, for why?
oure God whom we serue, is able to kepe vs from the hote burnyng ouen (O kynge) and can ryght well delyuer vs out of thy handes.
And though he wyll not, yet shalt thou knowe (O kyng) that we will not serue thy goddes, ner do reuerence to the Image, which thou hast set vp.
Then was Nabuchodonosor full of indignacyon, so that the countenaunce of his face chaunged vpon Sidrach, Misach, and Abednago. Therfore he charged and commaunded, that the ouen shuld be made seuen tymes hotter, then it was wonte to be:
Ꟶ spake vnto the strongest worthies that were in his hoste, for to bynde Sidrach, Misach and Abednago, and to cast them into the hote burnynge ouen.
So these men were bounde in their cotes hosen, shues wyth their other garmentes, Ꟶ cast into the hote burnynge ouen:
for the kynges commaundement was so strayte, and the ouen was excedynge hote. As for the men that put in Sidrach, Misach Ꟶ Abednago, the flamme of the fyre destroyed them.
And these thre men Sidrach, Misach Ꟶ Abednago fell downe in the hote burnynge ouen, beynge faste bounde.
Then Nabuchodonosor the kyng marueled and stode vp in all hast: he spake vnto hys councell and sayde: dyd not ye cast these thre men bounde into the fyre? They answered, and sayde vnto the king: Yee, O kynge.
He answered, and sayde: lo, for all that, yet do I se foure men going lowse in the myddest of the fyer, and nothynge corrupte: and the fourth is lyke the sonne of God to loke vpon.
Upon thys went Nabuchodonosor vnto the mouth of the hote burning ouen: he spake also, and sayde: O Sidrach, Misach and Abednago, ye seruauntes of the hye God, go forth, Ꟶ come hyther. And so Sidrach, Misach Ꟶ Abednago went out of the fier.
Then the dukes, lordes Ꟶ nobles, Ꟶ the kinges councell came together to se these men, vpon whom the fyer had no maner of power in theyr bodies. In somoch that the very here of their heed was not burnt, Ꟶ theyr clothes vnchaunged: yee, there was no smell of fier felt vpon them.
Then spake Nabuchodonosor, and sayde, Blessed be the God of Sidrach, Misach and Abednago: which hath sent his angell, and defended his seruauntes, that put theyr trust in him: that haue altered the kinges commaundement: and ieoperde their bodies ther vpon: rather then they wolde serue or worshippe eny other God, excepte their awne God onely.
Therfore I wyll and commaunde, that all people, kynredes and tunges, which speake any blasphemy agaynst the God of Sydrach, Misach, and Abednago, shall dye, and their houses shalbe prysed: Because, there is no God that maye saue, as thys.
So the kynge promoted Sidrach, Misach, Ꟶ Abdenego, in the lande of Babylon.
Nabuchodonosor kynge vnto all people, kynreddes and tunges that dwell vpon the whole earth: peace be multiplied among you.
I thought it good to shewe the tokens and maruelous worckes, that the hye God hath wrought vpon me.
O, howe great are his tokens, and howe myghtie are his wonders? His kyngdome is an euerlasting kyngdome, and his power lasteth for euer and euer.
I Nabuchodonosor beyng at rest in myne house and florishynge in my palace,
sawe a dreame, which made me afrayed: Ꟶ the thoughtes that I had vpon my bedd, with the visyons of myne head, troubled me.
Then sent I out a commission, that all they which were of wysdome at Babilon shulde be brought before me, to tell me the interpretacyon of the dreame.
So there came the sothsayers, charmers, Caldees and coniurers of deuels: to whom I tolde the dreame, but what it betokened, they coulde not shewe me:
tyll at the last, there came one Daniel (other wyse called Balthazar, according to the name of my God) which hath the sprete of the holy goddes in him, to whom I tolde the dreame, saying:
O Balthazar, thou prince of Sothesayers: For so moche as I knowe, that thou hast the sprete of the holy Goddes and no secrete is hyd from the. tell me therfore, what the vysyon of my dreame (that I haue sene) maye sygnifie.
I sawe a visyon in my heade vpon my bed: and beholde, there stode a tre vpon the grounde,
which was very hye, greate and myghtye: the heyght reached vnto the heauen, and the bredth extended to all the endes of the earth:
hys leaues were fayre, he had very moche frute, so that euery man had ynough to eate therin. The beastes of the felde had shadowes vnder it, and the foules of the ayre dwelt in the bowes therof. Shortly, all creatures fed of it.
I sawe in my head a visyon vpon my bed; Ꟶ behold, a watcher Ꟶ the holy one came downe from heauen,
Ꟶ cryed myghtely, saying. Hewe downe the tree, breake of his braunches, shake of his leaues, and scatre his frute abrode: that all the beastes maye get them awaye from vnder him, and the foules from his braunches.
Neuertheles, leaue the grounde of hys rote styll in the earth, Ꟶ bynde him vpon the playne felde, with cheynes of yron and stele. With the dewe of heauen shall he be wet, Ꟶ he shall haue hys parte in the herbes of the grounde with other wylde beastes.
That mans herte of his shall be taken from hym, and a beastes herte shall be geuen hym, tyll seuen yeares be come and gone vpon him.
This erande of the watcher, is a commaundment grounded and sought out in the councell of him, that is most holy: to learne men for to vnderstande, that the hyest hath power ouer the kyngdomes of men, Ꟶ geueth them, to whom it lyketh him, and bringeth the very out castes of men ouer them.
Thys is the dreame, that I kyng Nabuchodonosor haue sene. Therfore O Balthazar, tell thou me what it signifyeth: for so moch as all the wyse men of my kyngdome are not able to shewe me, what it meaneth. But thou canst do it, for the sprete of the holy Goddes is in the.
Then Daniel (whose name was Balthazar) helde hys peace by the space of an houre and hys thoughtes troubled hym. So the kynge spake Ꟶ sayde: O Balthazar, lett nether the dreame ner the interpretacyon therof feare the. Balthazar answered, saing: O my Lorde, this dreame happen to thyne enemies, and the interpretacyon to thyne aduersaries.
As for the tree that thou sawest which was so great Ꟶ myghtye, whose heygth reached vnto the heauen, and hys bredth into all the world:
whose leaues were fayre, and the frute moch: vnder the which the beastes of the felde had theyr habitacyon and vpon whose braunches the foules of the ayre dyd syt.
Euen thou (O kynge) art the tre, greate and stronge. Thy greatnes increaceth, Ꟶ reacheth vnto the heauen, so doth thy power to the endes of the earth.
But where as the kynge sawe a watcher euen an holy angell, that came downe from heauen, and sayde: hewe downe the tree, and destroye it: yet leaue the ground of the rote in the earth: and bynde hym vpon the playne felde with cheynes of yron Ꟶ stele: He shall be wet with the dewe of heauen, and hys parte shall be with the beastes of the felde, tyll seuen yeares be come and gone vpon hym:
Thys (O kynge) is the interpretacyon, yee, it is the very deuyce of hym, that is hyest of all and it toucheth my Lorde the kynge.
Thou shalt be cast out from men, and thy dwellinge shalbe with the beastes of the felde: with grasse shalt thou be fed lyke an oxe. Thou must be wet with the dewe of the heauen: yee, seuen yeares shall come, Ꟶ go vpon the, tyll thou knowe, that the hyest hath power vpon the kyngdomes of men, Ꟶ geueth them to whom he lyst.
Moreouer, where as it was sayde, that the rote of the tree shulde be left styll in the grounde: it betokeneth, that thy kyngdome shal remayne whole vnto the, after thou hast lerned to knowe, that the power commeth from heauen.
Wherfore, O kynge, be content with my councell, that thou mayest redeme thy synnes with almoyse and thyne offences with mercy to poore people: for thys shall be an helynge of thyne erroure.
All these thynges touche the, kynge Nabuchodonosor.
So after .xii. monethes, the kyng walked vp and downe in the palace of the kingdome of Babylon,
and sayde. Thys is the greate cyte of Babylon, which I my selfe (with my power and strength) haue made a kynges courte, for the honour of my magestye.
While these wordes were yet in the kynges mouth there fell a voyce from heauen, sayinge: O kynge Nabuchodonosor, to the be it spoken: Thy kyngdome shall departe from the,
thou shalt be cast out of mens company: thy dwellynge shalbe with the beastes of the felde, so that thou shalt eate grasse lyke as an oxe, tyll seuen yeares become and gone ouer the. euen vntyll thou knowest, that the hyest hath power vpon the kyngdomes of men, Ꟶ that he may geue them, vnto whom it pleaseth him.
The very same houre was thys matter fulfylled vpon Nabuchodonosor: so that he was cast out of mens company, and dyd eate grasse lyke an oxe. Hys body was wet with the dewe of heauen, tyll hys heares were as great as Aegles fethers, and hys nayles lyke byrdes clawes.
When thys tyme was past, I Nabuchodonosor lyfte vp myne eyes vnto heauen, and myne vnderstandinge was restored vnto me agayne. Then gaue I thanckes vnto the hyghest. I magnifyed and praysed him that lyueth for euermore, whose power endureth alwaye, and hys kyngdome from one generacyon to another:
in comparyson of whom all they that dwell vpon the earth, are to be reputed as nothynge. He handleth according to his will, among the powers of heauen Ꟶ amonge the inhabitours of the earth: and there is none that maye resyste his hande, or saye: what doest thou?
At the same tyme was myne vnderstandinge geuen me agayne, and I was restored to the honoure of my kingdome, to my dignite, and to myne awne shape agayne. My great estates and Princes sought vnto me, and I was set in my kyngdome agayne, so that I had yet greater worshyppe.
Then dyd I Nabuchodonosor, loue, magnifye and prayse the kynge of heauen: for all his worckes are true, and hys wayes ryght. As for those that go on proudly, he is able to brynge them downe.
Kynge Balthazar made a great bancket to his thousand Lordes: with all these thousande he made great chere,
and when he was droncken with wyne commaunded to bring hym the golden and syluer vessels which hys father Nabuchodonosor had taken oute of the temple at Ierusalem: that the kynge Ꟶ his Lordes with his quene and concubynes myght drincke therout.
So they brought the golden vessell, that was taken oute of the temple of the Lordes house at Ierusalem. Then the kynge and his Lordes with his quene and concubines droncke out of them.
They droncke wyne, and praysed theyr Idoles of golde, syluer, copper yron, wodde and stone.
In the very same houre there appeared fyngers, as it had bene of a mans hande writynge, ryght ouer agaynst the candelstycke vpon the playne wall in the kynges palace: Ꟶ the kynge sawe the palme of the hande that wrote.
Then chaunged the kynge his countenaunce, and his thoughtes troubled hym, so that the ioyntes of his body shoke, and hys knees smote one agaynst the other.
Wherfore the kinge cried myghtely, that they shulde brynge hym the charmers. Caldees and coniurers of deuels. The kynge spake also to the wyse men of Babylon, and sayde: Who so can rede this writing, Ꟶ shewe me the playne meaning therof: shalbe clothed with purple, haue a cheyne of golde aboute his necke, and rule the thyrde part of my kyngdome.
Upon this, came all the kinges wyse men: but they coulde nether reade the writynge, ner shewe the kinge what it signifyed.
Then was the kynge sore afrayed, in so moch, that hys coloure chaunged, and his Lordes were sore vexed.
So by reason of this matter, that had happened to the kynge Ꟶ his Lordes, the quene went vp herselfe into the bancket house, and spake vnto the kinge, sayinge: O kyng, God saue thy lyfe for euer. Let not the thoughtes trouble the, and let not thy countenaunce be chaunged.
For why? there is a man in thy kyngdome, that hath the sprete of the holy goddes within him, as it was sene in thy fathers dayes. He hath vnderstandynge and wysdome lyke the goddes. Ye the kynge Nabuchodonosor thy father made this man chefe of the sothsayers, charmers, Caldees and readers of destines:
because that soche an aboundaunt sprete, knowledge Ꟶ wysdome (to expounde dreames, to open secretes, and to declare harde dowtes) was founde in him: yee, euen in Daniel, whom the kyng named Balthasar. Let this same Daniel be sente for, and he shall tell, what it meaneth.
Then was Daniel brought before the kynge. So the kinge spake vnto Daniel, and sayde. Art thou that Daniel, one of the presoners of Iuda, whom my father the kynge brought out of Iewry?
I haue heard speake of the, that thou hast the sprete of the holy goddes, experience and vnderstandinge, and that there hath bene greate wysdome founde in the.
Nowe haue there bene brought me, wise Ꟶ conninge charmers, to reade thys wryting and to shewe me the meanynge therof. But they coulde not tell me, what thys matter signifyed
Then hearde I saye, that thou canst expounde darcke thynges, and declare harde doutes. Well than, yf thou canst reade thys wrytynge, Ꟶ shewe me the meanynge therof thou shalt be clothed wt purple, haue a cheyne of golde aboute thy necke, and rule the thyrd parte of my kyngdome.
Daniel answered, Ꟶ sayde before the kyng: As for thy rewardes, kepe them to thy selfe, or geue thy ryche gyftes to another: yet not the lesse, I will rede the wryting vnto the kyng, Ꟶ shewe him the interpretacyon therof
O kynge heare. God the hyest gaue vnto Nabuchodonosor thy father, the dignitie of a kyng with worshyppe Ꟶ honour,
so that all people, kinreddes Ꟶ tunges stode in awe and feare of hym, by reason of the hye estate, that he had lent hym. For why, he slewe whom he wolde: he smote, whom it pleased him. Agayne: whom he wolde, he set vp: and whom he lyst, he put downe.
But because his hert was so proude, and his stomack set so fast vnto wylfulnesse: he was deposed from his kyngly trone, Ꟶ hys magesty was taken from hym.
He was shut out from amonge men, hys herte was lyke a beastes herte, and hys dwellynge was with the wylde asses: he was fayne to eate grasse lyke an oxe, Ꟶ hys body was wet with the dewe of the heauen, tyll he knewe, that the hyest had power vpon the kyngdomes of men and setteth ouer them, whom he lyst.
And thou his sonne (O Balthazar) for all this, hast not submytted thyne herte, though thou knewest all these thinges:
but hast magnifyed thy selfe aboue the Lorde of heauen, so that the vessels of hys house were brought before the: that thou, and thy Lordes? with thy quene and concubynes, myght dryncke wyne therout. And hast praysed the Idoles of syluer and gold, copper and yron, of wodd and stone. As for the God in whose hande consysteth thy breth and all thy wayes: thou hast not loued hym.
Therfore is the palme of thys hande sent hyther from hym, to token vp this wryting.
And this is the scripture, that is written vp: Mane, Thetel, Phares.
Nowe the interpretacion of the thynge is this: Mane, God hath nombred the kyngdome, and brought it to an ende:
Thetel, thou art weyed in the balaunce, and art founde to lyght:
Phares, thy kyngdome it delt in partes, and geuen to the Medes and Perses.
Then commaunded Balthazar, to cloth Daniel wyth purple, to hange a cheyne of golde aboute hys necke, and to make a proclamacyon concernynge hym: that he shulde be the ruler of the thyrde parte of hys kyngdome.
The very same night was Balthazar the kynge of the Caldees slayne,
and Darius out of Medea toke in the kyngdome, beynge .lxii. yeare of age.
It pleased Darius to set ouer his kingdome an .C. and .xx. Lordes, whyche shulde be in all hys kyngdome about.
Aboue these he set thre Prynces (of whom Daniel was one) that the Lordes myght geue accomptes vnto them, and the kynge to be vndiseased.
But Daniel exceaded all these Prynces and Lordes, for the sprete of God was plenteous in him: so that the kynge was mynded to set hym ouer the whole realme.
Wherfore the Princes and Lordes sought, to pycke out in Daniel some quarell agaynst the kyngdome: yet coulde they fynde none occasyon ner faute vpon hym. For whyche was so faythfull, that there was no blame ner dishonesty founde in hym.
Then sayde these men: we wyll get no quarell agaynst thys Daniel, excepte it be in the lawe of hys God.
Upon this, wente the prynces Ꟶ Lordes together vnto the kinge, Ꟶ sayde thus vnto hym: kynge Darius, God saue thy lyfe for euer.
All the greate estates of the realme: as the Prynces, Dukes, Senatours and Iudges, are determed to put oute a commaundement of the kynge, Ꟶ to make a sure statute: namely, that whoso desyreth any peticyon, ether of any God or man (within this .xxx. dayes) excepte it be onely of the, O kynge: the same person may be cast into the Lyons denne.
Wherfore, O kyng, confyrme thou this statute, and make a wrytinge: that the thing which the Medes and Perses haue ordeyned be not altered ner broken.
So Darius made the wrytinge, and confyrmed it.
Nowe when Daniel vnderstode that the wrytinge was made, he wente into hys house: and the windowes of his wall towarde Ierusalem stode open. There kneled he downe vpon hys knees, thre tymes a daye: there he made hys peticyon, and praysed hys God, lyke as hys maner was to do afore tyme.
Then these men made searche, and founde Daniel makynge hys peticyon, Ꟶ prayinge vnto hys God.
So they came to the kynge, Ꟶ spake before him concernynge his commaundement, sayinge: O kyng, hast thou not subscribed the statute, that within .xxx. dayes who so requyreth his peticion of any God or man but onely of thy selfe, O kynge: he shalbe cast into the denne of the Lyons? The kynge answered, and sayde: yee, it is true. It must be as a lawe of the Medes Ꟶ Perses, that maye not be broken.
Then answered they, and sayde vnto the kynge: Daniel one of the presoners of Iuda O kyng, regardeth nether the, ner thy statute, that thou hast made, but maketh his peticyon thre tymes a daye.
When the kynge hearde these wordes, he was sore greued, and wolde haue excused Daniel, to delyuer hym, and put of the matter, vnto the Sunne went downe, to the intent that he myght saue hym:
These men perceauyng the kynges mynde, sayde vnto him: knowe this (O kynge) that the lawe of the Medes and Perses is, that the commaundement Ꟶ statute which the kynge maketh, maye not be altered.
Then the king bad them brynge Daniel, and they cast hym into the Lyons denne. The kynge also spake vnto Daniel, and sayde: thy God, whom thou alwaye seruest, euen he shall defende the.
And there was brought a stone, and layed vpon the hole of the denne: this the kyng sealed with his awne rynge, and with the sygnet of hys prynces: that the kynges commaundement concernynge Daniel, shulde not be broken.
So the kynge wente into hys palace, and eate no meate that nyght nether was there any mynstrelsy brought in before hym, nether coulde he take any slepe.
But by tymes in the mornynge at the breake of the daye, the kynge arose, and wente in all haste vnto the denne of the Lyons.
Nowe as he came nye vnto the denne, he cried with a piteous voyce vnto Daniel: yee, the kynge spake, and sayde vnto Daniel: O Daniel, thou seruaunt of the lyuinge God, is not thy God (whom thou alwaye seruest) able to delyuer the from the lyons?
Daniel sayde vnto the kinge. O kyng, God saue thy lyfe for euer.
My God hath sent his angell which hath shut the lyons mouthes, so that they might not hurte me. For why? mine vngyltynesse is founde out before hym. And as for the, O kynge, I neuer offended the.
Then was the kynge exceadinge glad, Ꟶ commaunded to take Daniel out of the denne, So Daniel was brought out of the denne, and no maner of hurte was founde vpon him. For he put hys trust in hys God.
And as for those men which had accused Daniel, the kyng, commaunded to brynge them, and to cast them in the Lyons denne: them, theyr chyldren and theyr wyues. So the Lyons had the mastry of them, and brake all theyr bones asonder, or euer they came at the grounde.
After thys, wrote kynge Darius vnto all people, kynreddes, and tunges, that dwelt in all landes: peace be multiplyed with you.
My commaundement is, in all my dominyon and kyngdome, that men feare and stande in awe of Daniels God. For he is the lyuynge God, which abydeth euer: hys kyngdome shall not fayle, and his power is euerlastinge.
It is he that delyuereth, and saueth: he doth wonders and maruelous worckes, in heauen and in earth: he hath preserued Daniel from the power of the Lyons.
This Daniel prospered in the reygne of Darius and Cyrus of Persia.
In the fyrst yeare of Balthazar kyng of Babylon; sawe Daniel a dreame, and a visyon was in hys heade vpon hys bedde. Which dreame he wrote, and the summe of the matter is thys.
Daniel spake and sayde: I sawe in my visyon by nyght, and beholde: the foure wyndes of the heauen stroue vpon the see,
and foure greate beastes came vp from the see, one vnlyke another.
The fyrst was as a lyon, and yet had he Aegles wynges. I sawe, that his wynges were plucte from hym, and he taken awaye from the earth: that he stode vpon hys fete as a man, and that there was geuen him a mans herte.
Beholde, the seconde beast was lyke a beare, Ꟶ stode vpon the one syde. Among his teeth in his mouth he had .iii. greate longe teeth, Ꟶ it was sayde vnto him. Aryse, eate vp, moch flesh.
Then I loked, and beholde, there was another lyke vnto a leoparde, this had wynges as a foule, euen foure vpon the backe. Thys beast had foure heades, and there was power geuen hym.
After this I sawe in a visyon by nyght, and beholde, the fourth beast was grymme and horrible, and maruelous stronge. It had great yron teeth, it deuoured and destroyed, and stamped the resydue vnder hys fete. It was farre vnlyke the other beastes that were before it: for it had ten hornes, wherof I toke good hede.
And beholde, there came vp amonge them, another lytell horne, before whom there were thre of the fyrst hornes pluckte awaye. Beholde, this horne had eyes lyke a man, and a mouth speakynge presumptuous thynges.
I loked tyll the seates were prepared, and tyll that olde aged sat him downe. His clothinge was as whyte as snowe, and the hearres of hys head lyke the pure woll. Hys trone was lyke the fyrye flame, and hys wheles as the burning fyre.
There drew forth a fyrie streame, and went out from hym. A thousande tymes a thousande serued him .x.M. tymes ten thousande stode before hym. The iudgement was set, and the bokes opened.
Then toke I hede there vnto, because of the voyce of the proude wordes, which the horne spake I behelde, tyll the beaste was slayne, and his body destroyed, geuen ouer to be brent in the fyre.
As for the power of the other beastes also it was taken awaye, but theyr lyues were prolonged for a tyme and season.
I sawe in a visyon by nyght, and beholde, there came one in the cloudes of heauen lyke the sonne of a man, which wente vnto the olde aged, before whom they brought him.
Then gaue he him power Ꟶ dignite regall, that all people, trybes and tunges shulde serue him. His power is an euerlastinge power, which shall neuer be put downe: Ꟶ his kyngdome endureth uncorrupte.
My herte was vexed, Ꟶ I Daniel had a troubled sprete within me. Ꟶ the visyons of my head made me afrayed:
tyll I gat me vnto one of them that stode by, to knowe the trueth, concernynge all these thinges. So he tolde me, and made me vnderstande the interpretacyon of the thynges.
These foure great beastes, are foure kynges which shall aryse out of the earth.
These shall take in the kyngdome of the saynctes of the most hyest, and possesse it styll more Ꟶ more for a longe season.
After thys I requyred diligently to knowe the trueth, concerning the fourth beast, which was so farre vnlyke the other beastes, and so horrible: whose teeth were of yron, and his nayles of brasse: which deuoured and destroyed and stamped the resydue vnder his fete.
I desyred, also to knowe the trueth, as touchynge the ten hornes that he had vpon his heade, and thys other which came vp afterwarde, before whose face there fell downe thre, which horne had eyes and a mouth that spake presumptuous thinges, and loked with a grymmer visage then hys felowes.
I behelde, and the same horne made battayll agaynst the saynctes, yee and gat the victory of them,
vntyll the tyme that the olde aged came, that the iudgement was geuen to the chefest saintes: and tyll the tyme that the sayntes had the kyngdome in possessyon.
He gaue me thys answere. That fourth beaste shalbe the fourth kyngdome vpon earth: it shalbe more then all other kyngdomes, it shall deuoure, treade downe, and destroye all other landes.
The ten hornes, are ten kynges, that shall aryse out of the kyngdome, after whom there shall stande vp another, which shalbe greater then the fyrst.
He shall subdue thre kynges, Ꟶ shall speake wordes agaynst the hyest of all: he shall destroye the sayntes of the most hyest, and thyncke, that he maye chaunge tymes and lawes. They shalbe geuen vnder hys power, vntyll a tyme, two tymes, Ꟶ halfe a tyme.
But the iudgement shalbe kepte, so that hys power shalbe taken from him, for he shall be destroyed, and peryssh at the last.
As for the kyngdome, power and all might that is vnder the heauen: it shalbe geuen to the holy people of the moost hyest, whose kyngdome is euerlastynge: yee, all powers shall serue and obeye hym.
Thus farre extende the wordes. Neuertheles, I Daniel was so vexed in my thoughtes, that my countenaunce chaunged but the wordes I kepte styll in my herte.
In the thyrde yeare of the raygne of kynge Balthazar, there appeared a visyon vnto me Daniel, after that I had sene the fyrst.
I sawe in a visyon (and when I sawe it, I was at Susis in the chefe cyte, which lyeth in the lande of Elam) and in the vision, me thought I was by the ryuer of Ulai.
Then I loked vp, Ꟶ sawe: Ꟶ beholde there stode before the ryuer, a ramme, which had two hornes: and these two hornes were hye, but one was hyer then another, Ꟶ the hyest came vp behinde.
I sawe that this ramme pushed with his hornes, agaynst the west, agaynst the north, Ꟶ agaynst the south: so that no beastes might stande before him, ner defende them from his power: but he dyd as hym lysted, and waxed greatly.
I toke hede vnto thys, Ꟶ then came there an he goate from the west ouer the whole earth, and touched not the grounde. Thys goate had a maruelous wrethen horne betwixte his eyes,
Ꟶ came vnto the ramme, that had the two hornes (whom I had sene afore by the ryuer syde) and ranne fearcely vpon him with his might.
I sawe him drawe nye vnto the ramme, beinge very fearce vpon hym: yee, he gaue hym soche a stroke, that he brake his two hornes. Nether had the ramme so moch strength as to stande before him: but he cast hym downe, troade hym vnder hys fete: Ꟶ no man was able to delyuer the ramme out of hys power.
The goate waxed exceadinge greate, and when he was at the strongest, his great, horne was broken also. Then grewe there other foure soch lyke in the steade, toward the .iiii. wyndes of the heauen.
Yee, out of one of the leest of these hornes, there came vp yet another horne, which waxed maruelous greate: towarde the south, towarde the east, and towarde the fayre pleasaunt lande.
It grewe vp to the hoost of heauen, wherof it dyd cast some downe to the grounde, and of the starres also, and trode them vnder fete.
Yee, it grewe vp vnto the prynce of the hoost, from whom the daylye offerynge was taken, and the place of hys Sanctuary casten downe.
And a certayne season was geuen vnto it, agaynst the daylye offeringe (because of wyckednesse) that it myght cast downe the veryte to the grounde, and so to prospere in all thynges, that it wente aboute.
Upon this I hearde one of the sainctes speakynge, which saynte sayde vnto one that asked this question. Howe longe shall this visyon of the daylye sacrifyce and of the wastinge abhominacyon endure: that the Sanctuary and the power shall so be troden vnder fote?
And he answered him: Unto the euenynge Ꟶ the mornynge, euen two thousande and thre hundreth dayes: then shall the Sanctuary be clensed agayne.
Nowe when I Daniel had sene this vision: and sought for the vnderstandynge of it: beholde, there stode before me a thinge like vnto a man.
And I herde a mans voyce in the riuer of Ulay, which cryed, and sayd: O Gabriel, make this man vnderstande the visyon.
So he came, and stode by me. But I was afrayed at hys commynge, and fell downe vpon my face. Then sayde he vnto me, O thou sonne of man, marcke well, for in the last tyme shall this vision be fulfylled.
Now as he was speakynge vnto me, I waxed faynte, so that I suncke downe to the grounde. But he toke holde vpon me, and sett me vp agayne,
sayinge: Beholde, I will shewe the, what shall happen in the last wrath: for in the tyme appoynted it shalbe fulfylled.
The ramme which thou sawest with the two hornes, is the kynge of the Medes and Perses:
but the goate is the kynge of Greke lande: the greate horne that stode betwyxte hys eyes, that is the principall kynge.
But where as it brake, and foure other rose vp in the steade: it signifyeth, that out of this people shall stande vp foure kyngdomes, but not so myghtye as it.
After these kyngdomes (whyle vngodlynesse is a growinge) there shall aryse a kyng of an vnshamefast face, whych shalbe wyse in darcke speakynges.
He shalbe myghtye and stronge, but not in his awne strength. He shall destroye aboue measure, and all that he goeth aboute shall prospere: he shall slaye the stronge and holy people.
And thorowe hys craftynes, falshed shall prospere in hys hande, hys herte shalbe proude, and many one shall he put to death in his welthynesse. He shall stande vp agaynst the Prynce of Prynces, but he shalbe destroyed wythout hande.
And thys visyon that is shewed vnto the, is as sure as the euenynge and the mornynge. Therfore wryte thou vp thys syght, for it wylbe longe or it come to passe.
Upon this was I daniel very faynte, so that I laye sycke certayne dayes: but when I rose vp, I wente aboute the kynges busynesse, and marueled at the visyon, neuerthelesse no man knewe of it.
In the fyrst yeare of Darius the sonne of Ahasuerus, whych was of the sede of the Medes, and was made kynge ouer the realme of the Caldees:
yee, euen in the fyrst yeare of his raygne, I Daniel desyred to knowe the yearly nombre out of the bokes, wherof the Lorde spake vnto Ieremy the Prophete: that Ierusalem shulde lye waste .lxx. yeares:
and I turned me vnto God the Lorde, for to praye and make myne intercession, with fastynge, sacke clothe Ꟶ ashes,
I prayed before the Lord my God, and knowledged, sayinge. O Lorde, thou greate and fearfull God, thou that kepest couenaunt and mercy wyth them, which loue the, and do thy commaundementes.
We haue synned, we haue offended, we haue bene disobedient and gone back: yee, we haue departed from all thy preceptes and iudgementes.
We wolde neuer folowe thy seruauntes the Prophetes that spake in thy name to oure kynges and princes, to oure forefathers, and to all the people of the lande.
O Lord, righteousnesse belongeth vnto the, vnto us pertayneth nothynge but open shame: as it is come to passe thys daye vnto euery man of Iuda, and to them that dwell at Ierusalem. Yee, vnto all Israel, whether they be farre or nye: thorowe out all landes: wherin thou hast strowed them, because of the offences, that they had done agaynst the.
Yee, O Lorde, vnto vs, to oure kynges Ꟶ princes, to oure forefathers: euen to vs all, that haue offended the belongeth open shame.
But vnto the, O Lorde oure God, pertayneth mercy and forgeuenesse. As for vs, we are gone backe from hym,
and haue not obeyed the voyce of the Lorde oure God, to walke in hys lawes, whych he layed before vs by hys seruauntes the Prophetes:
yee all Israel haue transgressed, and gone backe from thy lawe, so that they haue not herckened vnto thy voyce. Wherfore, the curse Ꟶ othe that is written in the lawe of Moses the seruaunt of God (agaynst whom we haue offended) is poured vpon vs.
And he hath perfourmed his wordes, whych he spake agaynst vs, Ꟶ agaynst oure iudges that iudged vs: to brynge vpon vs soch a greate plage, as neuer was vnder heauen, lyke as it is nowe come to passe in Ierusalem.
Yee, all this plage, as it is wrytten in the lawe of Moses, is come vpon vs. Yet made we not oure prayer before the Lorde oure God, that we myght turne agayne from oure wickednesse, Ꟶ to be learned in thy verite.
Therfore hath the Lorde made haste, to brynge this plage vpon vs, for the Lorde our God is ryghteous, in all his workes whych he doth: for why? We wolde not herken vnto hys voyce.
And nowe, O Lorde oure God thou that with a myghtie hande hast brought thy people out of Egypte, to get thy selfe a name which remayneth this daye: we haue synned
O Lorde, Ꟶ done wyckedly agaynst all thy ryghteousnes: yet let thy wrothfull displeasure be turned awaye (I beseche the) from thy cyte Ierusalem thy holy hyll. And why? for oure synnes sake, and for the wykednesse of oure forefathers is Ierusalem Ꟶ thy people abhorred, of all them that are aboute vs:
Now therfore, O our God, heare the prayer of thy seruaunt, and hys intercessyon. O let thy face shyne ouer thy Sanctuary, that lyeth waste:
for the Lordes sake. O my God, enclyne thyne eare, and herken (at the leest for thyne awne sake) open thyne eyes: beholde howe we be desolated, yee, and the cytie also, whych is called after thy name: for we do not cast oure prayers before the in oure awne ryghteousnes, no: but onely in thy great mercyes:
O Lorde, heare: O forgeue Lorde, O Lorde consydre, tarye not ouer longe: but for thyne awne sake do it. O my God: for thy cyte and thy people is called after thy name.
As I was yet speakynge at my prayers, knowledgynge myne awne synnes, and the synnes of my people, makynge so myne intercessyon before the Lorde my God, for the holy hylles sake of my God:
yee, whyle I was yet speakynge in my prayer, beholde, the man Gabriel. (whom I had sene afore in the visyon) came flyinge to me, and touched me aboute the offering tyme in the euenynge.
He infourmed me, Ꟶ spake vnto me: O Daniel sayde he, I am nowe come to make the vnderstande it.
For as soone as thou begannest to make thy prayer, it was so diuised, Ꟶ therfore am I come to shewe the. And why? For thou art a man greatly beloued. Wherfore, pondre the matter well, that thou mayest learne, to vnderstande the visyon.
.Lxx. wekes are determed ouer thy people, and ouer the holy cytie: that the wyckednes maye be consumed, that the synne may haue an ende, that the offence maye be reconciled, and to brynge in euerlastinge ryghteousnesse, to fulfyll the visyons and the prophetes, and to anoynte the moost holy one.
Understande this then, and marcke it well: that from the tyme it shalbe concluded to go and repayre Ierusalem agayne, vnto Christ (or the anoynted) prince: there shalbe seuen wekes: Then shall the stretes and walles be buylded agayne .lxij. wekes, but with harde troublous tyme.
After these .lxij. wekes, shall Christ be slayne, and they shall haue no pleasure in hym. Then shall there come a people with the Prince, and destroye the cyte Ꟶ the Sanctuary: and hys ende shall come as the water floude. But the desolacyon shall contynue tyll the ende of the battell.
He shall make a stronge bonde with many, for the space of a weke: Ꟶ when the weke is halfe gone, he shall put downe the slayne and meatoffringe. And in the temple there shalbe an abhominable desolacyon, tyll it haue destroyed all. And it is concluded, that this wastynge shall contynue vnto the ende.
In the thyrde yeare of kynge Cirus of Persia, there was shewed vnto Daniel (other wyse called Balthasar) a matter, yee, a true matter, but it is yet a longe tyme vnto it. He vnderstode the matter well, and perceaued what the visyon was.
At the same tyme, I Daniel mourned for the space of thre wekes,
so that I had no lust to eate bread: as for fleshe and wyne there came none wythin my mouth: No, I dyd not once anoynte my self, tyl the wole thre wekes were out.
Upon the .xxiiij. daye of the first moneth, I was by the greate floude, called Tygris
I lyft vp myne eyes, and loked: and beholde, a man clothed in lynen, whose loynes were gyrded vp with fyne golde of Araby:
his body was lyke the Chrysolite stone, hys face (to loke vpon) was lyke lyghtenynge, hys eyes as the flame of fyre, hys armes and fete were lyke fayre glysterynge metall, but the voyce of his wordes was lyke the voyce of a multitude.
I Daniel alone sawe thys visyon the men that were wyth me, sawe it not: but a greate fearfulnesse fell vpon them, so that they fled awaye, and hyd them selues.
I was left there my selfe alone, and sawe this great visyon, so longe tyll there remayned nomore strength wythin me: yee, I lost my coloure clene, I wasted awaye, and my strength was gone.
Yet hearde I the voyce of hys wordes: and as soone as I hearde it, fayntnesse came vpon me; and I fell downe flat to the grounde vpon my face.
And behold, an hande touched me, whych set me vp vpon my knees Ꟶ vpon the palmes of my handes,
sayinge vnto me. O Daniel, thou well beloued man: take good hede of the wordes, that I shall saye vnto the, and stande ryght vp, for vnto the am I nowe sent. And when he had sayde these wordes, I stode vp tremblynge.
Then sayde he vnto me: feare not Daniel: for why, sence the fyrst daye that thou set thyne herte to vnderstande, and dydest chasten thy selfe before thy God: thy wordes haue bene herde. And I had come vnto the. When thou begannest to speake
had not the prynce ouer the kyngdom of the Perses wythstande me .xxj. dayes. But lo, Michael one of the chefe prynces, came to helpe and I was left to contynue ther with the kinges of Persia,
Ꟶ am come to shewe the, what shall happen vnto thy people in the latter dayes. For it wylbe longe yet or the visyon be fulfylled.
Nowe when he had spoken these wordes vnto me, I cast downe my head to the grounde and helde my tunge.
Beholde, there touched my lyppes one very lyke vnto a man. Then opened I my mouth, and sayde vnto him, that stode before me, O my Lorde, my ioyntes are lowsed in the visyon, and there is nomore strength within me.
Howe may my Lordes seruaunt then talke wyth my Lord? seynge there is no strength in me, so that I cannot take my breth?
Upon this there touched me agayne, one moch lyke a man and conforted me,
sayinge. O thou man so well beloued, feare not: be content, take a good hert vnto the, and be stronge. So when he had spoken vnto me, I recouered, and sayde. Speake on my Lord, for thou hast refreshed me.
Then sayd he: knowest thou wherfore I am come vnto the? nowe wyll I go agayne to fyght wyth the prince of the Perses. As soone as I go forth, lo, the prince of Grekelande shall come.
Neuertheles, I wyll shewe the that thynge, that is fast noted in the scrypture of trueth. And as for all yonder matters, there is none that helpeth me in them, but Michael youre prynce.
And in the fyrst yeare of Darius of Media, I stode by hym, to comforte him, and to strength hym,
Ꟶ nowe wyll I shewe the trueth. Beholde, there shall stande vp yet thre kynges in Persia, but the fourth shalbe farre rycher then they all. And when he is in the chefest power of hys ryches, he shall prouoke euery man agaynst the realme of Grekelande.
Then shall there aryse yet a myghtye kynge, that shall rule wyth greate dominion, and do what hym lyst.
And as soone as hys kyngdome cometh vp, it shalbe destroyed, and deuyded towarde the foure wyndes of the heauen. They that come after hym, shall not haue soche power Ꟶ dominyon as he: but hys kyngdome shalbe scatred, yee, euen amonge other then those.
And the kyng of the south shalbe myghtyer, then his other princes. And one shall be stronger then he, Ꟶ shall rule hys dominyon wyth greate power.
And in the ende of yeares they shalbe ioyned together, and the kynges daughter of the southe shall come to the kynge of the North, for to make frendshyppe, but she shall not optayne the power of that arme, nether shall she be able to endure thorowe his myght: but she, and soch as brought her (yee and he that begat her, and conforted her for hys tyme) shalbe delyuered vp.
Out of the braunches of her rote, there shall one stande vp in hys steade: whych with power of armes shall go thorowe the kynges lande of the north, and handle hym accordynge to hys strength. As for their Idols and princes, with their costly Iewels of golde and syluer,
he shall cary them awaye captyues into Egypte, and he shall reygne more yeares then the kynge of the north.
And when he is come into the kynges realme of the south, he shalbe fayne to turne agayne into hys awne lande.
Wherfore hys sonnes shalbe displeased, Ꟶ shall gather together a myghtye greate hoost of people: and one of them shall come, and go thorowe lyke a water flowde: then shall he returne, and go forthwith defyinge and boastynge vnto his awne lande.
Then the kynge of the south shalbe angry and shall come forth to fight against the kynge of the north: yee, he shall brynge a greate multitude of people together, and a greate heape shalbe geuen into his hande:
these shall he cary awaye wyth greate pryde, for so moche as he hath cast downe so many thousandes, neuertheles, he shall not preuayle.
For the kyng of the north shall gather (of the new) a greater heape of people then afore, and come forth (after a certayne tyme Ꟶ yeares) wyth a myghtye hooste and exceadynge greate good.
At the same tyme there shall many stande vp agaynst the kynge of the south, so that the wycked chyldren of thy people also shall exalte them selues (to fulfyll the vision) Ꟶ then fall.
So the kinge of the north shall come to laye sege, and to take the strong fensed cyties: And the power of them of the south shall not be able to abyde him, and the best men of the people shall not be so strong, as to resyst hym.
Shortely, when he commeth, he shall handle hym as he lyst, Ꟶ no man shalbe so hardy as to stande agaynst hym. He shall stande in the pleasaunt countre, whych thorowe him shalbe destroyed.
He shall set hys face wyth all hys power to optayne hys kyngdom, and to be lyke it. Yee, that shall he do, and geue him vnto the daughters amonge wemen, to destroye hym. But he shall fayle, nether shall he optayne hys purpose.
After thys shall he set hys face vnto the. Iles and take many of them. A prince shall stoppe hym, to do him a shame, besyde the confusyon that els shall come vnto him.
Thus shall he tourne agayne to hys awne lande, stomble and fall, and be nomore founde:
so be that came vpon hym Ꟶ dyd hym violence, shall stande in hys place, haue a pleasaunt kyngdome: and after fewe dayes he shalbe destroyed, Ꟶ that nether in wrath, ner in battell.
In hys steade there shall aryse a vyle person, not holden worthy of a kynges dignytie: this shall come in peaceably, and optayne the kyngdome wyth fayre wordes:
he shall fyght agaynst the armes of the myghtye (and destroye them) yee, and agaynst the prince of the couenaunt.
So after that he hath taken truce wyth him, he shall handle disceatfully: that he maye get vp, and ouercome hym with a small flocke:
and so with craftynesse to get him to the fattest place of the lande, and to deale otherwyse, then ether his fathers or graundfathers dyd. For he shall destroye the thynge, that they had robbed Ꟶ spoyled, yee, and all theyr substaunce: ymagenynge thoughtes agaynst the stronge holdes, and that for a tyme.
Hys power and herte shalbe sterred vp wyth a greate armye agaynst the kinge of the south where thorowe the kynge of the south shalbe moued then vnto battell, with a greate Ꟶ myghtye hoost also. Neuerthelesse, he shall not be able to stande, for they shall conspyre against him.
Yee, they that eate of his meate shall hurte hym: so that his hoost shall fall, Ꟶ many be slayne downe.
These two kynges shalbe mynded to do myschefe, and talke of disceate at one table: but they shall not prospere, for why, the ende shall not come yet, vnto the tyme apoynted
Then shall he go home agayne into hys awne lande with great good, and set his hert agaynst the holy couenaunt, he shalbe busye agaynst it, and then returne home.
At the time apoynted he shall come agayne, and go towarde the south. So shall it happen otherwyse then at the fyrst, yet ones agayne.
And why? the shyppes with Italyans shall come vpon him, that he may be smytten and turne agayne: that he may take indignacion against the couenaunt of holynesse, to medle agaynst it. Yee, he shall turne him, and drawe soch vnto him, as leaue the holy couenaunt.
He shall set myghtye men to vnhalowe the Sanctuary of strength, to put downe the daylye offeringe, and to set vp the abhominable desolacyon.
And soch as breake the couenaunt shall he flatter wyth fayre wordes. But the people that wyll knowe their God, shall haue the ouerhande and prospere.
Those also that haue vnderstandinge among the people shall enfourme the multitude: and for a longe season, they shalbe persecuted wyth swearde, with fyre, wyth captiuite Ꟶ wyth the takynge awaye of theyr goodes.
Nowe when they fall, they shalbe sett vp wyth a lytle helpe: but many shall cleue vnto them faynedly.
Yee some of those which haue vnderstandyng shall be persecuted also, that they may be tryed, purifyed and clensed, tyll the tyme be out: for there is yet another time appoynted.
The kynge shall do what hym lyst he shall exalte and magnifye him selfe agaynst all that is God. Yee, he shall speake maruelous thinges agaynst the God of all goddes wherin he shall prospere, so longe tyll the wrath be fulfylled, for the conclusyon is deuised alredy.
He shall not regarde the God of hys fathers, but his lust shall be vpon wemen. Yee, he shall not care for eny God, for he shall magnifye him selfe aboue all.
In hys place shall he worshype the myghtie stoute God: and the God whom his fathers knewe not, shall be honoure with golde and syluer, with precious stones and pleasaunt Iewels.
This shall he do, thorowe hys stronge fensed places, settinge vpe hys straunge God whom he confessith and encreasinge his glorye. Soche as will receaue hym, Ꟶ take hym for God, he shall geue them greate worshyppe and power: yee, and make them Lordes of the multitude, and geue them the lande with rewardes.
In the latter tyme shall the kynge of the south stryue wyth him: and the kynge of the north in lyke maner shall come against him with charettes, horsmen and wt a greate nauy of shyppes. He shall come into the landes, destroye and go thorowe:
he shall entre also into the fayre pleasaunt lande: Many cyties and countres shall decaye excepte Edom, Moab and the best of the chyldren of Ammon, whych shall escape from hys hande.
He shall stretch forth his handes vpon the countrees, Ꟶ the lande of Egypte shall not escape hym.
For thorowe his goynge in, he shall haue dominion ouer the treasures of syluer and golde, and ouer all the precious Iewels of Egypt, Libia and Ethiopia.
Neuerthelesse, the tydynges out of the East and the north shall trouble him, for the whych cause he shall goo forth to destroye and rote owte a greate multitude.
The tentes of hys palace shall be pytched betwyxte the two sees, vpon the hyll of the noble Sanctuary, for he shall come to his dethe, and then shall no man helpe hym.
The tyme wyll come also, that the great prince Michael, which standeth on thy peoples side, shal aryse vp, for there shall come a tyme of trouble, soch as neuer was, sens there began to be eny people, vnto that same tyme. Then shall thy people be delyuered, yee, all those that be founde wrytten in the boke.
Many of them that slepe in the dust of the earth, shall awake: some to the euerlastynge lyfe, some to perpetuall shame Ꟶ reprofe.
The wyse (soch as haue taught other) shall glyster, as the shynynge of heauen: and those that haue instructe the multitude vnto godlynesse, shalbe as the starres, worlde without ende.
And thou O Daniel, shut vp these wordes, and seale the boke tyll the last time Many shall go aboute here and there, and then shall knowledge increase.
So I Daniel loked, Ꟶ beholde, there stode other two: one vpon thys shore of the water, the other vpon yonder syde.
And one of them sayd vnto hym, which was clothed in lynen and stode aboue vpon the waters of the floude. How longe shall it be to the ende of these wonderous worckes?
Then herde I the man wyth the lynen clothes, which stode aboue vpon the waters of the floude: when he helde vp hys ryght and left hande vnto heauen, and sware by hym whych lyueth for euer that it shall tary for a tyme, two tymes and halfe a tyme: Ꟶ when the power of the holy people is clene scatred abrode, then shall all these thynges be fulfylled.
I herde it well, but I vnderstode it not. Then sayde I: O my Lord, what shall happen after that?
He answered: Go thy waye Daniel, for these wordes shall be closed vp Ꟶ sealed, tyll the last tyme:
and many shalbe purifyed, clensed Ꟶ tryed. But the vngodly shall lyue wyckedly and those wicked (as many of them as they be) shall haue no vnderstandynge. As for soch as haue vnderstanding, they shall regarde it.
And from the tyme forth that the daylye offerynge shalbe put downe Ꟶ the abhominable desolation sett vp, there shalbe a .M.CCXC: daies
O well is hym, that wayteth, Ꟶ cometh to the thousande.iij.C. and .xxxv. dayes.
Go thou thy waye nowe tyll it be ended: take thy rest, and hyde thy lot, tyll the dayes haue an ende.
This is the worde of the Lorde, that came vnto Oseas the sonne of Beery in the days of Oseas, Ioathan, Ahas and Iezekias kynges of Iuda: and in the tyme of Ieroboam sonne of Ioas kinge of Israel.
Fyrst, when the Lorde spake vnto Oseas he sayde vnto hym. Go thy waye, take an harlott to thy wyfe, and get chyldren by her: for the lande hath commytted greate whordome agaynst the Lorde.
So he wente, Ꟶ toke Gomer the daughter of Deblaim: whych conceaued, and brought forth a sonne.
And the Lorde sayde vnto hym: call hys name Iesrael, for I wyll shortly auenge the bloude of Iesrael vpon the house of Iehu, Ꟶ wyll brynge the kyngdome of the house of Israel to an ende.
Then wyll I breake the bowe of Israel, in the valley of Iesrael.
She conceaued yet agayne, and bare a daughter. And he sayde vnto hym. Call her name. Loruhamah (that is, not optayninge mercy) for I wyll haue no pytie vpon the house of Israel, but forget them and put them cleane out of remembraunce.
Neuerthelesse, I wyll haue mercy vpon the house of Iuda, and wyll saue them, euen thorowe the Lorde theyr God. But I wyll not delyuer them thorowe eny bowe, swearde, battell, horses or horsmen.
Nowe, when she had weaned Loruhamah, she conceaued agayne, and bare a sonne.
Then sayde he: call hys name, Loamy. For why? ye are not my people, therfore will not I be your God.
And though the nombre of the chyldren of Israel be as the sande of the see, whych can nether be measured ner tolde: yet in the place where it is sayde vnto them ye be not my people: euen there shall it be thus reported of them they be the chyldren of the lyuynge God.
Then shall the chyldren of Iuda and the chyldren of Israel be gathered together agayne and chose them selues one head, and then departe out of the lande: for greate shalbe the daye of Israel.
Tell youre brethren, that they are my people: and youre systerne, that they haue optayned mercy.
As for youre mother, ye shall chyde wt her, and reproue her for she is not my wyfe, nether am I her husbande, onlesse she put awaye her whordome out of my syght, Ꟶ her aduoutry from her brestes.
If no I shall stryppe her naked, Ꟶ sett her euen as she came into the worlde: yee, I shall laye her waste, and make her lyke a wyldernesse, Ꟶ slaye her for thyrste.
I shall haue no pite also vpon her children for they be the chyldren of fornicacyon.
Their mother hath broken her wedlocke, and she that bare them is come to confusion. For she sayd: I will go after my louers, that geue me my water and my bread, my woll Ꟶ flaxe, my oyle and my dryncke.
But I will hedge her waye with thornes, and stoppe it, that she shall not fynde her fotesteppes:
and though she runne after her louers, yet shall she not get them: she shall seke them, but not fynde them. Then shall she saye: well, I wyll go turne againe to my fyrst housbande, for at that tyme was I better at ease, then nowe
But this wolde she not knowe, where as I yet gaue her corne, wyne, oyle, syluer Ꟶ gold whych she hath hanged vpon Baal.
Wherfore, nowe will I go take my corne and wyne agayne in their season, and fet agayne my woll Ꟶ my flax, whych I gaue her, to couer her shame.
And nowe will I discouer her foolyshnesse, euen in the syght of her louers, Ꟶ no man shall delyuer her out of my handes.
Moreouer, I will take awaye all her myrth her holy dayes, her newmoones; her Sabbathes and all her solempne feastes:
I wyll destroye her vyneyardes Ꟶ fygg trees, though she sayeth: lo, heare are my rewardes, that my louers haue geuen me. I wyll make it a wodde, and wylde beestes shall eate it vp.
I wyll punysh her also for the dayes of Baal wherin she censed hym, deckynge hym wyth her earynges Ꟶ cheynes: when she folowed her louers, and forgat me, sayeth the Lorde.
Wherfore beholde, I wyll call her agayne bringe her into a wyldernes, Ꟶ speake frendly vnto her:
there will I geue her her vyniardes agayne, yee Ꟶ the valley of Achor also to shewe her hope and comforte. Then shall she synge there as in the tyme of her youth, and lyke as in the daye when she came out of the lande of Egypte.
Then (sayeth the Lorde she shall saye vnto me) O my housbande, Ꟶ shall call me nomore Baal:
for I wyll take awaye those names of Baal from her mouth, yee, she shall neuer remembre their names eny more.
Then wyll I make a couenaunt with them, with the wylde beastes, with the foules of the ayre, and wyth euery thynge that crepeth vpon the earth. As for bowe, swerde and battel, I will destroye soch out of the lande, Ꟶ wyll make them to slepe safely.
Thus wyll I mary the vnto myne awne selfe for euermore: yee, euen to my selfe wyll I mary the, in ryghteousnesse, in equite, in louynge kyndnesse and mercy.
In fayth also wyll I mary the vnto my selfe, and thou shalt knowe the Lorde.
At the same tyme wyll I shewe my selfe frendly Ꟶ gracyous vnto the heuens, sayeth the Lord: and the heauens shall helpe the earth
and the earth shall helpe the corne, wyne and oyle, Ꟶ they shall helpe Iesrael.
I wyll sowe them vpon earth, for a sede to myne amne selfe, Ꟶ wyll haue mercy vpon her, that was wythout mercy. And to them whych were not my people, I wyll saye: thou art my people and he shall saye: thou art my God.
Then sayde the Lorde to me: Go yet thy waye Ꟶ wowe an aduouterous woman, whom thy neyghboure loueth, as the Lorde doth the chyldren of Israel: how be it they haue respecte to straunge goddes, Ꟶ loue the wyne kannes.
So I gat her for .xv. syluerlynges, and for an Homer Ꟶ an halfe of barlye,
Ꟶ sayde vnto her: Thou shalt byde with me a longe season, but se that thou playest not the harlot, Ꟶ loke thou medle wt none other man, Ꟶ then will I kepe my selfe for the.
Thus the chyldren of Israel shall syt a great while without kynge and prince, without offering and aulter, without preste Ꟶ reuelacyon.
But afterwarde shall the chyldren of Israel conuerte, and seke the Lorde theyr God, and Dauid theyr kynge: Ꟶ in the latter dayes they shall worshyppe the Lorde, Ꟶ hys louynge kyndnesse.
Heare the worde of the Lord, O ye chyldren of Israel. For the Lorde must punysh, them that dwell in the lande. And why? There is no trewthe, there is no mercie, there is no knowledge of God in the lande:
but swearyng, lyenge, manslaughter: theft Ꟶ aduoutry haue gotten the ouerhande, and one bloudgyltinesse foloweth another.
Therfore shall the land be in a miserable case, and all they that dwell therin, shall be roted out. The beastes in the felde, the foules in the ayre, Ꟶ the fyshes in the see shall dye.
Yet is there none, that wyll chasten nor reproue another. For thy people rebukethe the prestes, whych shulde refourme other men.
Therfore stomblest thou in the daye tyme Ꟶ the prophet wt the in the nyght. I wyll bring thy mother to sylence, and why?
my people perish, because they haue no knowledg. Seinge then that thou hast refused vnderstanding, therfore wyll I refuse the also: so that thou shalt nomore be my preste. And for so moche as thou hast forgotten the lawe of thy God, I wyll also forget thy chyldren.
The more they increased in the multitude, the more they synned agaynst me, therfore wyll I change theyr honoure into shame.
They eate vp the synnes of my people, and corage them in theyr wickednesse.
Thus the prest is become lyke the people. Wherfore I wyll punish them for their wicked wayes, and rewarde them accordynge to their awne ymaginacyons.
They shall eate, Ꟶ not haue ynough. They haue vsed whordome, therfore shall they not prospere: and why? they haue forsaken the Lorde and not regarded hym.
Whordome, wyne Ꟶ dronckenesse taketh the herte awaye.
My people aske councell at their stockes, their staffe must tell them. For an whoryshe mynde hath desceyued them so that they committe fornicacion agaynst theyr God.
They make sacrifyces vpon the hye mountaynes, Ꟶ burne their incense vpon the hilles, yee, among the okes, groues Ꟶ bushes, for there are good shadowes. Therfore, youre daughters are become harlottes, and youre spouses haue broken theyr wedlocke,
I wyll not punish youre daughters for beinge defyled, Ꟶ youre brydes that became whores: seynge the fathers them selues haue medled wt harlottes, Ꟶ offered wt vnthriftes: but the people that wyll not vnderstande must be punyshed.
Though thou Israel art disposed to playe the harlot, yet shuldest not thou haue offended, O Iuda: thou shuldest not haue runne to Gilgal ner haue gone vp to Bethauen, ner haue sworne, the Lord lyueth.
For Israel is gone backe lyke a wanton cowe. The Lorde therfore shall make her fede, as the lambe that goeth astraye.
And where as Ephraim is become partaker of Idols, wel, let him go.
Their dronckennes hath put them backe, Ꟶ brought them to whordome. Their rulers loue rewardes, bringe, (saye they) to their awne shame.
A wynde shall take holde of theyr fethers, and they shalbe confounded in theyr offrynges.
O ye prestes: heare this, take hede, O the housholde of Israel: gene care, O thou kyngly house, for it wer youre parte to se Iudgement done, but you are become a snare vnto Myzphah, and a spred net vnto the mount of Thabor.
They kyll sacrifyces by heapes, And turne farre from the Lord, Ꟶ I haue bene a rebuker of them all.
I know Ephraim well ynough, Ꟶ Israel is not hyd fro me: for Ephraim is become an harlot: Ꟶ Israel is defyled.
They are not mynded to turne vnto their God, for they haue an whorysh hert, so that they cannot knowe the Lord.
But the pryde of Israel will be rewarded him in hys face, yee, both Israell Ꟶ Ephraim shall fall for theyr wickednesse, and Iuda wt them also.
They shall come with their shepe and bullockes to seke the Lorde, but they shall not fynde him, for he is gone from them.
As for the Lorde, they haue refused him, and brought vp bastarde children: a moneth therfore shall deuoure them with their porcyons.
Blowe with the shawmes at Gibea, and wt the trompet in Ramah, crye out at Bethauen vpon the yonsyde of BenIamin.
In the tyme of the plage shall Ephraim he layed waste, therfore dyd I faythfully warne the trybes of Israel.
Yet are the princes of Iuda become lyke them that remoue the landemarckes, therfore wyll I poure out my wrath vpon them lyke water.
Ephraim is oppressed, Ꟶ can haue no right of the lawe: for why? they folowe the doctrynes of vngodly men.
Therfore will I be vnto Ephraim as a moth, and to the house of Iuda as a caterpyller.
When Ephraim sawe hys sycknesse, and Iuda hys dysease, Ephraim wente vnto Assur, and sent vnto kyng Iareb: yet coulde not he helpe you, ner ease you of your payne.
I am vnto Ephraim as a lyon, and as a lyons whelpe to the house of Iuda. Euen, I will spoyle them, Ꟶ go my waye. I wyll take them wyth me, and no man shall rescue them.
I will go, and returne to my place, tyll they knowledge that they haue synned and seke me.
In theyr aduersite they shall erlye seke me, Ꟶ saye: come, let vs turne agayne to the Lorde: for he hath smyten vs, and he shall heale vs:
He hath wounded vs, and he shall bynde vs vp agayne: after two dayes shall he quycken vs, in the thyrde daye he shall rayse vs vp, so that we shall lyue in hys syght.
Then shall we haue vnderstandynge, Ꟶ endeuoure oure selues to knowe the Lorde. He shall go forth as the spryng of the daye, Ꟶ come vnto vs as the euenynge and mornynge rayne vpon the earth.
O Ephraim, what shall I do vnto the? O Iuda, howe shall I intreate the? seyng your loue is lyke a mornyng cloude, Ꟶ lyke a dewe that goeth early awaye.
Therfore haue I cut downe the Prophetes, and let them be slayne for my wordes sake: so that thy punishment shall come to lyght.
For I haue pleasure in louyng kyndnesse and not in offringe: yee, in the knowledge of God, more then in burntsacrifyce.
But euen lyke as Adam dyd, so haue they broken my couenaunt, and set me at naught.
Gilead is a cite of wicked doers of malycyous people Ꟶ bloudshedders.
And as theues armed wayte for him that passeth by the waye: such is the councell of the prestes whych with one agreed counsell murther cruelye suche as kepe the waye: ye they dare do all vnspeakable myschefe.
Horryble thynges haue I sene in the house of Israel, there playeth Ephraim the harlot, Ꟶ Israel is defyled:
yee and thou Iuda hepest an haruest for thy selfe, when I returne the captyuitie of my people.
When I vndertake to make Israel whole, then the vngraciousnesse of Ephraim and the wyckednes of Samaria commeth to lyght: then go they aboute wt lyes: therfore the theafe robbeth within: Ꟶ wtout the spoyler destroyeth.
They considre not in their hertes that I remembre all their wickednes. Nowie ther awne inuentyons haue beset them whych, I se well ynough.
They make the kynge and the prynces, to haue pleasure in theyr wyckednes and lyes.
All these burne in aduoutry, as it were an ouen that the baker heateth, when he hath left kneadynge, tyll the dowe be leuended.
Euen so goeth it this daye with oure kynges and princes, for they begynne to be wodde droncken thorowe wyne: they vse familiarite with soch as disceaue them.
They with the ymaginacyon of their herte are lyke an ouen, their slepe is all the nyght lyke the slepe of a baker, in the mornynge is he as hote as the flame of fyre:
they are all together as hote as an ouen. They haue deuoured their awne iudges, all theyr kynges are fallen: yet is there none of them that calleth vpon me.
Therfore must Ephraim be myxte amonge the Heathen: Ephraim is become lyke a cake, the no man turneth,
straungers haue deuoured his strength, yet he regardeth it not: he waxeth full of gray heares, yet wyll he not knowe it
and the pryde of Israel is cast downe before theyr face, yet wyll they not turne to the Lord theyr God, ner seke hym for all thys.
Ephraim is lyke a doue, that is begyled, and hath no herte. Now call they vpon the Egypcyans, nowe go they to the Assyrians:
but whyle they be goynge here and there, I shall sprede my net ouer them, Ꟶ drawe them downe as the foules of the ayre: Ꟶ accordyng as they haue bene warned, so will I punishe them.
Wo be vnto them, for they haue forsaken me. They must be destroyed, for they haue set me at naught, I am he that haue redemed them, and yet they dissemble wyth me.
They call not vpon me with theyr hertes, but lye houlynge vpon theyr beddes. Where as they come together, it is but for meate Ꟶ dryncke, and me will they not obeye.
I haue taught them, and defended theyr arme, yet do they ymagin myschefe against me.
They turne them selues, but not to the most hyest, Ꟶ are become as a broken bowe. Their princes shalbe slayne with the swearde, for the malyce of theyr tunges, soche scornnes shall they haue in the lande of Egypt.
Set the horne to thy mouth, and blowe: swyftly (as an Aegle) shall the enemye come against the house of the Lorde: for they haue broken my couenaunt, Ꟶ transgressed my lawe.
Israel shulde haue sayde vnto me: thou art my God, we knowe the:
but he hath refused the thyng that is good, therfore shall the enemy folowe vpon hym.
They haue ordened kynges, but not thorow me: they haue made princes, Ꟶ I must not knowe of it. Of their syluer Ꟶ golde haue they made them Images, to brynge them selues to destruccyon.
Thy calf, O Samaria, shalbe taken awaye, for my wrothfull indignacyon is gone forth agaynst the. Howe longe will it be, or they can be clensed.
For the calfe came from Israel, the worke man made it, therfore can it be no God, but euen in peaces shall the calfe of Samaria be broken.
They haue sowne wynde, therfore shall they reape a storme. Their sede shall beare no corne, there shall no meale be made of theyr increase: though they reape, yet shall straungers deuoure it vp.
Israel shall perish, the Gentiles shall intreate him as a foule vessell.
Sence they went vp to the Assyrians, they are become lyke a wylde asse in the deserte. Ephraim geueth rewardes to get louer
and though they hyre them amonge the hethen yet nowe wyll I gather them vp. They shall begynne to be weeryed wyth the burthen of kynges and prynces.
Ephraim hath made many aulters to do wyckednes, hys aulters (I saye) he had to his sinne.
Though I shewe them my lawe neuer so moch, they counte it but straunge doctryne.
Where as they do sacrifyce, offerynge the flesshe and eatinge it: the Lorde wyll haue no pleasure therin: but wyll remembre theyr wickednes, Ꟶ punishe their synnes. Israel turneth agayne into Egipt,
they haue forgotten him that made them, they buylde fayre palaces, and Iuda maketh many stronge cyties: therfore will I sende a fyre into theyr cyties, and it shall consume their places.
Do not thou triumphe, O Israel, make no boastynge ouer ioyouse thynges as do the Heathen, for thou hast commytted aduoutry agaynst thy God: whoryshe rewardes hast thou loued, more then all the cornestores.
Therfore shall they nomore enioye the cornestores and wyne presses, and theyr swete wyne shall fayle them.
They will not dwell in the Lordes lande but Ephraim turneth agayne into Egypte, and eateth vncleane thynges amonge the Assyrians:
They poure out no wyne for a drinckoffring vnto the Lorde, nether geue they hym their slayne offrynges: but they be vnto them as mourners meates, wherin all they that eate them, are defyled. For the bread that they haue soch lust vnto, shall not come into the house of the Lorde.
What wyll ye do then in the solempne dayes, and in the feast of the Lorde?
Lo, they shall get them awaye for the destruccyon: Egypt shall receaue them, and Noph shall bury them. The nettles shall ouergrowe theyr pleasaunt goodes, and burres shalbe in their tabernacles.
Be ye sure (O Israel) the tyme of visitacyon is come, the dayes of recompensynge are at hande. And then shall Israell knowe that they were deceyued by a prophete folyshe mad, and in a fransey: for the multitude of thyne iniquitye God shall multiplye enemyes agaynst the.
Ephraim hath made him self a watchman of my God, a prophete that is become a snare to do hurte in euery strete, and abhominacyon in the house of his God.
They be gone to farre, Ꟶ haue destroyed them selues, lyke as they dyd afore tyme at Gabaa therfore theyr wyckednes shalbe remembred, and their synnes punyshed.
I founde Israell lyke grapes in the wyldernes, and sawe their fathers as the fyrst fygges in the toppe of the fygge tre. But they are gone to Baal Peor, Ꟶ runne a waye fro me to that shamefull Idoll Ꟶ are become as abhominable as their louers.
Ephraim flyeth lyke a byrde, so shall their glory also: In so moch, that they shall nether begette, conceaue ner beare chyldren.
And though they brynge vp eny, yet will I make them chyldeles amonge men. Yee, wo shall come to them, when I depart from them.
Ephraim (as me thyncke) is planted in welthynes, lyke as Tyrus, but nowe must she brynge her awne chyldren forth to the manslayer.
O Lorde thou shalt geue them: what shalt thou geue them? geue them an vnfrutefull wombe Ꟶ drye brestes.
All their wyckednes is done at Gilgall, there do I abhorre them. For the vngracyousnes of their awne inuencyons, I will dryue them out of my house. I will loue them nomore, for all their prynces are vnfaythfull.
Ephraim is hewen downe, their rote is dryed vp, so that they shall brynge no more frute, yee, and though they brynge forth eny, yet will I slaye euen the best beloued frute of their body.
My God shall cast them awaye, for they haue not bene obedient vnto him, therfore shall they go astraye amonge the Heathen.
Israel was a goodly vyne, but he hath brought forth vnprofytable frute: yee, the more frute he had, the mo aulters he made: the more good I dyd to their lande, the more frendshype shewed they to their ymages.
Theyr herte is deuyded, therfore wyll they be destroyed. The Lord shall breake downe their ymages, he shall destroye theyr aulters.
Then shall they saye: we haue no kynge, for why? we haue not feared the Lord. And what shall then the kynge do to vs?
They comen together, and sweare vayne othes: they be confederat together, therfore groweth their punishment, as the wedes in the sorowes of the lande.
They that dwell in Samaria haue worshypped the calfe of Bethauen: therfore shall the people mourne ouer them, yee, Ꟶ the prestes also, that in theyr welthynesse reioysed wyth them: and why? it shall passe awaye from them.
It shall be brought to the Assirian, for a present vnto kynge Iareb. Ephraim shall receaue full punyshment. Israell shalbe confounded for hys awne ymaginacyons,
Samaria wt his kynge shall vanyshe awaye as the scomme in the water.
The hye places of Auen where Israell do synne, shall be cast downe: thystles and thornes shall growe vpon theyr aulters. Then shall they saye to the mountaynes: couer vs, and to the hylles: fall vpon vs.
O Israell, thou hast synned as Gabaa dyd afore tyme, where they remayned: shuld not the batayll then come vpon the wycked chyldren, as well as vpon the Gabaonites?
I wyll chasten them, euen after myne awne desyre, the people shalbe gathered together ouer them, when I punyshe them for their great wyckednesse.
Ephraim was vnto me, as a cowe that is vsed to go to plowe, therfore I loued hym, and fell vpon his fayre necke. I droue Ephraim, Iuda plowed, and Iacob played the husbande man:
Sowe vnto ryghteousnes, and reape the frutes of weldoinge: plowe vp your freshe lande, for it is tyme to seake the Lorde tyll he come and rayne rightuousnesse vpon you.
But you haue plowed vngodlynes: ye haue reped iniquytie, you haue eaten the frute of lyes. Seynge thou puttest thy confydence in thyne awne wayes, and leauest to the multitude of thy worthyes:
there shall growe a sedicyon amonge thy people. All thy stronge cyties shalbe layed waste, euen as Salmana was destroyed with his famyliers, thorowe him that was auenged of Arbell, in the daye of batayll, where the mother peryshed with her chyldren.
Euen so shall it go with you (O Bethell) because of youre malicyous wickednesse. Lyke as the mornynge goeth awaye, so shall the kynge of Israel passe.
When Israell was younge, I loued him: Ꟶ called my sonne oute of the lande of Egypt.
But the more they were called, the more they went backe, offringe vnto Idols of Baal, Ꟶ censynge Images.
I lerned Ephraim to go, Ꟶ bare them in myne armes, but they regarded not me, that wolde haue helped them.
I led them with coardes of frendshyppe, and with bandes of loue. I was euen he, that layed the yocke vpon their neckes. I gaue their foder my self
that they shulde not go agayne into Egypt. And nowe is Assur theyr kynge. For they wolde not turne vnto me.
Therfore shall the swearde begynne in their cyties, the stoare that they haue layed vp, shalbe destroyed and eaten: and that because of their awne ymaginacyons.
And my people shall stonde in a doubte whether to torne them, for when the prophetes called them to the most hiest, not one yet wolde gyue him his glory.
What greate thynges haue I geuen the, O Ephraim? howe faythfully haue I defended the, O Israel? haue I dealt with the as with Adama? or haue I intreated the lyke Seboim? No, my hert is other wise mynded. Yee, my mercy is to feruent:
therfore haue I not turned me to destroye Ephraim in my wrothfull displeasure. For I am God and no man, I am euen that holy one in the middest of the, though I came not within the cytie.
The Lorde roareth lyke a lyon, that they maye folowe hym: yee, as a lyon roareth he, that they maye be afrayed lyke the chyldren of the see:
that they maye be scatred awaye from Egypt, as men scarre byrdes: Ꟶ frayed awaye (as doues vse to be) from the Assyrians lande: and that because I wolde haue them tary at home, sayeth the Lorde.
But Ephraim goeth aboute me with lyes, and the house of Israell dissembleth. Only Iuda holdeth hym with God, and with the true holy thynges.
Ephraim is fed with ayre, and foloweth after the east winde: he is euer increasynge lyes and destruccyon. They be confederate with the Assyrians, their oyle is caryed into Egypt.
The Lorde hath a courte to holde wt Iuda, and wyll punyshe Iacob. After their awne wayes and accordynge to theyr awne inuencyons, shall he recompense them.
He toke his brother by the hele, when he was yet in his mothers wombe: and in hys strength he wrestled with God.
He strowe with the angell, and gatt the victorye: so that he prayde Ꟶ desyred hym. He founde him at Bethell, and there he talketh with vs.
Yee, the Lorde God of Hoostes, euen the Lorde him selfe remembred him.
Then turne to thy God, kepe mercy and equite, Ꟶ hope styll in thy God.
But thou art lyke the marchaunt that hath a false weyght in his hande, he hath a pleasure to occupie extorcyon.
Ephraim thinketh thus: Tush, I am rich. I haue good ynough: In all my worckes shall not one fawte be founde that I haue offended.
Yet am I the Lord thy God, euen as when I brought the out of the lande of Egypte, and sett the in thy tentes, and as in the hye feaste dayes.
I haue spoken thorowe the prophetes, Ꟶ shewed diuerse visyons and declared my selfe by the ministracion of the prophetes.
But at Gilaad is the abhominacyon, they are fallen to vanyte. At Gilgal they haue slayne oxen: as many heapes of stones as they had in theyr lande forowes, so many aulters haue they made.
Iacob fled in to the lande of Siria, Ꟶ Israell serued for a wife, Ꟶ for a wife he kepte shepe.
By a prophete the Lorde brought them out of Egypt, and by a prophet he preserued them.
But Ephraim hath puoked him to displeasure thorowe his abhominacyons, therfore shall his bloude be poured vpon him selfe, and the Lorde hys God shall rewarde hym hys blasphemyes.
When Ephraim spake, the hethen trembled: and he was exalted amonge the Israelytes, but he is gone backe to Baal, therfore must he dye.
And nowe they synne more and more: of their syluer, they make them molten ymages, after the ymaginacyons of ther awne braynes that is, very ydols, and yet all is nothinge but the worke of the craftesman: Not witstandynge they preache of the same to such as there sacrificeth: who so will kysse the calues, offreth perfectlye.
Therfore, they shalbe as the morninge cloude, and as the dewe that early passeth awaye and lyke as dust that the whorle wynde taketh awaye, from the flore, and as smoke that goeth out of the chymney.
I am the Lorde God, which brought the out of the lande of Egypt: that thou shuldest knowe no God but me onely, and that thou shuldest haue no Sauioure but only me.
I toke diligent hede of the in the wyldernesse the drye lande.
But when they were well fedde and had ynough, they waxed proude, Ꟶ forgat me
therfore will I be vnto them as a lyon and as a leoparde in the waye to the Assyrians.
I will come vpon them as she beare, that is robbed of her whelpes, Ꟶ I will breake that stubburne herte of theirs. There will I deuoure them as a lyon: yee: that wylde beastes shall teare them.
O Israel, thine iniquite hath destroyed the but in me only is thy helpe.
Where are thy kynges nowe, that shulde helpe the in all thy cyties? Yee, and thy iudges, of whom thou saydest: geue me a kyng and princes?
well, I gaue the a kynge in my wrath, and in my displeasure will I take hym from the agayne.
The wyckednesse of Ephraim is bounde together, and hys synne lyeth hyd.
Therfore, shall sorowes come vpon hym, as vpon a woman that trauayleth. An vndiscrete sonne is he, for he consydreth not, that he shulde not haue bene able to haue endured in the tyme of hys byrth,
had not I defended hym from the graue, and delyuered hym from death. O death, I will be thy death: O hell, I wyll be thy kynge.
Yet can I se no comforte, for when he is nowe the goodlyest amonge the brethren, the east wynde (euen the wynde of the Lorde) shall come downe from the wildernes, and drye vp his conduytes, Ꟶ dryncke vp his welles: he shall spoyle the treasure of all pleasaunt vessels.
As for Samaria, they shalbe made waste, and why? they are dysobedient vnto theyr God. They shall peryshe with the swearde, theyr chyldren shalbe slayne, and their wemen great with chylde shalbe rypte vp:
O Israell, turne the nowe, vnto the Lorde thy God, for thou hast taken a greate fall thorowe thy wickednes.
Take these wordes with you, when ye turne to the Lorde, and saye vnto hym: O, forgeue vs all oure synnes, receaue vs graciously, Ꟶ then wyll we offre the bullockes of oure lyppes vnto the:
Assur shalbe nomore oure helper, nether will we ryde vpon horses eny more. As for the worckes of oure handes, we wyll nomore call vpon them: For it is thou that art oure God, thou shewest euer mercye vnto the fatherlesse.
O (yf they wolde do this) I shulde heale theyr sores: yee, with all my herte wolde I loue them: so that my wrath shulde cleane be turned awaye from them.
Yee, I wolde be vnto Israel as the dewe, and he shulde growe as the lylie, and hys rote shulde breake out as Libanus.
His braunches shulde sprede out abroade and be as fayre as the olyue tre and smell as Libanus.
They that dwell vnder hys shadowe, shulde come agayne, and growe vp as the corne, Ꟶ floryshe as the vyne he shulde haue as good a name, as the wyne of Libanus.
O Ephraim, what haue I to do wyth Idols eny more? I wyll graciously heare hym, and sede hym forth. I wyll be vnto the as a grene fyrre tre, vpon me shalt thou fynde thy frute.
Who so is wise, shall vnderstand thys: and he that is ryght enstructe, wyll regarde it. For the wayes of the Lorde are ryghteous, soch as be Godly wyll walke in them. As for the wycked, they wyll stomble therin.
Thys is the worde of the Lorde, that came vnto Ioell the sonne of Phatuel.
Heare, O yee elders: pondre this well, all ye that dwell in the lande: yf euer there happened soch a thinge in your dayes, or in the dayes of youre fathers.
Tell youre chyldren of it, and lett them shewe it vnto their chyldren, and so they to certifye theyr posteryte therof.
Loke what the caterpyller hath lefte, that hath the greshoper eaten vp: what the greshoper lefte, that hath the locuste eaten vp: and what the locuste hath left, that hath the blastynge consumed.
Wake vp ye dronckardes, and wepe: mourne all ye wynesuppers, because of youre swete wyne, for it shall be taken awaye from youre mouth.
Yee, a myghtye and an innumerable people shall come vp into my lande: these haue teeth lyke the teeth of lyons, and chaftbones lyke the lyonesses.
They shall make my vyneyarde waste, they shall pyll of the darckes of my fyggetrees, strype them bare, cast them awaye, and make the braunches whyte.
Make thy moone as a vyrgin doth that gyrdeth her selfe with sacke, because of her bryde grome.
For the meate and drynckoffringe shalbe taken awaye from the house of the Lorde, and the prestes the Lordes minysters shall mourne.
The felde shalbe wasted, the lande shalbe in a myserable case: for the corne shalbe destroyed, the swete wyne shall come to confusyon, and the oyle vtterly desolate.
The housbandmen and the wyne gardeners shall loke pyteously and make lamentacyon, for the wheate, wyne and barly, and because the haruest vpon the felde is so clene destroyed.
The grapegatherers shall make greate mone, when the vyneyarde and fyggetrees be so vtterly wasted. Yee, all the pomgarnettes, palmetrees, apletrees, Ꟶ the other trees of the felde shall wyther awaye. Thus the mery cheare of the chyldren of men, shall come to confusyon.
Gyrde you, and make youre mone, O ye prestes, mourne ye minystres of the aulter: goo your waye in, and slepe in sack cloth, O ye officiers of my God: for the meat Ꟶ drinkofferinge shall be taken awaye from the house of youre God.
Proclayme a fastinge, call the congregacyon, gather the elders and all the inhabitours of the lande together into the house of the Lorde your God, and crye vnto the Lorde:
alas, alas for thys daye. And why? the daye of the Lorde is at hande, and cometh as a destroyer from the almyghtye.
Shall not the meates be taken awaye before oure eyes, the myrth also and ioye from the house of our God?
The sede shall peryshe in the grounde, the garners shall lye waste, the flores shalbe broken downe, for the corne shall be destroyed.
O what a syghynge make the kyne? the bullockes are very euell lykynge, because they haue no pasture: and the shepe are famysshed awaye.
O Lorde, to the wyll I crye: for the fyre hath consumed the goodly pastures of the wyldernes, and the flame hath brent vp all the trees of the felde.
Yee, the wylde beastes crye also vnto the: for the water riuers are dryed vp, and the fyre hath consumed the pastures of the wyldernesse.
Blowe out the trompette in Syon, and crye vpon my holy hyll, that all soche as dwell in the lande, maye tremble at it: for the daye of the Lorde commeth, and is harde at hande:
a darcke daye, a gloomynge daye, a cloudy daye, yee, and a stormy daye, lyke as the mornynge spredeth out vpon the hylles. Namely, a greate and myghtye people: soch as haue not bene sence the beginninge, nether shall be after them for euermore.
Before him shall be a consumynge fyre, and behynde him a burnynge flame. The lande shalbe as a garden of pleasure before him, but behinde him shall it be a very waste wyldernesse, and there is no man, that shall escape hym:
They are to loke vpon lyke barbed horses, Ꟶ runne lyke horsmen.
They skippe vp vpon the hylles, as it were the sounde of charettes: as the flame of fyre that consumeth the strawe, and as a myghty people redy to the batayll.
The folke shalbe afrayed of hym, all faces shalbe as blacke as a pot:
These shall runne lyke gyauntes, and leape ouer the walles lyke men of warre. Euery man in his goinge shall kepe hys araye, and not goo out of hys path.
There shall not one driue another, but eche shall kepe his awne waye. They shall breake in at the wyndowes, Ꟶ not be hurte:
They shall come into the cytie, Ꟶ runne vpon the walles. They shall clyme vp vpon the houses, and slyppe in at the wyndowes lyke a thefe.
The earth shall quake before hym, yee, the heauens shalbe moued. The sunne Ꟶ the moone shall be darckened, and the starres shall withdrawe theyr shyne.
The Lord shall shewe hys voyce before hys hooste, for his hoost is greate, stronge, and myghtye to fulfyll hys commaundement. Thys is that greate and maruelous fearfull daye of the Lorde. And who is able to abyde it?
Nowe therfore sayeth the Lorde. Turne you vnto me with all your hertes, with fastinge, wepynge and mournynge,
rente your hertes, and not youre clothes. Turne you vnto the Lord your God, for he is gracious and mercyfull, longe sufferynge and of great compassyon: and redy to pardone wyckednes.
Then (no doute) he also shall turne, and forgeue, and after his chastenynge, he shall lett your increase remayne, for meat and drinckoffrynges vnto the Lord your God?
Blowe out with the trompette in Syon, proclayme a fastynge, call the congregacyon,
and gather the people together: warne the congregacyon, gather the elders, brynge the chyldren Ꟶ sucklynges together. Lett the brydegrome go forth of his chambre, and the bryde out of her closet.
Lett the prestes serue the Lorde betwyxte the porch and the aulter, wepinge and sayinge: be fauourable, O Lorde, be fauourable vnto thy people: let not thyne heritage be brought to soch confusyon, lest the Heathen be lordes therof. Wherfore shulde they saye amonge the Heathen: where is nowe theyr God.
Then shall the Lorde be gelous ouer his lande, and spare hys people:
yee, the Lorde shall answere, and saye vnto his people: Beholde, I wyll sende you corne, wyne Ꟶ oyle, so that ye shall haue plenty of them: and I will nomore geue you ouer to be a reprofe amonge the Heathen.
Agayne, as for him of the north, I shall dryue him farre from you: and shute him out into a drye Ꟶ waste lande, his face towarde the east see, and his hynder partes towarde the vtmost see. The styncke of him shall go vp, and his fylthy corrupcyon shall fall vpon him selfe, because he hath dealt so proudly.
Feare not (O lande) but be glad and reioyse, for the Lorde will do great thinges.
Be not ye afrayed nether (O ye beastes of the felde) for the pastures shalbe grene, and the trees shall beare their frute: the fyggetrees and vyneyardes shall geue theyr increase.
Be glad then (O ye chyldren of Syon) and reioyse in the Lorde youre God, for he hath geuen you a teacher of ryghteousnesse: Ꟶ he it is that shall sende you downe shouers of rayne, early and late in the fyrst moneth:
so that the garners shalbe full of corne, and the presses plenteous in wyne and oyle.
And as for the yeares that the gresshoper, locuste, blastynge, and caterpyller (my greate hoost, which I sent amonge you) haue eaten vp, I shall restore them to you agayne.
so that ye shall haue ynough to eate, Ꟶ be satisfyed: and prayse the name of the Lorde your God, that so maruelously hath dealte with you. And my people shall neuer be confounded any more.
Ye shall well knowe, that I am in the myddest of Israell, and that I am youre God: yee, and that there is none other, and my people shall no more be brought to confusion.
After this, will I poure out my sprete vpon all flesh: and your sonnes and your daughters shall prophecy: your olde men shall dreame dreames, and youre yonge men shall se visyons,
yee, in those dayes I will poure out my sprete vpon seruauntes and maydens.
I will shewe wonders in heauen aboue and tokens in the earth beneth: bloude and fyre, and the vapoure of smoke.
The sunne shalbe turned into darckenes, and the mone into bloude: before the greate Ꟶ notable daye of the Lord come.
And the tyme shall come, that whosoeuer calleth on the name of the Lorde, shalbe saued. For vpon the mounte Syon and at Ierusalem, there shalbe a saluacyon, lyke as the Lorde hath promysed: yee, and amonge the other remnaunt, whom the Lorde shall call.
For take hede: in those dayes and at the same tyme, when I turne agayne the captiuyte of Iuda and Ierusalem:
I shall gather all people together, and brynge them in the valley of Iosaphat: and there will I reason with them: because of my people and heritage of Israel: whom they haue scatred about in the nacyons: and parted my lande:
yee, they haue cast lottes for my people, the yonge men haue they set in the bordel house, Ꟶ solde the damsels for wyne, that they myght haue to drincke.
Thou Tirus and Sidon and all ye borders of the Philistines: what haue ye to do wt me? Will ye defye me? well, yf ye will nedes defye me, I shall recompence you, euen vpon your heade, Ꟶ the ryght worthely:
for ye haue taken awaye my syluer and golde, my fayre and goodly Iewels, and brought them into your goddes houses.
The chyldren also of Iuda and Ierusalem haue ye solde vnto the Grekes, that ye myght brynge them farre from the borders of their awne countrees.
Beholde therfore, I wyll rayse them out of the place, where ye haue solde them, and will rewarde you euen vpon your head.
Your sonnes and youre daughters wyll I sell thorowe the handes of the chyldren of Iuda, and so they shall geue them forth to sell, vnto them of Saba, a people of a farre countre: for the Lorde him selfe hath sayde it.
Crye oute these thynges amonge the Gentyles, proclayme warre, wake vp the gyauntes, let them drawe nye, let them come vp all the lusty warryours of them.
Make you sweardes of your plowshares, and speares of youre sycles Ꟶ sythes. Let the weake man saye: I am stronge.
Mustre you, Ꟶ come, all ye Heathen rounde about: gather you together, there shall the Lord laye all thy gyauntes to the grounde.
Lett the people aryse, Ꟶ get them to the valley of Iosaphat for there will I syt, Ꟶ iudge all Heathen rounde about
Laye to your sythes, for the haruest is rype: come, get you downe: the wyne presse is full, yee, the wynepresses runne ouer, for their wickednes is waxen greate.
In the valley appoynted, there shalbe many, many people: for the daye of the Lorde is nye in the valley appoynted.
The sunne Ꟶ moone shalbe darckened, Ꟶ the starres shall withdrawe their lyght.
The Lorde shall roare out of Syon, and crye out of Ierusalem, that the heauens and the earth shall quake withall. But the Lorde shalbe a defence vnto hys awne people, and a refuge for the chyldren of Israel.
Thus shall ye knowe, that I the Lorde youre God dwell vpon my holy mounte of Syon. Then shall Ierusalem be holy, Ꟶ there shall no straungers go thorowe her any more.
Then shall the mountaynes drope swete wyne, and the hylles shall flowe with mylcke. All the ryuers of Iuda shall haue water ynough, and out of the Lordes house there shall flowe a spring, to water the broke of Sitim:
but Egypte shalbe layed waste, and Edom shalbe desolate: because they haue dealte so cruelly with the chyldren of Iuda, and shed innocent bloude in theyr lande.
Agayne, Iuda shalbe inhabited for euermore, Ꟶ Ierusalem from generacyon to generacyon:
for I will not leaue their bloude vnauenged. And the Lorde shall dwell in Syon.
These are the sermons that were shewed vnto Amos, (which was one of the shepherdes at Thecua) vpon Israell, in the tyme of Osiah kinge of Iuda, and in the tyme of Ieroboam the sonne of Ioah kynge of Israel, two yeare before the earth quake.
And he sayde: The Lorde shall roare oute of Sion, and shewe his voyce from Ierusalem: so that the pastures of the shepherdes shalbe in a myserable case, Ꟶ the toppe of Charmel dryed vp.
Thus sayeth the Lorde: for thre and foure wyckednesses of Damascus, I will not spare her: because they haue throshed Galaad with yron flayles.
But I will sende a fyre into the house of Hazaell, the same shall consume the palaces of Benadab.
Thus will I breake the barres of Damascus, and rote out the inhabyter from the felde of Auen, And him that holdeth the scepter, out of the pleasaunt house: so that the people shalbe dryuen out of fayre Siria, sayeth the Lorde.
Thus sayeth the Lord: For thre and foure wickednesses of Gaza, I will not spare her: because they make the presoners yet more captyue, and haue dryuen them into the lande of Edom.
Therfore will I sende a fyre into the walles of Gaza, whych shall deuoure her houses.
I will rote out them that dwell at Asdod and him that holdeth the scepter of Ascalon, and stretche out myne hande ouer Accaron, that the remnaunt of the Philistines shall peryshe, sayeth the Lorde.
Thus sayeth the Lorde: For thre Ꟶ foure wickednesses of the cytie of Tyre, I wyll not spare her: because they haue increased the captiuyte of the Edomites, and haue not remembred the brotherly couenaunt.
Therfore, wyll I sende a fyre into the walles of Tyre, that shall consume her palaces.
Thus sayeth the Lord: For thre and foure wickednesses of Edom I wyll not spare hym, because he persecuted hys brother with the swerde, destroyed his mothers wombe, bare hatred very longe, and so kepte indignacion all waye by hym.
Therfore wyll I sende a fyre into Theman, which shall deuoure the palaces of Bosra.
Thus sayeth the Lorde: for thre Ꟶ foure wickednesses of the chyldren of Ammon, I wyll not spare them: because they rypt vp the wemen greate wyth chylde in Galaad, to make the borders of their landes the wyder.
Therfore, I will kyndle a fyre in the walles of Rabbath, that shall consume her palaces: with a greate crye, in the daye of batayll, in tempest and in the daye of storme:
so that their kynge shall go into captiuyte he Ꟶ hys prynces together, sayeth the Lorde.
Thus sayeth the Lorde: For thre and foure wyckednesses of Moab, I wyll not spare hym: because he brent the bones of the kynge of Edom to asshes.
Therfore, wyll I sende a fyre into Moab, which shall consume the palaces of Carioth: so that Moab shall peryshe with noyse and the sounde of a shawme.
I wyll rote out the iudge from amonge them, Ꟶ slaye all hys prynces with him, sayeth the Lorde.
Thus sayeth the Lorde: for thre and foure wyckednesses of Iuda, I wyll not spare him: because he hath cast a syde the lawe of the Lorde, and not kepte hys commaundementes: for why? they wolde nedes be disceaued with the lyes that theyr forefathers folowed.
Therfore, will I sende a fyre into Iuda, which shall consume the palaces of Ierusalem.
Thus sayeth the Lorde: For thre and foure wickednesses of Israel, I will not spare him because he hath solde the ryghteous for money, Ꟶ the poore for shoes.
They treade vpon poore mens heades, in the dust of the earth, Ꟶ croke the wayes of the meke. The sonne and the father go to the harlot, to dishonoure my holy name,
they lye besyde euery alter vpon clothes taken to pledge, and in the house of theyr goddes they dryncke the wyne of the oppressed.
Yet destroyed I the Amoryte before them, that was as hye as the Cedre trees, and as stronge as the okes: notwithstandynge I destroyed his frute from aboue and his rote from vnder:
Agayne, I brought you out of the lande of Egypt, Ꟶ led you fourty yeares thorowe the wildernes, that ye might haue the Amorites landes in possession.
I raysed vp prophetes amonge youre chyldren, and absteyners amonge youre yonge men. Is it not so, O ye chyldren of Israel, sayeth the Lorde?
But ye gaue the absteyners wyne to dryncke, yee, ye commaunded the prophetes sayinge. Prophecy not.
Beholde, I will crashe you in sonder, lyke as a wayne crassheth, that is full of sheaues:
so that the swifte shall not escape nether the stronge be able to do eny thynge: no, the gyaunte shall not saue his awne lyfe.
The archer shall not abyde, and the swyfte of fote shall not escape. The horsman shall not saue his lyfe,
and he that is as manly of stomack as a gyaunte, shall in that daye be fayne to runne his waye naked, sayeth the Lorde.
Heare, what the Lord speaketh vnto you (O ye chyldren of Israel) namely, vnto all the trybes, whom I brought out of Egypt, and sayde:
you only haue I accepted from all the generacyons of the earth: therfore, will I viset you in all your wickednesses.
Maye twayne walke together excepte they be agreed amonge them selues?
Doth a lyon roare in the wodde, except he haue a praye? Or crieth a lyons whelpe out of his denne, excepte he haue gotten somthinge?
Doth a byrde fall in a snare vpon the earth where no fouler is? Taketh a man his snare vp from the grounde, afore he catche somwhat?
Crye they out Alarum with the trompet in the cytie, and the people not afrayed? Commeth there eny plage in a cytie without it be the Lordes doynge?
Nowe doth the Lorde God no maner of thinge, but he telleth his secrete before vnto hys seruauntes the prophetes.
When a lyon roareth, who wyll not be afrayed? Seinge then that the Lorde God him selfe speaketh, who wyll not prophecy?
Preach in the palaces at Asdod, and in the palaces of the lande of Egypt, and saye: gather you together vpon the mountaynes of Samaria, so shall ye se greate murther and violent oppressyon amonge them, for why? they regarde not the thinge that is ryght,
sayeth the Lorde: they gather together euell gotten goodes, and laye vp robbery in their houses:
Therfore, thus sayeth the Lorde God. This lande shalbe troubled and beseged rounde about, thy strength shalbe plucte from the, and thy palaces robbed.
Thus sayeth the Lorde. lyke as an heardman taketh two legges or a pece of an eare out of the lyons mouth: Euen so the chyldren of Israel (that dwell in Samaria) hauynge their couches in the corner, their beddes at Damascus, shalbe plucte awaye.
Heare, Ꟶ beare recorde in the house of Iacob (sayeth the Lorde God of hoostes)
that when I begynne to vyset the wyckednesse of Israel, I will vyset the aulters at Bethell also: so that the hornes of the aulter shalbe broken of, and fall to the grounde.
As for the wynterhouse Ꟶ sommerhouse I will smyte them downe: and the houses of yuery: yee, and many other houses shall peryshe, and be destroyed, sayeth the Lorde.
O heare thys worde ye fat kyne, that be vpon the hyll of Samaria: ye that do poore men wronge, and oppresse the nedy: ye that saye to your lordes: brynge hyther, let vs drinke.
Therfore, the Lorde hath sworne by hys holynes: The dayes shall come vpon you, that the enemyes shall cary you away in shyppes, Ꟶ your posterite shalbe caryed awaye vpon fyshers hokes.
Ye shall get you out at the gappes one after another, euen the kynges palace shall you ouer throwe, to make awaye to escape, sayeth the Lorde.
Ye came to Bethell for to worcke vngraciousnes, and haue increased your sinnes at Galgal: ye brought your sacrifyces in the mornynge, and youre tythes vnto the thirde daye.
Ye made a thankofferynge of leuen, ye promysed frewill offeringes, and proclamed them. Soch lust had ye, O ye children of Israel, sayeth the Lord God.
Therfore haue I geuen you ydle teeth in all youre cyties, and scarsnesse of bred in all your palaces: yet will ye not turne vnto me, sayeth the Lorde.
When there were but thre monethes vnto the haruest, I withelde the rayne from you: ye I rayned vpon one cytie: and not vpon another, one pece of grounde was moystured wt rayne, and the grounde that I rayned not vpon, was drye.
Wherfore two, yee, thre cyties came vnto one, to drincke water: but they were not satisfyed, yet will ye not turne vnto me, sayeth the Lorde.
I haue smytten you with drouth Ꟶ blastinge: and loke howe many orchardes, vyneyardes, fyggetrees Ꟶ olyuetrees ye had: the caterpyller hath eaten them vp. But yet will ye not turne vnto me, sayeth the Lorde.
Pestylence haue I sent amonge you, as I dyd in Egypt: your yonge men haue I slayne with the swerde, and caused your horses to be taken captyue: I made the stinckynge sauour of youre tentes to come vp into youre nostrels. Yet will ye not turne vnto me, sayeth the Lorde.
Some of you haue I ouerthrowen, as I ouerthrewe Sodome and Gomorre: so that ye were as a bronde plucte out of the fyre. Yet wyll ye not turne vnto me, sayeth the Lorde.
Therfore, thus will I handle the agayne, O Israel, ye euen thus will I handle the. Make the ready then to mete thy God, O Israel.
For lo, he maketh the mountaynes, he ordeyneth the wynde, he sheweth man what he is aboute to do: he maketh the mornynge and the darckenes, he treadeth vpon the hye places of the earth; the Lorde God of hostes is his name.
Heare thys worde, O ye house of Israel, Ꟶ why? I must make thys mone for you.
The vyrgyn Israel shall fall, Ꟶ neuer ryse vp agayne: she shalbe cast downe vpon her awne grounde, and no man shall helpe her vp.
For thus sayeth the Lorde God: where as there dwelt a .M. in one cytie, there shalbe left scarce an hundred therin: Ꟶ where there dwelt an .C. there, shall scarce ten be left in the house of Israel.
Neuertheles, thus sayth the Lorde vnto the house of Israell: Seke after me, and ye shall lyue,
but seke not after Bethel. Come not at Gilgal, and go not to Bersaba: for Gilgal shalbe caryed awaye captyue, and Bethel shall come to naught.
Seke the Lorde, that ye maye lyue: lest the house of Ioseph be brent with fyre and consumed Ꟶ lest there be none to quenche Bethell.
Ye turne the lawe to wormwod, Ꟶ cast downe ryghteousnes vnto the grounde.
Ye forsake the Lord that maketh the .vij. starres Ꟶ the Orions, that turneth the nyght into daye, and of the daye he maketh darcknesse. He calleth the waters of the see, and poureth them out vpon the playne grounde: the Lorde is hys name.
He rayseth destruccyon vpon the myghtye people, Ꟶ bringeth downe the stronge holde.
But they owe him euell will, that reproueth them openly: and who so telleth them the playne trueth, they abhorre hym.
For so moche then as ye oppresse the poore, and robbe him of his best sustenaunce: therfore, where as ye haue buylded houses of square stone, ye shall not dwell in them. Maruelous pleasaunt vyneyardes shall ye plante, but the wyne of them shall ye not drincke: Ꟶ why?
as for the multitude of youre wyckednesses and youre stoute synnes, I knowe them ryght well. Enemyes are ye of the ryghteous, ye take rewardes, ye oppresse the poore in iudgement.
Therfore, the wyse must nowe be fayne to holde his tunge, so wycked a tyme is it.
Seke after the thinge that is good, Ꟶ not euell, so shall ye lyue: yee, the Lorde God of hoostes shalbe with you, accordinge to your awne desyre.
Hate the euell, and loue the good: set vp ryght agayne in the porte: and (no doute) the Lorde God of Hoostes shalbe mercyfull vnto the remnaunt of Ioseph.
If no (sayeth the Lorde God, the God of hostes) there shall be mournynge in all stretes, yee, they shall saye in euery strete: alas, alas. They shall call the housbandman to lamentacyon, and soch as can mourne to mournynge.
In all vyneyardes there shall be heuynesse, for I will come amonge you, sayeth the Lorde.
Wo be vnto them that desyre the daye of the Lorde. Wherfore wolde ye haue it? As for the daye of the Lorde, it shalbe darcke and not cleare.
Yee, lyke as when a man runneth from a lyon, and a Beer meteth with him: or when he commeth into the house, Ꟶ leaneth his hande vpon the wall, a serpent byteth him.
Shall not the daye of the Lorde be darcke, Ꟶ not cleare? shall it not be cloudy, Ꟶ no shyne in it?
I hate and abhorre your holy dayes, Ꟶ where as ye cense me when ye come together, I wyll not accepte it.
And though ye offre me brent offrynges and meat offrynges, yet haue I no pleasure therin. As for your fat thanckofferynges. I wyll not loke vpon them:
Awaye with that noyse of thy songes, I will not heare thy playes of musyck:
but se that equytie flowe as the water, and ryghteousnesse as a myghtye streame.
O ye house of Israel, gaue ye me offrynges and sacrifyces those fourty yeares longe in the wyldernes?
yet haue ye set vp tabernacles to your Moloch, and ymages of your Idols, yee, and the starre of your God Rempha, fygures which ye made to worshyppe them.
Therfore wyll I cause you to be caryed awaye beyonde Damascus, sayeth the Lord, whose name is the God of Hostes.
O wo be to the proude welthy in Syon to soch as thinke them so sure vpon the mount of Samaria? whych holde them selues for the best of the worlde, and rule the house of Israel, euen as they lyst.
Go vnto Calne, and se: and from thence get you to Hemath the great cytie, Ꟶ so go downe to Gath of the Philistines: be they better at ease then these kyngdomes, or the border of their lande wyder then yours?
Ye are taken out for the euell daye, euen ye that syt in the stole of wylfulnesse.
Ye that lye vpon beddes of Yuery, and vse youre wantonnesse vpon your couches: ye that eate the best lambes of the flocke, Ꟶ the fattest calues of the droaue:
ye that synge to the lute, and in playenge of instrumentes compare youre selues vnto Dauid:
ye that dryncke wyne out of goblettes, and anoynte youre selues with the best oyle, but no man is sory for Iosephs hurte.
Therfore, nowe shall ye be the fyrst of them, that shall be led awaye captiue, and the lusty chere of the wylfull shall come to an ende.
The Lorde God hath sworne euen by him selfe (sayeth the Lorde God of Hostes) I hate the pryde of Iacob, and I abhorre his palaces: and I will geue ouer the cytie, with all that is therin:
so that though there remayne ten men in one house, they shall dye.
So their nexte kynsfolekes and the deed buriers shall take them, and cary awaye theyr bones, and saye vnto him, that is in the ynnermer house: is there yet eny mo by the? And he shall answere: they are all gone, holde thy tunge (shall he saye) for they wolde not remembre the name of the Lorde.
Beholde, the Lorde is mynded to smyte the greate houses, so that they shall decaye: and the lytle houses, that they shall cleue a sunder.
Who can runne wt horses, or plowe with oxen vpon the harde rockes of stone? For why ye haue turned true iudgement into bytternesse Ꟶ the frute of ryghteousnesse into wormwod:
Yee, euen ye, that reioyse in vayne thinges: ye that saye: haue not we optayned hornes in oure awne strength?
Wel, take hede, O ye house of Israel, sayeth the Lorde God of hoostes: I will bringe a people vpon you, whych shall trouble you, from the waye that goeth towarde Hemath, vnto the broke in the medowe.
The Lorde God shewed me soch a vysyon: beholde, there stode one that made greshoppers, euen when the corne was shotynge forth, after the king had clypt his shepe.
Now when they vndertoke to eate vp all the grene thinges in the lande, I sayde: O Lord God, be mercyfull, I beseche the: who shulde els helpe vp Iacob that is brought so lowe?
So the Lorde was gracious therin, and the Lord sayde: well, it shall not be.
Agayne, the Lord shewed me thys visyon: beholde, the Lorde God called the fyre to punysh wythall, and it deuoured the great depe: yee, it consumed a parte all redy.
Then sayde I: O Lorde God, holde thyne hande: for who shulde els helpe vp Iacob that is brought so lowe?
So the Lord was mercyfull therin, and the Lorde God sayd: wel, it shall not be.
Moreouer, he shewed me thys vysyon: beholde, the Lord stode vpon a plastered wall and a masons trowel in his hande.
And the Lord sayd vnto me: Amos, what seest thou I answered: a masons trowell. Then sayde the Lorde: beholde, I wyll laye the trowell amonge my people of Israel, Ꟶ wyll nomore ouer se them,
but the hye hylchapels of Isaac must be layed waste, and the churches of Israell made desolate, and as for the house of Ieroboam, I wyll stande vp agaynst it with the swerde.
Upon thys sent Amasyah the prest to Bethel vnto Ieroboam the kynge of Israel, sayenge. Amos maketh the house of Israel to rebel agaynst the, the lande can not awaye wyth hys wordes.
For Amos sayeth, Ieroboam shall dye wyth the swerde, and Israell shall be led awaye captiue out of theyr awne lande.
And Amasiah sayde vnto Amos, Gett the hence (thou that canst se so well) and fle into the lande of Iuda: get the there thy lyuinge, and prophecy there:
and prophecy nomore at Bethell, for it is the kynges chapell, and the kynges courte.
Amos answered, and sayde to Amasiah: As for me I am nether prophet, ner prophetes sonne: but a keper of catell. Now as I was breakynge downe molberies, Ꟶ going after the catell,
the Lorde toke me, and sayd vnto me: Go thy waye, and prophecy vnto my people of Israel.
And therfore, heare thou nowe the worde of the Lorde: Thou sayest: prophecy not agaynst Israel, and speake nothynge agaynst the house of Isaac.
wherfore, thus sayeth the Lord: Thy wyfe shalbe defyled in the cytie, thy sonnes and daughters shall be slayne with the swearde, Ꟶ thy lande shalbe measured out wyth the line. Thou thy selfe shalt dye in an vnclene lande, Ꟶ Israel shalbe dryuen out of his awne contre.
The Lorde God: shewed me thys vysyon: and beholde, there was a maunde wt sommer frute.
And he sayde: Amos, what seyst thou? I answered: a maunde wt sommer frute. Then sayde the Lorde vnto me: the ende commeth vpon my people of Israel, I wyll nomore ouerse them.
In that daye shall the songes of the temple be turned into sorowe, saieth the Lord God, many deed bodyes shall lye in euery place, and be cast forth secretly.
Heare thys, O ye that oppresse the poore, and destroye the nedy in the lande, saying:
When will the new moneth be gone, that we maye sell vytayle, Ꟶ the Sabboth, that we maye haue scarcenesse of corne: to make the bushel lesse, and the Sycle greater?
We shall set vp false wayghtes, that we maye get the pore vuder vs wyth theyr money, and the nedy also for shoes: yee, let vs sell the chaffe for corne.
The Lord hath sworne agaynst the pryde of Iacob: these workes of theyrs wyll I neuer forget.
Shall not the lande tremble, and all they that dwell therin, mourne for this? Shall not theyr destruccyon come vpon them lyke a water streame, and flowe ouer them as the floude of Egypte?
At the same tyme (sayeth the Lord God) I shall cause the Sunne to go downe at none, and the lande to be darcke in the cleare daye.
Your hye feastes wyll I turne to sorowe, Ꟶ youre songes to mournynge: I will bringe sack cloth vpon all backes, and baldnes vpon euery head: yee, soch a mournynge wyll I sende them. as is made vpon an only begotten sonne, and they shall haue a myserable ende.
Beholde, the tyme commeth (sayeth the Lorde God) that I shall sende an hunger into the earth: not the hunger of bred, ner the thyrst of water: but an hunger so heare the worde of the Lorde:
so that they shall go from the one see to the other, yee, from the north vnto the east, runnynge aboute to seke the worde of the Lorde, Ꟶ shall not fynde it
In that tyme, shall the fayre virgins Ꟶ the yonge men perysh for thyrst,
yee, euen they that sweare in the execrable calfe of Samarya, Ꟶ saye: as truly as thy God lyueth at Dan, and as truly as thy God lyueth at Bersaba. These shall fall, and neuer ryse vp agayne.
I sawe the Lorde standynge vpon the aulter, Ꟶ he sayde: smyte the dore cheke, that the postes maye shake wythall. For theyr couetousnesse shall fall vpon all theyr heades, Ꟶ theyr posterite shalbe slayne with the swerde. They shall not fle awaye, there shall not one of them escape, ner be delyuered.
Though they were buryed in the hell, my hande shall fetch them from thence: though they clyme vp to heauen, yet shall I cast them downe:
though they hyde them selues vpon the toppe of Carmel, yet shall I seke them out, and brynge them from thence: though they crepe downe fro my syght into the depe of the see, I shall commaunde the serpente, euen there to byte them.
If they goo awaye before theyr enemyes into captiuite, then shall I commaunde the swerde, there to slaye them. Thus wyll I sett myne eyes vpon them, for theyr harme and not for theyr wealth.
For when the Lorde God of hoostes toucheth a lande, it consumeth awaye, and all they that dwell therin, must nedes mourne: And why? theyr destruccyon shall aryse as euery streame Ꟶ runne ouer them, as the floude in Egypte.
He that hath hys dwellynge in heauen, Ꟶ groundeth hys tabernacle in the earth: He that calleth the waters as the see, Ꟶ poureth them out vpon the playne grounde: his name is the Lorde.
O ye chyldren of Israel, are ye not vnto me, euen as the Moryans, sayeth the Lorde: haue not I brought Israel out of the lande of Egypte, The Philistynes from Capthor, and the Syrians from Cyr?
Beholde, the eyes of the Lorde are vpon the realme that synneth, to rote it clene out of the earth: Neuertheles, I will not vtterly destroye the house of Iacob, sayeth the Lorde.
For lo this I promyse: though I syfte the house of Israel amonge all nacyons (lyke as they vse to syfte in a syue) yet shall not the smallest grauell stone fall vpon the earth:
But all the wicked doers of my people, that saye: Tush, the plage is not so nye, to come so hastely vpon vs: those shall perysh wyth the swerde.
At that tyme will I buylde agayne the tabernacle of Dauid, that is fallen downe, and hedge vp his gappes: and loke what ys broken, I shal repayre it: yee, I shall buylde it agayne, as it was afore tyme
that they maye possesse the remnaunt of Edom, yee, and all soch people as call vpon my name wyth them, sayeth the Lorde, whych doth these thynges.
Beholde, the tyme commeth (sayeth the Lorde) that the plowman shall ouer take the mower, Ꟶ treader of grapes, hym that soweth sede. The mountaynes shall droppe swete wyne, and the hylles shall be frutefull
Ꟶ I wyll turne the captiuyte of my people of Israell: they shal repayre the waste cyties, and haue them in possession: they shall plante vyneyardes, and dryncke the wyne therof they shall make gardens, Ꟶ enioye the frutes of them.
And I wyll plante them vpon theyr awne grounde, so that I will neuer rote them out agayne from theyr lande whych I haue geuen them sayeth the Lorde thy God.
Thys is the visyon that was shewed vnto Abdy. Thus hath the Lord God spoken vpon Edom: We haue hearde of the Lorde that there is an embassage sent amonge the Heathen: Up let vs aryse, and fyght agaynst them.
Beholde, I wyll make the small amonge the Heathen, so that thou shalt be vterly despysed.
The pryde of thyne herte hath lyft the vp thou that dwellest in the stronge holdes of stone, Ꟶ hast made the an hye seate: Thou sayest in thyne hert: who shall cast me downe to the grounde?
But though thou wentest vp as hye as the Aegle, and madest thy nest aboue amonge the starres: yet wolde I plucke the downe from thence.
Yf the theues and robbers came to the by nyght, thou takinge thy rest: shulde they not steale, tyl they had ynough? Yf the grape gatherers came vpon the, wolde they not leaue the some grapes?
But how shall they rype Esau, and seke out hys treasures?
Yee, the men that were sworne vnto the, shal dryue the out of the borders of thyne awne lande. They that be now at one wt the, shall disceaue the, and ouercome the: Euen they that eate thy bred, shal betraye the, or euer thou perceaue it.
Shall not I at the same tyme destroye the wyse men of Edom, and those that haue vnderstandyng, from the mount of Esau?
Thy gyauntes (O Theman) shalbe afrayed, for thorow the slaughter they shalbe all ouer throwne vpon the mount of Esau.
Shame shall come vpon the, for the malyce that thou shewedest to thy brother Iacob: yee, for euermore shalt thou perish,
and that because of the tyme, when thou dydest set thy selfe agaynst hym, euen when the enemyes caryed awaye hys hoost, Ꟶ when the aleauntes came in at his portes, Ꟶ cast lottes vpon Ierusalem, and thou thy selfe wast as one of them.
Thou shalt nomore se the daye of thy brother, thou shalt nomore beholde the tyme of hys captiuite: thou shalt nomore reioyse ouer the children of Iuda, in the daye of theyr destruccyon, thou shalt tryumphe nomore in the tyme of theyr trouble.
Thou shalt nomore come in at the gates of my people, in the tyme of theyr decaye: thou shalt not se theyr misery in the daye of theyr fall. Thou shalt sende out no man agaynst theyr hoost, in the daye of theyr aduersyte:
nether shalt thou stande waytynge any more at the corners of the stretes, to murthur soch as are fled, or to take them presoners, that remayne in the daye of theyr trouble.
For the daye of the Lorde is harde by vpon all the Heathen. Lyke as thou hast done, so shalt thou be dealte wythall, yee, thou shalt be rewarded euen vpon thyne head.
For lyke wyse as ye haue droncken vpon myne holy hyll, so shall all heathen dryncke contynually: yee, drincke shall they, and swalowe vp, so that ye shalbe, as though ye had neuer bene.
But vpon the mount Syon shall the saluacyon be, and holynes, these shalbe holy, Ꟶ the house of Iacob shall possesse euen those, that had them selues afore in possession.
Moreouer. the house of Iacob shalbe a fyre, the house of Ioseph a flame, and the, house of Esau shalbe the strawe: whych they shall kyndle and consume, so that nothyug shalbe left of the house of Esau, the Lorde hym selfe hath sayde it.
They of the South shall haue the mount of Esau in possession: and loke what lyeth vpon the grounde, that shall the Philystynes haue: the playne feldes shall Ephraim and Samaria possesse: and the mountaynes of Galaad shall BenIamin haue:
And thys hoost shalbe the chyldren of Israels presoners: Now what so lyeth from Canaan vnto zareptah, and in Sepharad, that shalbe vnder the subieccyon of Ierusalem: and the cyties of the south shall enheret it.
Thus they that escape vpon the hyll of Syon, shall go vp to punysh the mount of Esau, and the kyngdome shalbe the Lordes,
The worde of the Lorde came vnto Ionas the sonne of Amythay saying:
Aryse, Ꟶ get the to Niniue that greate cyte: and preache vnto them, how that theyr wyckednes is come vp before me.
And Ionas made him ready to fle vnto Tharsis from the presence of the Lorde, and gat hym downe to Ioppa: where he founde a shyp ready for to go vnto Tharsis. So he payde hys fare, and wente aborde, that he myght go with them vnto Tharsis, from the presence of the Lorde.
But the Lorde hurled a greate wynde into the see, and there was a myghtye tempest in the see: so that the shyppe was in ieoperdy of goynge in peces.
Then the maryners were afrayde, and cryed euery man vnto his God: and the goodes that were in the shyppe, they cast into the see, to lyghten it of them. But Ionas gatt hym vnder the hatches, where he layed him downe Ꟶ slombred.
So the master of the shyppe came to him and sayde vnto him: why slomberest thou? Up, call vpon thy God: yf God (happely) wyll thynke vpon vs, that we perysh not.
And they sayde one to another: come, let vs cast lottes: that we maye knowe, for whose cause we are thus troubled. And so they cast lottes, and the lot fell vpon Ionas.
Then sayd they vnto him: tel vs, for whose cause are we thus troubled? what is thyne occupacyon? whence commest thou? what countre man art thou, and of what nacion?
He answered them: I am an Ebrue, and I feare the Lorde God of heauen, whych made both the see, Ꟶ drye lande.
Then were the men exceadyngly afrayed Ꟶ sayde vnto hym: why dydest thou so? (for they knewe, that he was fled from the presence of the Lorde, because he had tolde them)
Ꟶ sayd moreouer vnto him: What shall we do vnto the, that the see maye ceasse from troublynge vs? (for the see wrought and was troublous)
he answered them: Take me, and cast me into the see, so shall it lett you be in rest: for I wote, it is for my sake, that this great tempeste is come vpon you.
Neuerthelesse, the men assayed wyth rowynge, to brynge the shyppe to lande: but it wolde not be, because the see wrought so: Ꟶ was so troublous agaynst them.
Wherfore they cryed vnto the Lord, Ꟶ sayde: O Lord let vs not perysh for thys mans death, nether laye thou innocent bloude vnto our charge: for thou, O Lord, hast done, euen as thy pleasure was.
So they toke Ionas, and cast hym into the see, and the see lefte ragynge,
And the men feared the Lorde exceadyngly, doyng sacryfyces and makinge vowes vnto the Lorde.
And Ionas prayed vnto the Lorde hys God, out of the fysshes bely,
and sayd. In my trouble I called vnto the Lorde, and he herde me: out of the bely of hell I cryed, Ꟶ thou herdest my voyce.
Thou haddest cast me downe depe in the myddest of the see, Ꟶ the floude compased me aboute: yee, all thy waues and roules of water went ouer me,
I thought that I had bene cast awaye out of thy syght: but I will yet agayne loke towarde thy holy temple.
The waters compased me, euen to the very soule: the depe laye aboute me, Ꟶ the wedes were wrapte aboute myne head.
I went downe to the botome of the hylles, and was barred in with earth for euer. But thou, O Lorde my God, hast brought vp my lyfe agayne out of corrupcion.
When my soule fainted wythin me, I thought vpon the Lorde: Ꟶ my prayer came in vnto the, euen into thy holy temple.
They that hold of vayne vanyties, wyll forsake his mercy.
But I will do the sacrifyce with the voyce of thankesgeuynge, Ꟶ wyll paye that I haue vowed: for why? saluacyon commeth of the Lord.Ion
Then came the worde of the Lord vnto Ionas agayne, sayenge
vp, and get the to Niniue that great cytie Ꟶ preach vnto them the preachynge which I bade the.
So Ionas arose, Ꟶ wente to Niniue at the Lordes commaundement. Niniue was a greate cyte vnto God, namely, of thre dayes iourney,
And Ionas wente to, Ꟶ entred into the cytie: euen a dayes iourney, Ꟶ cryed, sayenge: There are yet .xl. dayes and then shall Niniue be ouerthrowen.
And the people of Niniue beleued God, and proclaymed fastynge, and arayed them selues in sack cloth, as well the greate as the small of them.
And the tydinges came vnto the kyng of Niniue which arose out of hys seate, and dyd hys apparell of and put on sack cloth, and sate hym downe in asshes.
And it was cryed Ꟶ commaunded in Niniue, by the auctorite of the kynge and hys Lordes, sayenge: se that nether man or beest, oxe or shepe taste ought at all: and that they nether fede ner drinke water:
but put on sack cloth both man Ꟶ beast: and crye myghtely vnto God: yee, se that euery man turne from his euell waye, and from the wyckednesse, that he hath in hande.
Who can tell? God maye turne, Ꟶ repente, and cease from his fearcc wrath, that we perysh not.
And when God sawe theyr workes how they turned from their wicked wayes he repented on the euell, which he sayd he wolde do vnto them, and dyd it not.
Therfore Ionas was sore dyscontent and angrie.
And he prayed vnto the Lorde, and sayde: O Lorde, was not thys my sayinge (I praye the) when I was yet in my countre? therfore I hasted rather to fle vnto Tharsis, for I knowe wel ynough that thou art a mercyfull God, full of compassyon, longe sufferyng, and of great kyndnes and repentest when thou shuldest take punyshment,
And now O Lord, take my lyfe fro me (I beseche the) for I had rather dye then lyue.
Then sayde the Lord: art thou so angrie?
And Ionas gat hym out of the cytie, and satt downe on the east syde therof: and there made hym a booth, and sat vnder it in the shadowe, tyll he myght se, what shulde chaunce vnto the cytie.
And the Lord God prepared a wylde vyne, whych sprange vp ouer Ionas, that he myght haue shadowe aboue his head, to delyuer hym out of his payne. And Ionas was excedynge glad of the wylde vyne.
But vpon the nexte morowe agaynst the spryng of the daye. The Lord ordened a worme, whych smote the wylde vyne, so that it wythered awaye.
And when the Sunne was vp, God prepared a feruent east wynde: Ꟶ the Sunne bett ouer the head of Ionas, that he faynted agayne, Ꟶ wysshed vnto his soule, that he myght dye, and sayd: It is better for me to dye, then to lyue.
And God sayd vnto Ionas: Art thou so angrie for the wylde vyne? And he sayd: yee, very angrie am I, euen vnto the deeth.
And the Lord sayd: thou hast compassion vpon a wylde vyne, wheron thou bestowdest no laboure: ner madest it growe whych sprange vp in one nyght Ꟶ peryshed in another:
And shulde not I then haue compassyon vpon Niniue that greate cytie, wherin there are aboue an .C. Ꟶ .xx. thousand personnes, that knowe not theyr ryght hand from the lefte, besydes moch catell?
Thys is the worde of the Lorde, that came vnto Micheas the Morastite, in the dayes of Iothan Ahas and Iehezekiah kynges of Iuda: whych was shewed hym vpon Samaria Ꟶ Ierusalem.
Heare al ye people, marcke this well O earth and all that therin is. Yee, the Lorde God hym selfe be wytnesse amonge you euen the Lord from his holy temple.
For why? beholde, the Lorde shall go out of his place, Ꟶ come downe, Ꟶ treade vpon the hye thynges of the earth.
The mountaynes shall consume vnder him, Ꟶ the valleyes shal cleue asunder: lyke as waxe consumeth at the fyre, Ꟶ as the waters runne downwarde.
And all thys shalbe for the wyckednesse of Iacob. and the synnes of the house of Israel. But what is the wyckednesse of Iacob? Is not Samaria? Whych are the hye places of Iuda? Is not Ierusalem?
Therfore I shall make Samaria an heape of stones in the felde, to laye aboute the vyneyarde: her stones shall I cast into the valley, and discouer her foundacyons.
All her Images shall be broken downe Ꟶ all her garmentes shall be brent in the fyre: yee, all her Idols will I destroye: for why? they are gathered out of the hyre of an whore, Ꟶ into an whores hyre shall they be turned agayne.
Wherfore I will mourne Ꟶ make lamentacion, bare Ꟶ naked will I go: I must mourne lyke the dragons, and take sorowe as the Estriches:
for theyr wounde is past remedy: And why? it is come into Iuda, Ꟶ hath touched the porte of my people at Ierusalem alredy.
Wepe not, lest they at Geth perceaue it. Thou at Bataphra, welter thy selfe in the dust Ꟶ asshes.
Thou that dwellest at Sephyr, get the hence with shame. The proude shall boost nomore for very sorowe: and why? her neyghboure shal take from her what she hath
The rebellyous cytie hopeth, that it shall not be so euell: but for all that, the plage shall come from the Lorde, euen into the porte of Ierusalem,
The greate noyse of the charettes shall feare them, that dwell at Lachys, which is an occasyon of the synne of the daughter of Syon, for in the came vp the wyckednesses of Israel.
Yee, she sent her coursers into the lande of Geth. The houses of lyes will dysceaue the kynges of Israel.
And as for the (O thou that dwellest at Morassa) I shal bring a possessioner vpon the, Ꟶ the plage of Israel shal reach vnto Odolla.
Make the balde, Ꟶ shaue the, because of thy tender chyldren: Make the cleane balde as an Aegle, for they shalbe caryed awaye captiue from the.
O wo vnto them, that Imagyn to do herme, and deuyse vngracyousnesse vpon theyr beddes, to perfourme it in the cleare daye: for ther power is agaynst God.
When they couet to haue lande, they take it by vyolence, they robbe men of theyr houses. Thus they oppresse a man for his house Ꟶ euery man for his herytage.
Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde: Beholde agaynst thys housshold haue I deuysed a plage, wherout ye shall not plucke your neckes: Ye shall nomore go so proudly, for it wyll be a perlous tyme.
In that daye shal thys terme be vsed and a mournynge shalbe made ouer you on thys maner: We be vtterly desolate the porcyon of my people is translated. Whan will he parte vnto vs the laude, that he hath taken from vs?
Neuertheles there shalbe noman to deuyde the thy porcyon in the congregacyon of the Lorde.
Tush, holde your tunge (saye they) It shall not fall vpon thys people, we shall not come so to confusyon,
sayeth the house of Iacob. Is the sprete of the Lorde so cleane awaye? or is he so minded? Treuth it is, my wordes are frendly vnto them that lyue ryght:
but my people doth the contrary, therfore must I take parte agaynst them: for they take awaye both cote and cloke from the symple. Ye haue turned youre selues to fyght,
the wemen of my people haue ye shut out from their good houses, Ꟶ taken awaye my excellent gyftes from theyr children.
Up, get you hence, for here shall ye haue no rest. Because of theyr Idolatrye they are corrupte, Ꟶ shal myserably perysh.
If I were a fleshly felowe, Ꟶ a preacher of lyes, and tolde them that they myght syt bybbynge Ꟶ bollyng, Ꟶ be droncken. O that were a Prophete for thys people,
But I will gather the in dede, O Iacob, Ꟶ dryue the remnaunt of Israell all together. I shal cary them one with another, as a flocke in the folde, and as the catell in theyr stalles, that they maye be dysquyeted of other men.
Who so breaketh the gappe, he shall go before. They shall breake vp the porte, Ꟶ go in Ꟶ out at it. The Kynge shall go before them, and the Lorde shalbe vpon the head of them.
And I sayde: heare, O ye heades of the house of Iacob, Ꟶ ye leders of the house of Israell: Shulde not ye knowe, what were lawfull and ryght?
But ye hate the good, and loue the euel: ye plucke of mennes skynnes, and the flesh from theyr bones:
ye eate the flesh of my people, and flay of theyr skynne: ye breake theyr bones, ye choppe them in peces as it were in to a cauldron, Ꟶ as flesh into a pot
Now the tyme shall come, that when they call vnto the Lorde, he shall not heare them, but hyde hys face from them, because that thorow theyr awne Imagynacyons they haue dealte so wyckedly.
And as concernynge the prophetes that dysceaue my people, thus the Lorde sayeth agaynst them. When they haue eny thynge to byte vpon, then they preach that all shalbe well: but yf a man put not some thing in to theyr mouthes, they preach of warre agaynst hym.
Therfore youre visyon shalbe turned to nyght, Ꟶ youre prophecienge to darcknesse. The Sunne shall go downe ouer those prophetes, Ꟶ the daye shalbe darcke vnto them.
Then shall the visyon seers be ashamed, and the sothsayers confounded: yee, they shalbe fayne, all the packe of them, to stoppe theyr mouthes, for they haue not Gods worde.
As for me, I am full of strength, Ꟶ of the sprete of the Lorde, full of iudgement Ꟶ boldnesse: to shewe the house of Iacob theyr wyckednes, and the house of Israel theyr synne.
O heare this ye rulers of the house of Iacob, Ꟶ ye iudges of the house of Israel, ye that abhorre the thynge that is laufull, Ꟶ wrest asyde the thyng that is streyght.
Ye that buylde vp Syon with bloude, and Ierusalem wt doynge wronge.
O ye iudges, ye geue sentence for gyftes: O ye preastes, ye teach for lucre. O ye prophetes, ye prophecy for mony. Yet will they be taken as those that holde vpon God, and saye: Is not the Lord amonge vs? Tush, there can no mysfortune happen vs.
Therfore shall Sion (for youre sakes) be plowed lyke a felde Ierusalem shall become an heape of stones, and the hyll of the temple shall be turned to an hye wodde.
But in the latter dayes it will come to passe, that the hyll of the Lordes house shalbe sett vp hyer then eny mountaynes or hylles: Yee, the people shall prease vnto it,
and the multitude of the Gentiles shall haste them thyther, sayeng: Come, let vs go vp to the hyll of the Lorde, and to the house of the God of Iacob: that he maye teach vs hys waye, and that we maye walcke in his pathes. For the lawe shall come out of Sion, Ꟶ the worde of God from Ierusalem,
and shall geue sentence amonge the multitude of the Heathen and refourme the people of farre countrees: so that of theyr sweardes they shall make plowshares, Ꟶ sythes of theyr speares. One people shall not lyft vp a sweard agaynst another, yee, they shal nomore learne to fyght:
but euery man shall syt vnder his vineyard Ꟶ vnder his fygge tre, Ꟶ no man to fraye him awaye: for the mouth of the Lord of hostes hath spoken it.
Therfore, where as all the people haue walcked euery man in the name of hys awne God, we wyll walcke in the name of oure God for euer and euer.
At the same tyme, sayeth the Lorde, will I gather vp the lame and the out castes, Ꟶ soch as I haue chastened:
Ꟶ wyll geue yssue vnto the lame, and make of the out castes a great people: and the Lorde hym selfe shalbe theyr kynge vpon the mount Syon, from thys tyme forth for euermore.
And vnto the. (O thou tower of Eder, thou stronge holde of the daughter Syon) vnto the shall it come: euen the lordshipe and kyngdome of the daughter Ierusalem.
Why then art thou now so heuy? is there no kynge in the? are thy councelers awaye that thou art so payned, as a woman in her trayuayle?
And now (O thou daughter Syon) be sory, let it greue the as a wyfe laboryng wyth chylde: for now must thou get the out of the cytie, and dwell vpon the playnefelde: Yee, vnto Babylon shalt thou go, there shalt thou be delyuered, and there the Lorde shall lowse the from the hande of thyne enemyes.
Now also are there many people gathered together agaynst the, saying: what, Sion is cursed, we shall se oure lust vpon her.
But they knowe not the thoughtes of the Lorde, they vnderstande not his councell, that shall gather them together as the sheeues in the barne.
Therfore get the vp, O thou daughter Syon, and throsshe out the corne: For I wyll make thy horne yron, Ꟶ thy clawes brasse, that thou mayest grynde many people: theyr goodes shalt thou appropriate vnto the Lorde, and theyr substaunce vnto the ruler of the whole worlde.
After that shalt thou be robbed thy selfe, O thou robbers daughter: they shall laye sege agaynst vs, Ꟶ smyte the iudge of Israel wt a rodde vpon the cheke.
And thou Bethleem Ephrata, art lytle amonge the thou sandes of Iuda, Out of the shal come vnto me, which shal be the gouernoure in Israel: whose out goynge hath bene from the begynning, Ꟶ from euerlastynge.
In the meane whyle he plageth them for a season, vntyll the tyme that she (which shall beare) haue borne: then shall the remnaunt of his brethren be conuerted vnto the children of Israel.
He shall stande fast, and geue fode in the strength of the Lord, and in the victory of the name of the Lord his God: and when they be conuerted, he shall be magnified vnto the farthest partes of the worlde.
Then shall there be peace, so that the Assyrian maye come into youre lande, Ꟶ treade in youre houses. We shall bringe vp seuen shepherdes and .viii. princes vpon them:
these shall subdue the land of Assur wt the swerde, and the lande of Nymrod with their naked weapens. Thus shal he deliuer vs from the Assirian, when he commeth within oure land, and setteth his fote within oure borders.
And the remnaunt of Iacob shall be amonge the multitude of people, as the dewe of the Lorde, and as the droppes vpon the grasse, that tarieth for no man, and wayteth of no body.
Yee, the residue of Iacob shalbe amonge the Gentiles and the multitude of people, as the lyon amonge the beastes of the wodd, and as the Lyons whelpe amonge a flocke of shepe: which (when he goeth thorowe) treadeth downe, teareth in peces, and there is no man that can helpe.
Thyne hand shalbe lift vp vpon thyne enemyes, and all thyne aduersaries shall perish.
The tyme shall come also, sayeth the Lord, that I will take thine horses from the, and destroye thy charettes.
I wil breake downe the cityes of thy lande, and ouerthrowe all thy stronge holdes.
All witchcraftes wyll I rote oute of thyne hande, there shall no mo sothsayinges be within the.
Thine Idols and thyne Images will I destroye out of the so that thou shalt nomore bowe thy selfe vnto the worckes of thyne awne handes.
Thy groues will I plucke vp by the rotes, Ꟶ breake downe the cities.
Thus will I be auenged also, vpon all the Heathen that will not heare.
Herken now what the Lord sayeth: Up, reproue the mountaynes, Ꟶ lett the hylles heare thy voyce.
O heare the punishement of the Lord, ye mountaynes, Ꟶ ye mightie foundacions of the earth: for the Lord will reproue his people, Ꟶ reason wt Israel.
O my people, what haue I done vnto the? or wherin haue I hurte the? geue me answere.
Because I brought the from the lande of Egipte, and deliuered the out of the house of bondage? Because I made Moses, Aaron and Miriam to lede the?
Remembre (O my people) what Balach the kyng of Moab had Imagyned agaynst the and what answere that Balaam the sonne of Beor gaue him, from Sethim vnto Galgal, that ye maye knowe the louyng kyndnesses of the Lorde.
What acceptable thinge shall I offre vnto the Lord? shal I bowe my knee to the hie God? Shall I come before hym with brentoffrynges, and wyth calues of a yeare olde?
Hath the Lord a pleasure in many thousand rammes, or innumerable streames of oyle? Or shall I geue my fyrst borne for myne offences, Ꟶ the frute of my body for the synne of my soule?
I will shewe the, O man, what is good, Ꟶ what the Lorde requyreth of the Namely, to do right, to haue pleasure in louinge kyndnesse, to be lowly, Ꟶ to walcke wt thy God,
The Lordes voyce crieth vnto the citye, Ꟶ the man that shall be saued considerethe thy name (O Lorde) Herken what is your rodde, Ꟶ here him that warnith you?
Shuld I not be displeased, for the vnrightuous good in the houses of the wycked, Ꟶ because the measure his mynished?
Or shulde I iustifie the false balaunces and the bagge of disceatfull weyghtes,
amonge those that be full of riches vnryghtuously gotten: where the cytesins deale with falshede, speake lyes, Ꟶ haue disceatfull tunges in their mouthes?
Therfore, I will take in hande to punish the, Ꟶ to make the desolate, because of thy sinnes.
Thou shalt eate, Ꟶ not haue ynough: yee, thou shalt bringe thy selfe downe. Thou shalt fle, but not escape: Ꟶ those that thou woldest saue, will I delyuer to the swerde.
Thou shalt sowe, but not reape: thou shalt presse out oliues, but oyle shalt thou not haue to anoynte thy selfe withall: thou shalt treade out swete must, but shalt dryncke no wyne.
Ye kepe the ordinaunces of Amri, and all the customes of the house of Ahab: ye folowe their pleasures, therfore wyll I make the waste, and cause thy inhabyters to be abhorred, O my people: Ꟶ thus shalt thou beare thyne awne shame.
Wo is me: I am become as one, that goeth a gleanynge in the haruest, There are no mo grapes to eate, yet wold I fayne (wyth all my herte) haue of the best frute.
There is not a godly man vpon earth, there is not one rightuous amonge men. They laboure all to shed bloud, and euery man hunteth his brother to death:
yet they saye they do well when they do euel. As the prince will, so sayeth the iudge: that he maye do him a pleasure agayne. The greate man speaketh what his herte desireth: Ꟶ the hearers alowe him.
The best of them is but as a thistle, Ꟶ the most rightuous of them is but as a breer in the hedge. But when the daye of thy preachers commeth, that thou shalt be visyted: then shall they be wasted awaye.
Let no man beleue his frende, ner put hys confydence in a brother. Kepe the porte of thy mouth from her that lyeth in thy bosome:
for the sonne shal put his father to dyshonoure, the daughter shall rise agaynst her mother, the daughter in lawe against her mother in lawe: and a mans foes shalbe euen they of hys awne housholde.
Neuerthelesse, I will loke vp vnto the Lord I wyll paciently abyde God my sauyoure: my God shal heare me.
O thou enemye of myne, reioyce not at my fall, for I shall get vp agayne: Ꟶ though I sytt in darcknesse, yet the Lorde is my lyght.
I wyll beare the punishement of the Lord (for why, I haue offended him) tyll he syt in iudgement vpon my cause, Ꟶ se that I haue right. He wyll bryng me forth to the lyght, Ꟶ I shall se his rightuousnesse.
She that is myne enemy shal loke vpon it, Ꟶ be confounded, which now saieth. Where is thy Lord God? Myne eyes shall beholde her, when she shalbe troden downe, as the claye in the stretes.
The tyme will come, that thy gappes shal be made vp, Ꟶ the lawe shal go abrode:
Ꟶ at that tyme shal they come vnto the from Assur vnto the stronge cityes, Ꟶ from the stronge cityes vnto the ryuer: from the one see to the other, from the one mountayne to the other.
Notwythstandynge, the land must be wasted, because of them that dwell therin, and for the frutes of their awne Imaginacions.
Therfore fede thy people with thy rodde, the flocke of thine heritage which dwel desolate in the wodde: that they maye be fedde vpon the mount of Charmell, Basan Ꟶ Galaad as afore time.
Maruelous thinges wil I shewe them, lyke as when they came oute of Egipte
Thys shall the Heathen se, and be ashamed for all their power, so that they shall laye their hande vpon their mouth, and stoppe their eares.
They shal lycke the dust lyke a serpent, Ꟶ as the wormes of the earth, that tremble in their holes. They shalbe afrayed of the Lord oure God, Ꟶ they shall feare the.
Where is there soch a God as thou? that pardonest wyckednes, and forgeuest the offences of the remnaunt of thyne herytage? He kepeth not his wrath for euer: and why? his delite is to haue compassion:
he shal turne agayne, and be mercyfull to vs: he shal put downe oure wyckednesses, and cast all oure synnes into the botome of the see.
Thou shalt kepe thy trust with Iacob, Ꟶ thy mercy for Abraham, lyke as thou hast sworne vnto oure fathers longe agoo.
Thys is the heuy burthen of Niniue, whych Nahum of Elchos dyd write as he sawe it.
The Lorde is a gelous God, Ꟶ a taker of vengeaunce is the Lorde, and wrothfull. The Lorde taketh vengeaunce of his enemyes, and reserueth displeasure for his aduersaries.
The Lord suffreth longe, he is of great power, Ꟶ so innocent that he leaueth no man fautlesse before him. The Lord goeth forth in tempest Ꟶ stormy wether, the cloudes are the dust of his fete.
When he reproueth the see, he dryeth it vp, Ꟶ turneth all the floudes to drie lande Basan is desolate, Charmel Ꟶ the pleasure of Lybanus wasteth awaye.
The mountaynes tremble for him, the hylles consume. At the sight of him, the earth quaketh: yee, the whole world, and all that dwell therin.
Who maye endure before hys wrath? Or who is able to abide his gryme displeasure? His anger taketh on lyke fyre, and the harde rockes are clouen in sunder before him.
Full gracious is the Lord, and a stronge holde in the time of trouble, he knoweth them that put their trust in hym:
when the floude renneth ouer, and destroyeth the place, and when the darcknesse foloweth styll vpon his enemyes.
What do ye Imagin then agaynst the Lord on this maner? (Tush, when he hath once made an ende, there shall come nomore trouble.)
For like as the thornes that stike together, and as the drie strawe, so shall the dronckardes be consumed together, euen when they be full.
There come oute of the soch as Imagin myschefe, Ꟶ geue vngracious councell agaynst the Lorde.
Therfore thus sayeth the Lord: Let them be as well prepared: yee, Ꟶ as many as they can, yet shall they be hewen downe, and passe awaye. And as for the, I will vexe the, but not vtterly destroye the.
And now wil I breake his rodde from thy backe, Ꟶ burst thy bondes in sonder.
But the Lorde hath geuen a commaundement concernynge the, that there shall come nomore sede of thy name. The carued Ꟶ casten Images will I rote out of the house of thy God. Thy graue shal I prepare for the, and thou shalt be confounded.
Beholde, vpon the mountaynes come the fete of him, that bryngeth good tydinges, Ꟶ preacheth peace. O Iuda, kepe thy holy dayes, perfourme thy promyses: for Belial shal come no more in the, he is vtterly roted out.
b) The scaterer shall come vp agaynst the, Ꟶ laye sege to the castell. Loke thou well to the stretes, make thy loynes stronge, arme thy self with all thy myght:
for the Lord shal restore againe the glory of Iacob, lyke as the glory of Israel. The destroyers haue broken them downe, Ꟶ marred the wyne braunches.
The shilde of his gyauntes glystereth, hys men of warre are clothed in purple. His charettes are as fyre, when he maketh him forward, Ꟶ his spere shaftes are soked in venim
The charettes rolle vpon the stretes, Ꟶ welter in the hye wayes. They are to loke vpon lyke cressettes of fyre, Ꟶ go swyftly, as the lyghteninge.
When he doth but warne his giauntes, they fall in their araye, Ꟶ hastely they clymme vp the walles: yee, the engins of the warre are prepared all ready.
The water portes shall be opened, and the kynges palace shall fall.
The quene her selfe shall be led awaye captiue, and her gentyl wemen shal mourne as the doues, Ꟶ grone within their hertes.
Niniue is like a pole full of water, but then shal they be fayne to fle. Stand, stande, (shal they crie) Ꟶ there shall not one turne backe.
Awaye wt the syluer, awaye with the golde for here is no ende of treasure. There shalbe a multitude of all maner of costly ornamentes
Thus must she be spoyled, emptied Ꟶ clene striped out: that their hertes may be melted awaye, their knees tremble, all their loynes be weake, Ꟶ their faces blacke as a pot.
Where is now the dwellyng of the lyons, Ꟶ the pasture of the lyons whelpes? where the lyon Ꟶ the lyonesse went wt the whelpes, Ꟶ no man frayed them awaye?
But the lyon spoyled ynough for hys yonge ones, Ꟶ deuoured for his lyonesse: he filled his dennes wt his praye, Ꟶ his dwelling place wt that he had rauished.Nah
Beholde, I wil vpon the (saieth the LORDE of hoostes) and wil set fyre vpon thy charettes, that they shal smoke withall, and the swerde shal deuoure thy yonge lyons. I wil make an ende of thy spoylinge from out of the earth, Ꟶ the voyce of thy messaungers shall nomore be herde.
Wo to the bloudthursty citie, which is all full of lyes Ꟶ robbery, Ꟶ wyll not leaue of from rauisshing.
There a man maye heare scourging, russhynge, the noyse of the wheles, the cryenge of the horses, and the rollinge of the charettes.
There the horse men get vp wt naked swerdes, Ꟶ glysteringe speares: there lyeth a multitude slayne, Ꟶ a greate heape of deed bodyes: there is no ende of deed coarses: yee, men fall vpon their bodyes,
And that for the greate and manyfolde whordome, of the fayre Ꟶ beutyfull harlot: which is a mastresse of witchcraft: yee, and selleth the people thorow her whordome, Ꟶ the nacyons thorow her witchcraft.
Beholde, I will vpon the (sayeth the Lord of hostes) and will pull thy clothes ouer thy head: that I maye shewe thy nakednes amonge the Heathen, and thy shame amonge the kyngdomes.
I will cast dyrte vpon the, to make the be abhorred, Ꟶ a gasynge stocke:
Yee, all they that loke vpon the, shall starte backe, and saye: Niniue is destroyed. Who will haue pitie vpon the? where shal I seke one to comforte the?
Art thou better then the greate cite of Alexandria? that laye in the waters, and had the waters rounde aboute it: which was strongly fenced Ꟶ walled with the see?
Ethiopia Ꟶ Egipte were her strength Ꟶ that exceading great, aboue measure. Aphrica Ꟶ Lybia were her helpers,
yet was she dryuen awaye, Ꟶ brought into captiuite, her yonge chyldren were smitten downe at the head of euery strete, the lottes were cast for the most auncyent men in her, Ꟶ all her myghtye men were bounde in chaines.
Euen so shalt thou also be droncken, Ꟶ hyde thy selfe, and seke some helpe agaynst thyne enemy.
All thy stronge cities shalbe lyke fygetrees with ripe figges: whych when a man shaketh, they shall fall into the mouth of the eater.
Beholde, thy people within the, are but wemen: the portes of thy lande shalbe opened vnto thyne enemyes, and the fyre shall deuoure thy barres.
Drawe water now agaynst thou be beseged, make vp thy strong holdes go into the claye, tempre the morter, make strong brick:
yet the fyre shal consume the, the swerde shal destroye the: yee, as the locuste doth, so shal it eate the vp. It shal fal heuely vpon the as the locustes: yee, ryght heuely shall it fall vpon the, euen as the greshoppers.
Thy marchauntes haue bene nombred wt the starres of heauen: but now shal they sprede abrode as the locustes Ꟶ fle their waye:
Thy lordes are as the greshoppers, Ꟶ thy captaynes as the multitude of greshoppers: whych when they be colde, remayne in the hedges: but when the Sunne is vp, they fle awaye, Ꟶ no man can tel where they are become.
Thy shepherdes are a slepe (O kyng of Assur) thy worthyes are layed downe, thy people is scatred abrode vpon the mountaynes, Ꟶ no man gathereth them together agayne.
Thy wounde cannot be hyd, thy plage is so sore. All they that heare this of the, shal clappe their handes ouer the. For what is he, to whom thou hast not alwaye bene doyng hurte?
This is the heuy burthen, which the Prophet Abacuk dyd se.
O Lorde, how longe shall I crie, Ꟶ thou wylt not heare? How longe shall I complayne vnto the, suffrynge wronge, Ꟶ thou wylt not helpe?
Why lettest thou me se werynesse and laboure? Tyranny Ꟶ violence are before me, power ouergoeth right:
for the lawe is toarne in peces, Ꟶ there can not right iudgement go forth And why? the vngodly is more set by then the ryghtuous: this is the cause, that wronge iudgement procedeth.
Beholde, amonge the Heathen, and loke well, wondre at it, and be abashed: for I wyll do a thynge in your tyme, whych though it be tolde you, ye shall not beleue.
For lo, I wil rayse vp the Caldees, that bitter and swyfte people: which shall go as wyde as the land is, to take possession of dwelling places, that be not their awne.
A grymme and boysterous people is it, these shall sit in iudgement Ꟶ punishe.
Their horses are swyfter then the cattes of the mountayne, Ꟶ byte sorer then the wolues in the euening. Their horsemen come by greate heapes from farre, they fle hastely to deuour as the Aegle.
They come all to spoyle: out of them commeth an east wynde, whych bloweth and gathereth their captiues, lyke as the sande.
They shal mocke the kynges, and laughe the princes to scorne. They shall not set by eny stronge holde, for they shall laye ordinaunce agaynst it, and take it.
Then shall they take a fresh corage vnto them, to go forth Ꟶ to do more euel, and so ascribe the power vnto their God.
But thou O Lorde my God my holy one, thou art from the begynninge, therfore shal we not dye. O Lord, thou hast ordened them for a punishement, and sett them to reproue the myghtye.
Thyne eyes are clene, thou mayest not se euel, thou canst not beholde, the thinge that is wycked. Wherfore then dost thou loke vpon the vngodly, and holdest thy tunge, when the wycked deuoureth the man that is better then him selfe?
Thou makest men as the fishe in the see, and lyke as the crepyng beastes, that haue no gyde,
they take vp all with their angle, they catch it in their net, Ꟶ gather it in their yarne: wherof they reioice and are glad.
Therfore offre they vnto their net, Ꟶ do sacrifice vnto their yarne: because that thorowe it their porcyon is become so fat, Ꟶ their meate so plenteous.
Wherfore, they cast out their net agayne, Ꟶ neuer cease to slaye the people.
I stode vpon my watch, Ꟶ set me vpon my bulworcke, to loke and se what he wolde saye vnto me, and what answere I shulde geue him that reproued me.
But the Lord answered me, Ꟶ sayde: Wryte the vision playnely vpon thy tables, that who so commeth by, maye rede it
for the vision is yet farre of for a tyme, but at the last it shal come to passe, Ꟶ not fayle. And though he tary, yet wayte thou for him, for in very dede he will come, Ꟶ not be slacke.
Beholde, the vnrighteouse thinketh him selfe in sauegarde as in a strong holde: but the iust shal lyue by his fayth.
Lyke as the wyne disceaueth the dronckarde, euen so the proude shall fayle and not endure. He openeth his desire wyde vp as the hel, Ꟶ is as vnsaciable as death. All Heathen gathereth he to hym, and heapeth vnto him all people.
But shall not all these take vp a prouerbe agaynst him, Ꟶ mocke him with a byworde, Ꟶ saye: Wo vnto him that heapeth vp other mens goodes? How longe will he lade hym selfe with thicke claye?
O how sodenly wyll they stande vp, that shal byte, Ꟶ awake, that shal teare the in peces? yee, thou shalt be their praye?
Seinge thou hast spoyled many Heathen, therfore shal the remnaunt of the people spoyle the: because of mens bloude, Ꟶ for the wronge done in the lande, in the citye and vnto all them that dwell therin.
Wo vnto him, that couetously gathereth euell gotten goodes into his house: that he maye set hys nest an hye, to escape from the power of misfortune.
Thou hast deuysed the shame of thine awne house, for thou hast slayne to moch people, and hast wilfully offended:
so that the very stones of the wall shal crie out of it, and the tymbre that lyeth betwyxte the ioyntes of the buylding shall answere.
Wo vnto him, that buyldeth the towne with bloude, Ꟶ maynteneth the citye with vnrightuousnes.
Shall not the Lord of hostes bringe this to passe, that the labourers of the people shal be brent with a greate fyre, Ꟶ that the thinge wher vpon the people haue weeried them selues, shalbe lost?
For the earth shalbe full of knowledge of the Lordes honoure, lyke as the waters that couer the see.
Wo vnto him that geueth his neyghboure dryncke, puttynge in gall and makyng him droncken, that he maye se hys preuytees.
Therfore with shame shalt thou be filled, in steade of honoure. Dryncke thou also, tyll thou stombre with all: for the cuppe of the Lordes right hande shall compasse the aboute, and shamefull spewing in steade of thy worshype.
For the wronge that thou hast done in Libanus, shall ouerwhelme the, and the wilde beastes shal make the afrayed: because of mens bloud, Ꟶ for the wronge done in the lande, in the citie, and vnto all soch as dwell therin.
What helpe then will the ymage do, whom the worckman hath fashioned? Or the vayne cast ymage, wherin because the craftesman putteth his trust, therfore maketh he domme Idols?
Wo vnto hym, that sayeth to a pece of wod: aryse, Ꟶ to a domme stone: stande vp. For what instruccyon maye soch one geue? Beholde it is layed ouer with gold Ꟶ syluer and there is no breth in it.
But the Lorde in his holy temple is he: whom all the worlde shulde feare.
A prayer of the prophet Abacuc for the ignoraunt.
O Lorde, when I herde speake of the, I was afrayed. The worcke that thou hast taken in hande, shalt thou perfourme in his tyme, O Lord Ꟶ when thy tyme commeth, thou shalt declare it. In thy very wrath thou thinckest vpon mercy.
God commeth from Theman, Ꟶ the holy one from the mount of Pharan. Selah.
His glory couereth the heauens, Ꟶ the earth is full of his prayse. His shine is as the sunne, and beames of lyght go out of hys handes, there is his power hyd.
Destruccyon goeth before hym, Ꟶ a pestilent sycknesse go from his fete.
He standeth, Ꟶ measureth the earth He loketh, Ꟶ the people consume awaye, the mountaynes of the worlde fal downe to poulder, Ꟶ the hilles are fayne to bowe them selues, for his goinges are euerlastynge and sure.
I sawe, that the pauilyons of the Morians Ꟶ the tentes of the land of Madian were vexed for werynesse.
Wast thou not angrie O Lord, in the waters? was not thy wrath in the floudes, Ꟶ thy displeasure in the see? yes when thou sattest vpon thine horse, Ꟶ when thy charetes had the victory.
Thou shewedst thy bowe openly, lyke as thou haddest promysed wt an othe vnto the trybes. Selah. Thou dydest deuyde the waters of the earth.
When the mountaines sawe the, they were afrayed, the water streame wente awaye: the depe made a noyse at the lyftinge vp of thyne hand.
The Sunne Ꟶ Moone remayned styll in their habitacyon. Thyne arowes wente out glisterynge, and thy speares as the shyne of the lyghtenyng.
Thou trodest downe the land in thyne anger, and dydest throshe the Heathen in thy displeasure.
Thou camest forth to helpe thy people, to helpe thine anointed. Thou smotest downe the head the house of the vngodly, Ꟶ discoueredest hys foundacions, euen vnto the necke of him. Selah.
Thou dydest stryke thorow wt his scepter the heades of his playne people: which come as a stormy wynd to scatre me abrode, Ꟶ are glad when they maye eat vp the poore secretly
Thou makest awaye for thine horses in the see, euen in the mudde of great waters.
When I heare this, my body is vexed, my lyppes tremble at the voyce therof, my bones corrupte, I am afraied where I stande. O that I myght rest in the daye of trouble, that I myght go vp vnto our people, which are alredy prepared.
For the fygg trees shal not be grene: Ꟶ the vynes shal beare no frute. The laboure of the olyue shalbe but lost, Ꟶ the lande shall bring no corne: the shepe shalbe taken out of the folde, and there shalbe no catel in the stalles.
But as for me, I wyll be glad in the Lorde, and will reioyce in God my Sauyoure.
The Lord God is my strength, he shal make my fete as the fete of hertes: Ꟶ he which geueth the victory, shal bring me to my hye places synginge vpon my psalmes.
This is the worde of the Lord, which cam vnto Sophony the sonne of Chusi, the sonne of Gedoliah, the sonne of Amariah, the sonne of Hezekiah in the tyme of Iosiah the sonne of Amon kyng of Iuda.
I wyll gather vp all thynges in the lande (sayeth the Lord)
I wyll gather vp man Ꟶ beast: I wyll gather vp the foules in the ayre and the fysh in the see (to the greate decaye of the wycked) and wyll vtterly destroye the men out of the lande, sayeth the Lord.
I will stretch oute myne hande vpon Iuda, Ꟶ vpon all soch as dwell at Ierusalem. Thus will I rote oute the remnaunt of Baal from this place, Ꟶ the names of the Remurins and prestes:
yee, Ꟶ soch as vpon their house toppes worshyppe and bowe them selues vnto the hoste of heauen: which sweare by the Lord, Ꟶ by their Malchom also:
which starte a backe from the Lord, and nether seke after the Lord ner regarde hym.
Be still at the presence of the Lord God for the daye of the Lord is at hande: yee, the Lord hath prepared a slayne offeryng, and called hys gestes therto.
And thus shall it happen in the daye of the Lordes slaynofferyng. I will viset the princes, the kynges chyldren, and all soch as were straunge clothinge.
In the same daye also wyll I vyset all those, that treade ouer the thresholde so proudly, which fyll their Lordes house with robbery Ꟶ falshede.
At the same tyme (sayeth the Lorde) there shalbe herde a greate crye from the fysh porte and an howlinge from the other porte, and a greate murthur from the hylles.
Howle ye that dwell in the myll, for all the marchaunt people are gone, Ꟶ all they that were laden with syluer, are roted out.
At the same tyme wyll I seke thorow Ierusalem with lanternes, Ꟶ vyset them that continue in their dregges, and saye in their hertes: Tush, the Lord wyll do nether good ner euell.
Their goodes shalbe spoyled, and their houses layed waste: they shal buylde houses, Ꟶ not dwell in them, they shall plante vynyardes, but not drincke that wyne therof.
For the greate daye of the Lord is at hande, it is herde by Ꟶ commeth on a pace. Horrible is the tydinges of the Lordes daye, then shal the giaunte crye out:
for that daye is a daye of wrath, a daye of trouble and heuynesse, a daye of vtter destruccion Ꟶ misery, a darcke Ꟶ glomynge daye, a cloudy Ꟶ stormy daye,
a daye of the noyse of trompettes Ꟶ shawmes, agaynst the stronge cyties Ꟶ hie towres.
I will bringe the people into soch vexacion, that they shal go aboute lyke blinde men, because they haue synned agaynst the Lord. Their bloude shalbe shed as the dust, Ꟶ their bodies as the myre.
Nether their syluer ner their golde shalbe able to deliuer them in that wrothful daye of the Lorde, but the whole lande shalbe consumed thorow the fyre of his gelousy: for he shall soone make clene ryddaunce of al them that dwell in the lande.
Examyne youre selues Ꟶ serche O thou Nacyon that hast no desire to the law
or the thing go forth that God hath concluded, Ꟶ or the tyme come wherin man shall passe awaye as the dust: or the fearfull wrath of the Lord come vpon you:
yee, or the daye of the Lordes sore displeasure come vpon you. Seke the Lord all yee meke harted vpon earth, ye that worcke after his iudgement: seke ryghteousnesse, seke lowlynesse: that ye maye be defended in the wrothful daye of the Lord:
For Gaza shal be destroyed, and Ascalon shall be layed waste. They shall cast out Asdod at the noone daye, and Accaron shalbe pluckte vp by the rotes
Wo vnto you that dwell vpon the see coost ye murtherous people: the worde of the Lord shal come vpon you. O Canaan thou lande of the Philistines, I will destroye the, so that there shall no man dwell in the eny more,
Ꟶ as for the see coast, it shall be heardemens cotages Ꟶ shepe foldes:
yee, it shalbe a porcion for soch as remayne of the house of Iuda, to fede ther vpon. In the houses of Ascalon shall they rest towarde nyght: for the Lord their God shal vyset them, Ꟶ turne awaye their captiuite.
I haue herde the despite of Moab, Ꟶ the blasphemyes of the children of Ammon how they haue shamefully intreated my people, Ꟶ magnified them selues within the borders of their lande.
Therfore, as truly as I lyue (sayeth the Lord of hostes the God of Israel) Moab shalbe as Sodome Ꟶ Ammon as Gomorra: euen drie thorne hedges, salt pittes Ꟶ a perpetuall wyldernes. The resydue of my folcke shal spoyle them, the remnaunt of my people shal haue them in possession.
This shall happen vnto them for their pryde, because they haue dealte so shamefully with the Lorde of hostes people, Ꟶ magnified them selues aboue them.
The Lord shall be grymme vpon them, Ꟶ destroye all the goddes in the lande. And all the Iles of the Heathen shall worshippe him, euery man in his place.
Ye Moryans also shall perish wt my swerde:
yee, he shall stretch out his hande ouer the north, and destroye Assur. As for Niniue, he shall make it desolate, drye Ꟶ waste.
The flockes Ꟶ all the beastes of the people shall lye in the middest of it, pellicanes Ꟶ storckes shal abyde in the vpper postes of it, foules shall synge in the wyndowes, Ꟶ rauens shall sytt vpon the balckes, for the boordes of Cedre shalbe ryuen downe.
This is the proude and carelesse citye, that sayde in her herte. I am, and there is els none. O how is she made so waste, that the beastes lye therin? Who so goeth by, mocketh her, and poynteth at her with his fynger.
Wo to the abhominable, fylthie, Ꟶ cruell cytie:
which will not heare, ner be refourmed. Her trust is not in the Lorde, nether will she holde her to her God.
Her rulers within her are as roarynge lyons: her iudges are as wolues in the euenyng, whych leaue nothyng behinde them tyll the morowe.
Her prophetes are lyght personnes Ꟶ vnfaithfull men: her prestes vnhalowe the sanctuary Ꟶ do wronge vnder the pretence of the lawe.
But the iust lord that doth no vnright, was amonge them, euery morning shewing them his lawe clearly, Ꟶ ceassed not. But the vngodly wyll not lerne to be ashamed.
Therfore wil I rote oute this people, Ꟶ destroye their towres: yee, and make their stretes so voyde, that no man shal goo therin. Their cityes shalbe broken downe, so that no body shall be left, ner dwell there eny more.
I sayd vnto them: O feare me, and be content to be refourmed. That their dwellinge shulde not be destroyed, Ꟶ that there shulde happen vnto them none of these thynges, wherwith I shall vyset them. But neuertheles, they stande vp early; to folowe the fylthynes of their awne ymaginacions.
Therfore, ye shall wayte vpon me (sayth the Lorde) vntyll the tyme that I stande vp: for I am determined, to gather the people Ꟶ to bring the kingdomes together, that I may poure out myne anger, ye all my wrothfull dyspleasure vpon them. For al the worlde shall be consumed with the fyre of my gelousy.
And then wyll I clense the lyppes of the people, that they maye euerychone call vpon the name of the Lorde, and serue him with one shulder.
Soche as I haue subdued, and my children also whom I haue scatred abrode, shall brynge me presentes beyonde the waters of Ethiopia.
In that tyme shalt thou nomore be confounded, because of all thy ymagynacions, wher thorow thou haddest offended me: for I will take awaye the proude boasters of thyne honour from the, so that thou shalt nomore triumphe because of my holy hyl.
In the also wyll I leaue a small poore simple people, which shall trust in the name of the Lord.
The remnaunt of Israell shall do no wyckednes, ner speake lyes: nether shall there eny disceatfull tunge be founde in their mouthes. For they shalbe fed, and take their rest, and no man shal make them afrayed.
Geue thankes, O daughter Syon, be ioyfull, O Israel: reioyce Ꟶ be glad from thy whole hert, O daughter Ierusalem,
for the Lorde hath taken awaye thy punyshement, and turned backe thyne enemyes. The kyng of Israel, euen the Lord hym selfe is with the: so that thou nedest nomore to feare eny mysfortune.
In that tyme it shalbe sayde to Ierusalem: feare not, Ꟶ to Syon: let not thyne handes be slacke,
for the Lorde thy God is with the, it is he that hath power to saue: he hath a speciall pleasure in the, Ꟶ a maruelous loue towarde the: yee, he reioyseth ouer the wt gladnesse.
Soch as haue bene in heuynesse, wyll I gather together, and take out of thy congregacion: as for the shame and reprofe that hath bene layed vpon the, it shalbe farre from the.
And lo, in that tyme wyll I destroye al those that vexe the: I wil helpe the lame, and gather vp the cast awaye: yee, I will get them prayse and honour in all landes, where they haue bene put to shame.
At that same tyme wyll I brynge you in, Ꟶ at the same tyme will I gather you. I wil get you a name and a good reporte amonge all people of the erth, when I turne backe your captyuite before your eyes, sayeth the Lorde.
In the seconde yeare of kyng Darius, in the .vi. moneth the fyrst daye of the moneth, came the worde of the Lord (by the Prophete Aggeus) vnto zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel the prynce of Iuda, Ꟶ to Iosua the sonne of Iosedech the hye prest, sayinge.
Thus speaketh the Lorde of hostes, and sayeth. This people doth saye. The tyme is not yet come to buylde vp the Lordes house.
Then spake the Lord by the prophete Aggeus, and sayde.
Ye your selues can finde tyme to dwell in siled houses, and shall thys house lye wast?
Consyder nowe youre awne wayes in youre hertes (sayeth the Lorde of hostes)
ye sowe moch, but ye bryng lytle in: ye eate, but ye haue not ynough, ye drynck, but ye are not fylled: ye decke youre selues, but ye are not warme: and he that earneth eny wages, putteth it in a broken purse.
Thus sayeth the Lorde of hoostes. Consydre youre awne wayes in youre hertes,
get you vp to the mountayne, fetch wood, and buylde vp the house that it maye be acceptable vnto me, Ꟶ that I may shewe myne honours, sayeth the Lorde.
Ye loked for moch and lo it is come to lytle, Ꟶ though ye bringe it home, yet do I blowe it awaye. And why so sayeth the Lorde of hostes? Euen because that my house lyeth so waste, and ye ronne euery man vnto hys awne house.
Wherfore, the heauen is forbydden to geue you eny dew, and the earth is forbydden to geue you encrease.
I haue called for a drouth, both vpon the lande and vpon the mountaynes, vpon corne, vpon wyne, and vpon oyle, vpon euery thynge that the grounde bryngeth forth, vpon men Ꟶ vpon catell, yee, and vpon all handy laboure.
Now when zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel, Ꟶ Iesua the sonne of Iosedech the hye preste wt the remnaunt of the people, herde the voyce of the Lorde theyr God, and the wordes of the Prophete Aggeus (lyke as the Lorde theyr God had sent him) the people dyd feare the Lorde.
Then Aggeus the Lordes angell sayde in the Lordes message vnto the people, I am with you, sayeth the Lorde.
So the Lorde waked vp the sprete of zorobabel the Prynce of Iuda, and the sprete of Iesua the sonne of Iosedech the hye prest, and the sprete of the remnaunt of all the people: that they came and laboured, in the house of the Lorde of hoostes theyr God.
the .xxi. daye of the seueth moneth, came the worde of the Lord by the prophete Aggeus, sayenge:
speake to zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel prince of Iuda, Ꟶ to Iesua the sonne of Iosedech the hye preste, Ꟶ to the resydue of the people, and saye.
Who is left among you, that sawe thys house in her fyrst bewtye? But what thyncke ye now by it? Is it not in youre eyes, euen as though it were nothinge?
Neuerthelesse, be of good chere, O zorobabel (sayeth the Lord) be of good comforte, O Iesua thou sonne of Iosedech hye preste: take good hertes vnto you also all ye people of the lande, sayeth the Lorde of hoostes,
Ꟶ do accordynge to the worde (for I am with you, sayth the Lord of hostes) lyke as I agreed with you, when ye came out of the lande of Egypt: Ꟶ my sprete shalbe amonge you, feare, ye not.
For thus sayeth the Lord of hostes: yet once more wil I shake heauen and earth, the see, and the drye land,
yee, I wyll moue all Heathen, Ꟶ the conforte of all Heathen shall come, Ꟶ so wyll I fyll thys house wyth honoure, sayeth the Lorde of hostes.
The syluer is myne, Ꟶ the golde is myne, sayeth the Lord of hoostes.
Thus the glory of the last house shalbe greater then the fyrst, sayth the Lord of hostes: Ꟶ in thys place wyll I geue peace, sayeth the Lorde of hostes.
The .xxiiii. daye of the nynth moneth in the seconde yeare of kynge Darius, came the worde of the Lorde vnto the prophete Aggeus, sayenge.
Thus sayeth the Lorde God of hoostes. Aske the prestes concernynge the lawe, and saye:
yf one beare holy flesh in hys cote lappe, Ꟶ with his lappe do touch the bred potage, wyne, oyle, or eny other meate: shal he be holy also? The prestes answered and sayde: No.
Then sayd Aggeus: Now yf one beyng defyled wt a deed carcase, touch eny of these: shall it also be vnclene?
The prestes gaue answere, Ꟶ sayde: yee, it shalbe vncleane. Then Aggeus answered Ꟶ sayde: euen so is thys people Ꟶ thys nacyon before me, sayeth the Lord: Ꟶ so are all the worckes of theyr handes, yee, and all that they offre, is vncleane.
And now (I praye you) consydre from this daye forth, Ꟶ how it hath gone wt you afore or euer there was layed one stone vpon another in the temple of the Lord:
that when ye came to a corne heape of .xx. bushels, there were scarce ten: Ꟶ that when ye came to the wyne presse for to powre out .l. pottes of wyne, there were scarce .xx.
For I smote you wt heate, blastyng Ꟶ hayle stones in all the labours of youre handes: yet was there none of you, that wolde turne vnto me, sayeth the Lord.
Consydre then from this daye forth Ꟶ afore: namely, from the .xxiiii. daye of the nynth moneth, vnto the daye that the foundacyon of the Lordes temple was layed: marck it well,
is not the sede yet in the barne? haue not the vynes, the fyggetrees, the pomgranates, and olyue trees bene yet vnfrutefull? but from thys daye forth, I shal make them to prospere.
Moreouer, the .xxiiii. daye of the moneth came the worde of the Lorde vnto Aggeus agayne, sayenge:
Speake to zorobabell the prynce of Iuda, Ꟶ saye: I wyll shake both heauen Ꟶ earth,
and ouerthrowe the seate of the kyngdomes, yee, Ꟶ destroye the myghty kyngdome of the Heathen. I wyll ouerthrowe the charrettes, Ꟶ those that syt vpon them, so that both horse and man shall fall downe, euery man thorow his neyghbours swerde.Hag
In the eyght moneth of the seconde yeare of kynge Darius, came the worde of the Lord vnto zacharie the sonne of Barachias, the sonne of Addo, the prophete, sayenge:
The Lorde hath bene sore displeased at youre forefathers.
And saye thou vnto them: thus sayth the Lorde of hootes: Turne you vnto me (sayeth the Lorde of hostes) and I wyll turne me vnto you, sayth the Lorde of hoostes.
Be ye not lyke your forefathers, vnto whom the prophetes cryed afore tyme, sayeng. Thus sayeth the Lord God of hostes. Turne you from youre euell wayes, and from youre wycked ymaginacyons. But they wolde not heare ner regarde me, sayeth the Lorde.
What is now become of youre forefathers and the prophetes? are they yet styll alyue?
But dyd not my wordes and statutes (which I commaunded by my seruauntes the prophetes) touche youre forefathers? Upon this, they gaue answere and sayde: like as the Lorde of hoostes deuised to do vnto vs, according to oure owne wayes and ymagynacyons, euen so hath he delt with vs.
Upon the .xxiiii. daye of the .xi. moneth whych is the moneth Sebah, in the seconde yeare of Darius, came the worde of the Lorde vnto zachary the sonne of Barachias, the sonne of Addo the prophete, saying,
I sawe by nyght and lo, there sat one vpon a redd horse and stode styll amonge the myrre trees, that were beneth vpon the grounde, and behynde hym were there redd, speckled, and whyte horses.
Then sayde I, O my Lorde, what are these? And the aungel that talked wyth me, sayde vnto me. I wyll shewe the what these be.
And the man that stode amonge the myrre trees answered Ꟶ sayde: These are they whom the Lorde hathe sente to go thorowe the world.
And they answered the aungel of the Lorde, that stode among the myr trees and sayde. We haue gone thorowe the worlde: and beholde all the worlde dwell at ease and are carelesse.
Then the Lordes aungel gaue answer and sayde: O Lorde of hoostes, howe longe wylt thou be vnmercyful to Ierusalem and to the cyties of Iuda? With whom thou hast bene dyspleased nowe these thre score Ꟶ ten yeares.
So the Lorde gaue a louynge and a confortable answere vnto the aungel that talked wyth me.
And the aungel that comened with me, sayd vnto me: Crye thou, Ꟶ speake. Thus sayeth the Lorde of hoostes. I am exceadynge gelous ouer Ierusalem and Sion,
and sore displeased at the carelesse Heathen: for where as I was but alytle angry, they dyd theyr beste that I myght destroye them
Therfore thus sayeth the Lord: I wyl turne me agayne in mercye toward Ierusalem, so that my house shalbe buylded in it, sayeth the Lorde of hoostes, yee, and the plommet shalbe layed abroade in Ierusalem, sayeth the Lorde of hoostes.
Crye also, and speake thus sayeth the Lorde of hoostes. My cyties shalbe in good prosperyte agayne, the Lorde shall yet conforte Sion: Ꟶ chose Ierusalem:
Then lyfte I vp myne eyes, Ꟶ sawe, Ꟶ beholde foure hornes.
And I sayde vnto the aungel, that talked wt me what be these? he answered me. These are the hornes which haue scatered Iuda, Israel Ꟶ Ierusalem abroade.
And the Lord shewed me foure carpenters.
Then sayde I: what wyll these do? He answered and sayde Those are the hornes which haue so stroweed Iuda abroad, that no man durste lyft vp hys heade: But these are come to fray them awaye: Ꟶ to caste out the hornes of the Gentiles: whyche lyfte vp theyr horne ouer the lande of Iuda, to scatre it abroade.
I lift vp myne eyes agayne, and loked: Ꟶ beholde a man with a measure lyne in hys hand.
Then sayde I: whether goeste thou? Ꟶ he sayde vnto me: To measure Ierusalem, that I maye se how longe Ꟶ howe brode it is.
And behold the aungell that talked wyth me, went hys waye forth. Then went there oute another angel to mete him,
Ꟶ sayde vnto hym: Runne speake to thys yonge man, and saye: Ierusalem shalbe enhabyted wythout eny wall, for the very multitude of people and catell that shalbe therin:
Yee, I my selfe (sayth the Lorde) wyll be vnto her a wall of fyer rounde aboute, and wylbe honoured in her.
O get you forth, O fle from the lande of the north, sayth the Lorde, yee whome I haue scatred into the foure wyndes vnder heauen, sayth the Lorde.
Saue thy selfe, O Syon: thou that dwellest with the daughter of Babylon,
for thus sayeth the Lorde of hoostes. After that glorious power hath he sent me out to the Heathen, whych spoyled you, for whoso toucheth you, shall touch the aple of hys owne eye.
Beholde, I wyll lyft vp myne hande ouer them: so that they shalbe spoyled of those: whyche afore serued them, and ye shall knowe, that the Lord of hostes hath sente me.
Be glad, Ꟶ reioyce, O daughter of Syon: for lo, I am come to dwell in the myddest of the, sayth the Lord
at the same time there shal many Heathen cleue to the Lord and shalbe my people. Thus wyll I dwel in the myddest of the, and thou shalte knowe that the Lorde of hoostes hath sente me vnto th
The Lorde shal haue Iuda in possessyon for hys parte in the holy ground, and shal chose Ierusalem yet agayne.
Let all flesh be styl before the Lorde, for he is rysen oute of hys holy place.
And he shewed me Iesua the hye prest standyng before the angel of the lord and Satan stode at his ryght hand to resyst hym.
And the Lord sayde vnto Satan. The Lorde reproue the (thou Satan,) yee, the Lorde that hath chosen Ierusalem, reproue the. Is not thys a brand taken out of the fyre?
Nowe Iesua was clothed in vncleane raiment, and stode before the aungel
whych answered and sayde vnto those that stode before hym, take awaye the foule clothes from hym. And vnto him he sayde. Beholde, I haue taken awaye thy synne from the and wyl decke the wyth chaung of rayment.
He sayde moreouer, sett a fayre myter vpon hys heade. So they set a fayre myter vpon hys heade, Ꟶ put on clothes vpon hym, and the angel of the Lord stode there.
Then the angel of the Lord testifyed vnto Iesua, and spak
thus sayeth the Lord of hostes. If thou wilt walke in my wayes, Ꟶ kepe my watch: thou shalte rule my house, Ꟶ kepe my courtes, Ꟶ I wyll geue the place amonge these that stande here.
Heare (O Iesua) thou hye preste, thou and thy frends that dwell before the, for they are wonderous people. Behold, I wyl bring forth the braunches of my seruaunt:
for lo, the stone that I haue layed before Iesua: vpon one stone shalbe .vii. eyes. Beholde I wyl hewe hym out (sayeth the Lorde of hoostes) Ꟶ take awaye the synne of the lande in one day.
Then shal euery man cal for his neyghbour vnder the vyne and vnder the fyggtre, sayth the Lorde of hoostes:
And the angel that talked with me cam agayne, and waked me vp, as a man that is raysed out of hys slep
Ꟶ sayd vnto me: what seyst thou? And I sayde I haue loked, and beholde: a candelstycke al of golde with a boule vpon it, Ꟶ his seuen lampes therin, and vpon euery lampe seuen stalkes.
And two olyue trees therby, one vpon the ryght syde of the boule, and the other vpon the lyftesyde.
So I answered, and spake to the angel that talked wt me saying, O my Lord what are these?
the angell that talked wyth me answered and sayde vnto me: knoweste thou not what these be? and I sayde: No my Lorde.
He answered Ꟶ sayde vnto me: This is the worde of the Lorde vnto zorobabel, sayinge: Nether thorow an hooste of men nor thorowe strengthe, but thorowe my sprete, sayeth the Lorde of hoostes.
What art thou thou great mountayne, before zorobabel? thou must be made euen. And he shal brynge vp the fyrste stone, so that men shal crye vnto him good lucke good lucke.
Moreouer, the worde of the Lord came vnto me sayinge.
The handes of zorobobel haue layed the foundacyon of the house: hys handes, shall also fynyshe it, that ye maye knowe howe that the Lorde of hoostes hath sent me vnto you.
For he that hath bene dispysed a lytle ceason, shall reioyce, when he seeth the tynne weyght in zorobabels hande. The .vii. eyes are the Lordes whych go thorow the whole world.
Then answered I, and sayd vnto him, what are these two olyue trees vpon the ryght and lefte syde of the candelstick?
I spake moreouer, and sayd vnto him what be these two olyue braunches (whych thorow the two golden pypes) emptie them selues into the gold?
He answered me Ꟶ sayd knowest thou not, what these be? And I sayde, no, my Lorde.
Then sayd he. These are the two olyue braunches, that stande before the ruler of the whole earth.
So I turned me, lyftyng vp myne eyes, Ꟶ loked, Ꟶ beholde, a flyinge boke.
And he sayd vnto me: what seest thou I answered: I se a flyinge booke of .xx. cubytes longe, and .x. cubytes brode.
Then sayed he vnto me: Thys is the curse that goeth forth ouer the whole earth: for all theues shalbe Iudged after this booke Ꟶ all swearers shalbe iudged accordynge to the same,
Ꟶ I wyl brynge it furth (sayeth the Lorde of hostes) so that it shall come to the house of the thefe, Ꟶ to the house of him, that falsly sweareth by my name: Ꟶ shall remayne in hys house, Ꟶ consume it, wt the tymbre and stones therof.
Then the angel that talked wt me, wente forth and sayd vnto me: lyft vp thyne eyes and se, what is this that goeth forth.
And I sayde: what is it? He answered: thys is a measure goinge out. He sayde moreouer: Euen thus are they (that dwel vpon the whole earth) to loke vpon.
And beholde, there was lyft vp a talent of leade: Ꟶ lo, a woman sat in the myddest of the measure.
And he sayde: thys is vngodlynes. So he cast her into the myddest of the measure, and threwe the lompe of leade into the mouth of the measure.
Then lyfte I vp myne eyes, Ꟶ loked: and behold, there came out .ii. women, and the wind was in their wynges (for they had wynges lyke the wynges of a storke) Ꟶ they lyft vp the measure betwixt the earth and the heauen.
Then spake I to the aungel that talked wt me: whyther wyl these beare the measure?
And he sayd vnto me: into the lande of Synear to buyld them an house, whiche when it is prepared, the measure shalbe set there in his place.
Moreouer, I turned me, lyftyng vp myne eyes, and loked, Ꟶ beholde, there came foure charetes out from betwyxte two hylles, whiche hylles were of brasse.
In the fyrst charret were red horses, in the second charet were black horses,
in the third charet were whyte horses, in the fourth charet were horses of dyuers colours and strong
Then spake I, and sayde vnto the aungell that talked with me: O lord what are these.
The aungell answered, and sayde, vnto me. These are the .iiii. wyndes of the heauen, which be come forth to stande before the ruler of all the earth.
That with the blacke horse wente into the lande of the north, Ꟶ the white folowed them, and the spekled horses wente forth towarde the south.
These horses were very stronge, and wente out: Ꟶ sought to go Ꟶ take theyr iourney ouer the whole earth. And he sayde: get you hence, Ꟶ go thorow the worlde. So they wente thorow out the world.
Then cryed he vpon me, and spake vnto me, sayeng: behold, these that go towarde the north, shall styll my wrath in the north countre.
And the worde of the Lord came vnto me, sayeng.
Take of thou presoners that are come from Babylon: namely, Heldai, Tobiah, Ꟶ Idaia: Ꟶ come thou the same daye, Ꟶ go into the house of Iosiah, the sonne of Sophony.
Then take golde Ꟶ syluer, Ꟶ make crownes therof, and set them vpon the head of Iesua, the sonne of Iosedeh, the hye preste,
Ꟶ speake vnto hym. Thus sayth the Lorde of hoostes. Behold, the man whose name is the braunche: Ꟶ he that shall sprynge vp after him, shall buylde vp the temple of the Lorde,
yee, euen he shal buylde vp the temple of the Lorde. He shall beare the prayse, he shal syt vpon the Lordes trone, Ꟶ haue the dominacyon. A preste shal he be also vpon his trone, Ꟶ a peaceable councel shalbe betwixte them both.
And the crownes shalbe in the temple of the Lorde, for a remembraunce vnto Helem, Tobiah, Idaiah, and Hen the sonne of Sophony. And soch as be farre of, shal come Ꟶ buylde the temple of the Lorde,
that ye maye knowe, how that the Lorde of hoostes hath sent me vnto you. And thys shall come to passe, yf ye wyll herken dilygently vnto the voyce of the Lorde youre God.
It happened also in the fourth yeare of kynge Darius, that the worde of the Lorde came vnto zachary in the fourth daye of the nynth moneth, which is called, Casleu:
what tyme as Sarasar Ꟶ Rogomelech Ꟶ the men that were wt them sent vnto Bethell for to praye before the Lorde:
and that they shulde saye vnto the prestes, which were in the house of the Lord of hoostes, and to the prophetes. Shuld I wepe in the fyfth moneth, Ꟶ absteyne as I haue done nowe certayne yeares?
Then came the worde of the Lorde of hoostes vnto me sayenge.
Speake vnto all the people of the land, and to the prestes, and saye: when ye fasted and mourned in the fyfth Ꟶ seuenth moneth (now this .lxx. yeares) dyd ye fast vnto me?
When ye dyd eate also and droncke, dyd ye not eate Ꟶ dryncke for youre awne selues?
Are not these the wordes, which the Lorde spake by his prophetes afore tyme, when Ierusalem was yet inhabited and welthy, she and the cytyes rounde aboute her: when there dwelt men, both towarde the south and in the playne countrees?
And the worde of the Lorde came vnto zachary, sayenge.
Thus sayeth the Lorde of hoostes. Execute true iudgement: shewe mercy Ꟶ louynge kyndnesse, euery man to hys brother.
Do the wyddowe, the fatherles, the straunger, Ꟶ poore no wrong: Ꟶ let no man ymagen euel agaynst hys brother in hys herte.
Neuerthelesse, they wolde not take hede, but turned theyr backes, and stopped theyr eares, that they shulde not heare:
yee, they made theyr hertes as an Adamant stone lest they shulde heare the lawe Ꟶ wordes, which the Lord of hoostes sent in hys holy sprete by the prophetes afore tyme. Wherfore the Lord of hoostes was very wroth at them.
And thus is it come to passe: that lyke as he spake and they wolde not heare: euen so they cryed, and I wolde not heare (sayth the Lord of hoostes)
but scatered them amonge all Gentyles, whom they knewe not. Thus the lande was made so desolate, the there trauayled no man in it nether to, ner fro, for that pleasaunt lande was vtterly layed waste.
So the worde of the Lord came vnto me, sayenge.
Thus sayth the Lord of hoostes. I was in a great gelousy ouer Sion, yee, I haue bene very gelous ouer her in a great dyspleasur
thus sayeth the Lord of hoostes. I will turne me agayne vnto Syon, Ꟶ wyll dwell in the myddest of Ierusalem: so that Ierusalem shalbe called a faythfull Ꟶ true cytye, the hyl of the Lorde of hoostes, yee, an holy hyll.
Thus sayth the Lorde of hoostes. There shall yet olde men Ꟶ wemen dwel agayne in the stretes of Ierusalem: yee, Ꟶ soch as go wt staues in their handes for very age.
The stretes of the cytye also shalbe full of yonge boyes and damselles, playinge vpon the strates.
Thus sayeth the Lord of hostes: yf the resydue of this people thynke it to be vnpossible in these dayes, shuld it therfore be vnpossyble in my syght, sayth the Lord of hoostes?
Thus sayth the Lorde of hoostes: Beholde, I will delyuer my people from the lande of the east Ꟶ west,
and wyll brynge them agayne: that they maye dwell at Ierusalem. They shalbe my people, Ꟶ I wyll be theyr God, in treuth and ryghteousnesse.
Thus sayth the Lorde of hostes: let your handes be stronge, ye that now heare these wordes by the mouth of the prophetes, whych be in these dayes that the foundacyon is layed vpon the Lord of hoostes house that the temple maye be builded.
For why? before these dayes, nether men ner catel coulde wynne eny thinge, nether myght eny man come in and out in rest, for trouble: but I lett euery man go agaynst his neyghboure.
Neuertheles, I wyll now intreate the resydue of thys people nomore as afore tyme, sayth the Lord of hoostes,
but they shalbe a sede of peace. The vyneyarde shal geue her frute, the grounde shall geue her increase, and the heauens shall geue theyr dewe: and I shall cause the remnaunt of thys people, to haue all these in possession.
And it shall come to passe, that lyke as ye were a curse amonge the Heathen (O ye house of Iuda, and ye house of Israel) Euen so wil I delyuer you, that ye shalbe a blessing: feare not, but let your handes be stronge.
For thus sayth the Lord of hoostes: lyke as I deuysed to punysh you, what tyme as your fathers prouoked me vnto wrath, sayeth the Lord of hoostes, Ꟶ spared not.
Euen so am I determined now in these dayes, for to do well vnto the house of Iuda Ꟶ Ierusalem, therfore feare ye not.
Nowe the thynges that ye shall do, are these: Speake euery man the treuth vnto hys neyghboure, execute iudgement truly, and peaceably wythyn your portes,
none of you ymagin euel in his herte agaynst hys neyghboure, and loue no false othes: for all these are the thynges that I hate, sayeth the Lorde.
And the worde of the Lord of hoostes, came vnto me, sayeng:
thus sayeth the Lorde of hoostes. The fast of the fourth moneth, the fast of the fifth, the fast of the seuenth, and the fast of the tenth, shall be ioye and gladnesse, and prosperous hye feastes vnto the house of Iuda: Onely, loue the treuth and peace.
Thus sayeth the Lord of hoostes. There shall yet come people, and the inhabiters of many cytyes,
Ꟶ they that dwell in one cyte shal go to another, sayeng. Up, let vs go, Ꟶ praye before the Lorde, let vs seke the Lorde of hoostes, I wyll go wt you:
yee, moch people Ꟶ myghtye Heathen shal come Ꟶ seke the Lord of hoostes at Ierusalem, and to praye before the Lord.
Thus sayeth the Lord of hoostes. In that tyme shall ten men (out of all maner of languages of the Gentyles) take one Iewe by the hemme of hys garment, Ꟶ saye: we wyll go wt you, for we haue herde, that God is amonge you.
The worde of the Lorde shalbe receaued at Adrach, Ꟶ Damascus shalbe hys offeryng: for the eyes of all men Ꟶ of the trybes of Israel shall loke vp vnto the Lord.
The borders of Hemath shall be herde therby, Tirus also Ꟶ Sidon, for they are very wyse,
Tirus shall make her self stronge, heape vp syluer as the sande, Ꟶ golde as the claye of the stretes.
Behold, the Lord shal take her in, Ꟶ haue her in possessyon: he shal smyte downe her power into the see, and she shalbe consumed wt fyre.
This shall Ascalon se, Ꟶ be afrayed. Gaza shalbe very sory, so shall Accaron also, because her hope is come to confusion. For the kynge of Gaza shal perysh, Ꟶ at Ascalon shall no man dwell.
Straungers shall dwell at Asdod, Ꟶ as for the pryde of the Philystynes, I shall rote it out.
Theyr bloude wyll I take awaye from theyr mouth, Ꟶ theyr abhomynacyons from among theyr teeth. Thus they shalbe left for our God, yee, they shalbe as a prince in Iuda, Ꟶ Accaron lyke as a Iebusy.
And so wyll I compase my house rounde about wt my men of warre goynge to Ꟶ fro: that no oppressoure come vpon them eny more. For that haue I sene now with myne eyes.
Reioyce thou greatly, O daughter Syon be glad, O daughter Ierusalem. For lo, thy kynge commeth vnto the, euen the ryghteous and Sauioure, Lowly Ꟶ symple is he, he rydeth vpon an asse, Ꟶ vpon the foale of an asse.
I will rote out the charrettes from Ephraim, Ꟶ the horse from Ierusalem, the batel bowes shalbe destroyed. He shall geue the doctrine of peace vnto the Heathen, Ꟶ his dominyon shalbe from the one see to the other, Ꟶ from the floudes to the endes of the worlde.
Thou also thorow the bloude of thy couenaunt: shalt let thy presoners out of the pitte wher in is no water.
Turne you now to the stronge holde, ye that be in preson, Ꟶ longe sore to be deliuered. And this daye I bryng the worde, that I wyll rewarde the double agayne.
For Iuda haue I bent out as a bowe for me Ꟶ Ephraim haue I fylled. Thy sonnes, O Sion, will I rayse vp agaynst the Grekes, Ꟶ make the as a gyauntes swearde:
the Lorde God shalbe sene aboue them, Ꟶ hys dartes shall go forth as the lyghtenynge. The Lord God shall blowe the trompet, and shal come forth as a storme out of the south.
The Lord of hoostes shall defende them, they shal consume Ꟶ deuoure, Ꟶ subdue them with slynge stones. They shall dryncke Ꟶ rage, as it were thorow wyne. They shalbe fylled lyke the basens, Ꟶ as the hornes of the aulter.
The Lord their God shal delyuer them in the daye, as the flock of his people: ffor as precyous stones of a dyademe they shall be sett vp ouer his lande.
O how prosperous and goodly a thynge shal that be? The corne shall make the yonge men chearefull, and the new wyne the maydens.
Praye the Lorde then by tymes to geue you the latter rayne, so shal the Lorde make bright cloudes, and geue you rayne ynough for all the increase of the felde.
For vayne is the answere of Idols. The sothsayers se lyes, and tell but vayne dreames: the conforte that they geue, is nothyng worth. Therfore, go they astraye lyke a flocke of shepe, and are troubled, because they haue no shepherde.
My wroth full displeasure is moued at the shepherdes, Ꟶ I will vyset the goates. For the Lorde of hostes will graciously viset his flock, the house of Iuda, and holde them as a goodly fayre horse in the batel.
Out of Iuda shal come the helmet the nayle the batelbowe, and all the princes together.
They shalbe as the gyauntes, which in the batell treade downe the myre vpon the stretes. They shal fyght for the Lorde shalbe wyth them, so that the horsmen shalbe confounded.
I wyll comforte the house of Iuda, and preserue the house of Ioseph. I wyll turne them also, for I pitie them: and they shal be lyke as they were, when I had not cast them of. For I the Lorde am their God, and wyll heare them.
Ephraim shalbe as a gyaunt, and their hert shalbe chereful as thorow wyne: yee, their children shall se it, and be glad, and their hert shall reioyce in the Lorde.
I wyll blowe for them and gather them together, for I wyll redeme them. They shall increace, as they increased afore.
I wyll sowe them amonge the people, that they may thyncke vpon me in farre countrees: they shall lyue with their children, Ꟶ turne agayne.
I wyll brynge them agayne also from the lande of Egypt, and gather them out of Assyria. I wyll carye them into the lande of Galaad Ꟶ to Libanus and they shal wante nothinge.
He shall go vpon the see of trouble, Ꟶ smyte the see waues: so that all the depe floudes shalbe dryed vp. The proude boastynge of Assur shalbe cast downe, and the sceptre of Egypte shall be taken awaye.
I wyll comforte them in the Lorde, that they maye walke in his name, sayeth the Lorde.
Open thy dores, O Libanus, that the fyre maye consume thy Cedre trees.
Howle ye Fyrre trees for the Cedre is fallen, yee, all the proude are wasted awaye. Howle (O ye oke trees of Baasan) for the myghtye stronge wood is cut downe.
Men may heare the shepherdes mourne, for their glorye is destroyed. Men may heare the lyons whelpes roare, for the pryde of Iordane is wasted awaye.
Thus sayeth the Lorde my God: Fede the shepe of the slaughter,
whiche shalbe slayne of those that possesse them: yet they take it for no sinne, but they that sell them, saye: The Lord be thancked, I am rich: yee, their awne shepherdes spare them not.
Therfore wyll I nomore spare those that dwell in the lande, (sayeth the Lorde) but lo, I wil deliuer the people, euery man into his neyghbours hande and into the hande of his kynge: that they maye smyte the lande, and out of their handes I wyll not delyuer them.
I my selfe fedde the slaughter shepe (a poore flocke verely) and toke vnto me two staues: the one is called louyng mekenesse, the other is called destroyer, and so kepte the shepe.
Thre shepherdes I putt out of offyce in one moneth, for I myght not awaye wyth them, nether had they eny delyte in me.
Then sayde I: I wyll fede you nomore the thynge that dyeth, let it dye: and that wyll perysh, let it perish, and let the remnaunt eate, euery one the fleshe of his neyghboure.
I toke also my louynge meke staff, and brake it, that I myght disanull the couenaunt, which I made wyth all people.
And so it was broken in that daye. Then the poore symple shepe that had a respect vnto me, knewe therby, that it was the worde of the Lorde.
And I sayde vnto them: yf ye thinck it good, bring hyther my pryce: yf no, then leaue. So they wayed downe .xxx. syluer pens, the value that I was prysed at.
And the Lorde said vnto me: cast it vnto the potter (a goodly pryce for me to be valued at of them) and I toke the .xxx. syluer pens, and cast them to the potter in the house of the Lorde.
Then brake I my other staf also (namely destroyer) that I might lowse the brotherhead betwixt Iuda and Israel.
And the Lorde sayde vnto me. Take the also the staff of a foolysh shepherde:
for lo, I wyl rayse vp a shepherde in the lande, which shal not seke after the thinges that be lost, ner care for such as go astraye: he shal not heale the wounded, he shall not norysh the thinge that is whole: but he shal eate the flesh of soch as be fat, and teare theyr clawes in peces.
O Idols shepherde, that leaueth the flocke. The swerde shall come vpon hys arme and vpon hys ryght eye. Hys arme shalbe cleane dryed vp, and hys ryght eye shalbe sore blynded.
The heuy burthen which the Lorde hath deuysed for Israell. Thus sayeth the Lorde which spred the heauens abrode, layde the foundacion of the earth and geueth man the breath of lyfe.
Beholde, I wyll make Ierusalem a cuppe of surfet, vnto all the people that are rounde about her. Yee, Iuda hym selfe also shalbe in the sege agaynst Ierusalem.
At the same tyme wyll I make Ierusalem an heuy stone for al people, so that al soch as lyft it vp, shalbe toarne and rente, and all the people of the earth shalbe gathered together agaynst it.
In that daye, sayeth the Lorde, I wyll make all horses abashed, and those that ryde vpon them, to be out of their wittes. I wyl open myne eyes vpon the house of Iuda, and smyte all the horses of the people with blindnesse.
And the princes of Iuda shall saye in their hertes. The inhabyters of Ierusalem shall geue me consolacion in the Lorde of hostes their God.
In that tyme will I make the princes of Iuda lyke an hote burnynge ouen with wood, and lyke a cresset of fyre among the strawe: so that they shall consume all the people rounde aboute them, both vpon the ryght hande Ꟶ the left. Ierusalem also shalbe inhabyted agayne: namely, in the same place where Ierusalem standeth.
The Lorde shall preserue the tentes of Iuda lyke as a fore tyme: so that the glory of the house of Dauid: Ꟶ the glory of the cytesyns of Ierusalem, shalbe but lytle regarded, in comparison of the glory of Iuda.
In that daye shall the Lorde defende the cytesyns of Ierusalem: so that the weakest then amonge them shalbe as Dauid: and the house of Dauid shalbe lyke as Gods house, and as the Aungell of the Lorde before them.
At the same tyme will I go about to destroye all soch people as come against Ierusalem.
Moreouer, vpon the house of Dauid and vpon the cytesyns of Ierusalem will I poure out the sprete of grace Ꟶ compassion, so that they shall loke vpon me, whom they haue pearsed: Ꟶ they shal bewepe him as men mourne for their only begotten sonne: yee, Ꟶ be sory for him, as men are sory for their first chyld.
Then shall there be a great mournyng at Ierusalem, lyke as the lamentacion at Adremnon in the felde of Maggadon.
And the lande shall bewayle euery kinred by them selues. The kinred of the house of Dauid them selues alone, and their wiues by them selues:
The kynred of the house of Nathan them selues alone, and their wyues by them selues. The kynred of the house of Leui them selues alone, and their wyues by them selues. The kynred of the house of Semei them selues alone, and their wyues by them selues.
In lyke maner, all the other generacions euerychone by them selues alone, and their wyues by them selues.
In that tyme shall the house of Dauid and the cytesyns of Ierusalem haue an open well, to wash of synne and vnclennesse.
And then (sayeth the Lorde of hostes) I wyll destroye the names of Idoles out of the lande: so that they shall nomore be put in remembraunce. As for the false prophetes also, and the vnclene sprete, I shall take them out of the lande.
So that yf any of them prophecye any more, his awne father and mother that begat him, shall saye vnto him. Thou shalt dye for thou speakest lyes vnder the name of the Lorde: yee, his awne father and mother that begat him, shall wounde him, when he prophecieth.
And then shall those prophetes be confounded, euery one of his vision when he prophecieth: nether shal they were sack clothes any more, to disceaue men with all.
But he shall be fayne to saye: I am no Prophet: I am an husbandeman, for so am I taught by Adam fro my youth vp.
And yf it be sayde vnto hym: how came these woundes then in thine handes? He shal answere. Thus am I wounded in the house of myne awne frendes.
Aryse, O thou swearde, vpon my shepherde, and vpon the Prince of my people, saieth the Lorde of hostes. Smyte the shepherd, and the shepe shalbe scatred abrode, and so wyll I turne myne hande to the lytle ones.
And it shall come to passe (sayeth the Lorde) that in all the land two partes shalbe roted out, but the thyrde parte shall remayne therin.
And the same thyrde parte wyll I bringe thorow the fire, Ꟶ wil clense them, as the siluer is clensed: yee, Ꟶ trye them lyke as golde is tryed. Then shall they call vpon my name and I will heare them: I wyll saye: it is my people. And they shal saye: Lorde my God.
Beholde, the daye of the Lorde commeth, that thou shalt be spoyled and robbed,
for I will gather together all the Heathen to fight agaynst Ierusalem: so that the citie shalbe wonne, the houses spoyled, and the wemen defiled. The halfe of the citie shal go awaye into captiuite, and the residue of the people shal not be caried out of the citie.
After that shall the Lorde go forth to fight agaynst those Heathen, as men vse to fyght in the daye of battel.
Then shall his fete stand vpon the mount olyuete, that lyeth vpon the east syde of Ierusalem. And the mount olyuete shall cleue in two, eastwarde and westwarde, so that there shalbe a great valley, and the halfe mount shall remoue towarde the north, Ꟶ the other towarde the south.
And ye shall fle vnto the valley of my hylles, for the valley of the hylles shall reach vnto Asal. Yee, fle shall ye lyke as ye fled for the earthquake in the dayes of Osiah kynge of Iuda. And the Lord my God shal come, Ꟶ al saintes wt him.
In that daye shal it not be lyghte, other cleare or dymme.
This shalbe that speciall daye whiche is knowne vnto the Lord; nether day ner nyght but about the euenyng tyme it shalbe light.
In that tyme shall there waters of lyfe runne out from Ierusalem: the halfe potte of them towarde the east see, and the other halfe towarde the vttermost see, and shall continue both somer and wynter.
And the Lorde hym selfe shalbe kynge ouer all the earth. At that tyme shall there be one Lord onely, Ꟶ his name shalbe but one.
Men shall go about the whole erth, as vpon a felde: from Gibea to Rennon, Ꟶ from the south to Ierusalem. She shalbe set vp, Ꟶ inhabited in her place: from BenIamyns porte, vnto the place of the fyrst porte, Ꟶ vnto the corner porte: Ꟶ from the tower of Hananeell, vnto the kinges wyne presses.
There shal men dwel, Ꟶ there shalbe no more cursinge, but Ierusalem shalbe safely inhabited.
This shalbe the plage, wherwith the Lorde will smyte all pleople, that haue fought agaynst Ierusalem. Namely, their flesh shall cosume awaye, though they stande vpon their fete, their eyes shalbe corrupt in their holes and their tunge shal consume in their mouth.
In that daye shall the Lorde make a great sedicion amonge them, so that one man shall take another by the hande, Ꟶ laye his handes vpon the handes of his neyghboure.
Iuda shall fyght also against Ierusalem, Ꟶ the goodes of all the Heathen shalbe gathered together round aboute: golde Ꟶ syluer Ꟶ a very great multitude of clothes.
And so shall this plage goo ouer horsses, mules, camels, asses, Ꟶ all the beastes that shalbe in the host, lyke as yonder plage was.
Euery one that remayneth then of all the people, which cam agaynst Ierusalem, shall go vp yerly, to worshyppe the kynge (euen the Lorde of hostes) and to kepe the feast of tabernacles.
And loke what generacion vpon the earth goeth vp to Ierusalem for to worshyp the kynge (euen the Lorde of hostes) vpon the same shall come no rayne.
Yf the kynred of Egypte go not vp, Ꟶ come not, it shall not rayne vpon them nether. This shalbe the plage wher wt the Lorde wil smyte all the Heathen, that come not vp to kepe the feast of tabernacles:
yee, this shalbe the synne plage of Egipt Ꟶ the sinne plage of al people that go not vp to kepe the feast of tabernacles.
At that tyme shall the rydyng gere of the horses be holy vnto the Lorde, Ꟶ the kettels in the Lordes house shall be lyke the basens before the aulter:
yee, al the kettels in Ierusalem and Iuda, shalbe holy vnto the Lorde of hostes: and all they that slaye offeringes, shall come Ꟶ take of them, Ꟶ dyght them there in. And at that tyme there shall be no mo Cananites in the house of the Lorde.
The heuy burthen, which the Lorde sheweth agaynste Israell, by Malachy.
I haue loued you, sayeth the Lorde: Ꟶ yet ye saye wherin haste thou loued vs? Was not Esau Iacobs brother, sayeth the Lorde? yet haue I loued Iacob,
and hated Esau: yee, I haue made hys hylles wast and his heritage a wildernesse for dragons.
And though Edom sayde: well, we are destroyed, we wyll go buylde vp agayne the places that he wasted, yet (sayeth the Lorde of hostes) what they buylded, that brake I downe: so that it was called a cursed lande, and a people, whome the Lorde hath euer bene angrye withall.
Youre eyes haue sene it, and ye youre selues must confesse, that the Lorde hath brought the lande of Israel to great honoure.
Shulde not a sonne honoure his father, Ꟶ a seruaunt his master? Yf I be now a father, where is myne honoure? Yf I be the Lord, where am I feared? sayeth the Lorde of hostes. Now to you prestes, that despyse my name. And yf ye saye: wherin haue we despised thy name?
In this, that ye offre vnclene bred vpon myne aulter. And yf ye wil saye: wherin haue we offered any vnclene thinge vnto the? In this that ye saye: the aulter of the Lorde is not to be regarded.
Yf ye offre the blynde, is not that euel? And yf ye offre the lame and sycke, is not that euell? Yee, offre it vnto thy prince, shal he be content with the, or accepte thy personne, sayeth the Lorde of hostes?
And now make youre prayer before God, that he maye haue mercy vpon vs: for soche thinges haue ye done. Shal he regard your personnes, thinke ye, saieth the Lorde of hostes?
Yee, what is he amonge you, that wyl do so moch as to shut the dores, or to kindle the fyre vpon myne aulter for naught? I haue no pleasure in you, sayeth the Lord of hostes: and as for the meatoffringe, I wyl not accepte it at youre hande.
For from the risyng vp of the sonne vnto the going downe of the same, my name is greate amonge the Gentiles: yee, in euery place shal there sacrifice be done, and clene meatoffring offred vp vnto my name: for my name is great amonge the Heathen, sayeth the Lorde of hostes.
But ye haue vnhalowed it, in that ye saye, the aulter of the Lorde is not to be regarded, and the thyng that is set thervpon not worthy to be eaten.
Now saye ye: It is but laboure and trauayle, and thus haue ye thought scorne at it (sayeth the Lorde of hoostes) offrynge robbery, yee, the lame and the sycke. Ye haue brought me in a meatofferyng, shulde I accepte it of your hande, sayeth the Lorde?
Cursed be the dissembler, which hath in his flocke one that is a male, and when he maketh a vowe, offereth a spotted one vnto the Lord. For I am a greate kynge (sayeth the Lorde of hostes) and my name is fearfull among the Heathen.
And now (O ye prestes) this commaundement toucheth you:
yf ye wyll not heare it, ner regard it, to geue the glory vnto my name, sayeth the Lorde of hostes, I will sende a curse vpon you, Ꟶ will curse youre blessynges: yee curse them wyll I yf ye do not take hede.
Beholde, I shall corrupte your sede, and cast donge in youre faces, euen the donge of youre solempne feastes and it shall cleue fast vpon you.
And ye shall knowe, that I haue sent thys commaundement vnto you: that my couenaunt which I made with Leui, might stande sayeth the Lorde of hoostes.
I made a couenaunt of lyfe Ꟶ peace wyth him: this I gaue him, that he myght stande in awe of me: and so he dyd feare me, and had my name in reuerence.
The lawe of truthe was in his mouth, and there was no wickednesse founde in his lyppes. He walked with me in peace and equyte, and dyd turne many one awaye from their synnes.
For in the prestes lyppes shulde be sure knowledge, that men may seke the lawe at his mouth, for he is a messaunger of the Lorde of hostes.
But as for you, ye are gone clene out of the waye, and haue caused the multitude to be offended at the lawe: ye haue broken the couenaunt of Leui, sayeth the Lorde of hostes.
Therfore wyll I also make you to be despysed, and to be of no reputacyon amonge all the people: because ye haue not kepte my wayes, but haue bene parciall in the lawe.
Haue we not all one father? Hath not one God made vs? Why doth euery one of vs then despise his awne brother, Ꟶ so breake the couenaunt of oure fathers?
Now hath Iuda offended: yee, the abhominacion is donne in Israel and in Ierusalem for Iuda hath defyled the Sanctuary of the Lorde, which he loued, and hath kepte the daughter of a straunge God.
But the Lorde shal destroye the man that doth this: (yee, both the master and the scoler) out of the tabernacle of Iacob with hym that offreth vp meatoffryng vnto the Lorde of hostes.
Now haue ye brought it to this poynte agayne, that the aulter of the Lorde is couered with teares, wepynge and mournynge: so that I wyll nomore regard the meatofferynge, nether wyl I receaue or accepte eny thyng at your handes.
And yet ye saye: wherfore? Euen because that where as the Lorde made a couenaunt betwixte the and the wyfe of thy youth, thou hast despysed. Yet is she thyne awne companyon and maryed wyfe.
So dyd not the one, and yet had he an excellent sprete. What dyd then the one? He sought the sede promised of God. Therfore loke well to your sprete, and let no man despyse the wyfe of his youth.
Yf thou hatest her put her awaye sayeth the Lorde God of Israell and geue her clothynge for the scorne, sayeth the Lorde of Hostes. Loke well then to youre sprete, and despyse her not.
Ye greue the Lorde with your wordes, Ꟶ yet ye saye: wherwith al haue we greued him? In this, that ye saye. Al that do euel are good in the syght of God, and soch please hym. Or els where is the God that punisheth?
Beholde, I will sende my messaunger, whiche shall prepare the waye before me: and the Lorde whom ye wolde haue, shal soone come to his temple, yee, euen the messaunger of the couenaunt whom ye longe for. Beholde, he commeth, saieth the Lorde of hostes.
But who may abyde the daye of his commyng? Who shalbe able to endure, when he appeareth? For he is like a goldsmythes fyre, ad lyke wasshers sope.
He shal syt him downe to trye and to clense the syluer, he shall pourge the chyldren of Leui, and purifye them lyke as golde and syluer: that they maye bringe meatofferinges vnto the Lorde in righteousnes.
Then shall the offeryng of Iuda and Ierusalem be acceptable vnto the Lorde, lyke as from the begynnynge and in the yeares, a fore tyme.
I wyll come and punyshe you, and I my selfe wyl be a swyfte wytnes agaynst the witches, agaynste the aduouterers, agaynst false swearers: yee, Ꟶ agaynst those that wrongeously kepe back the hyrelynges dewty: which vexe the wyddowes and the fatherlesse, and oppresse the straunger, and feare not me, saieth the Lorde of hostes.
For I am the Lorde that chaunge not, Ꟶ ye (O chyldren of Iacob) wyll not leaue of
ye are gone awaye fro myne ordinaunces, and sens the tyme of your forfathers haue ye not kepte them. Turne you now vnto me, and I wyll turne me vnto you, sayeth the Lorde of hostes: ye saye, wherin shal we turne?
Shulde a man vse falshed and disceat with God as ye vse falshed and disceate with me? yet ye saye wherin vse we disceate wt the? In Tithes Ꟶ heaue offeringes.
Therfore are ye cursed wyth penury, because ye dissemble with me, all the sorte of you.
Bringe euery Tithe into my barne, that there maye be meat in myne house: and proue me withall (sayeth the Lorde of hoostes) yf I wyll not open the wyndowes of heauen vnto you, and poure you out a blessyng with plenteousnesse.
Yee, I shall reproue the consumer for your sakes, so that he shall not eate vp the frute of youre grounde, nether shall the vynyarde be baren in the felde, sayeth the Lorde of hostes:
In so moch that all people shall saye, that ye be blessed, for ye shall be a pleasaunt lande, sayeth the Lorde of hostes.
Ye speake harde wordes agaynst me, sayeth the Lorde. And yet ye saye: What haue we spoken agaynst the?
Ye haue sayde: It is but lost labour, to serue God? What profyt haue we for kepynge his commaundementes, and for walkynge humbly before the Lorde of hostes?
Therfore maye we saye, that the proude are happie, Ꟶ that they which deale with vngodlynesse, are sett vp: for they tempte God, and yet escape.
But they that feare God, saye thus one to another: the Lorde consydereth and heareth it. Yee, it is before him a memoryal boke, wrytten for soch as feare the Lorde, and remembre his name.
And in the daye that I wyll make (sayth the Lorde of hostes) they shalbe myne awne possession: and I will fauoure them, lyke as a man fauoureth hys awne sonne, that doth hym seruyce.
Turne you therfore, and consydre what dyfference is betwyxte the righteous and vngodly, betwixte him that serueth God, and him that serueth hym not.
For marck, the daye commeth that shal bnrne as an ouen: and all the proude, yee, and all soch as do wyckednesse, shalbe strawe, Ꟶ the daye that is for to come, shall burne them vp (saieth the Lord of hostes) so that it shal leaue them nether rote ner braunche.
But vnto you that feare my name, shall that Sonne of ryghteousnesse aryse, and health shalbe vnder his wynges: ye shal go forth, and multiplie as the fat calues,
ye shal treade downe the vngodly: for they shalbe lyke the asshes vnder the soles of youre fete in the daye that I shall make, sayeth the Lorde of hoostes.
Remembre the lawe of Moses my seruaunt, whych I commytted vnto hym in Oreb for all Israell, with the statutes and ordinaunces.
Beholde, I wyll sende you Elias the prophet: before the commynge of the daye of the greate and fearefull Lorde.
He shal turne the hertes of the fathers to theyr children, and the hertes of the chyldren to their fathers, that I come not and smyte the earth with cursynge.
Thys ys the booke of the generacyon of Iesus Chryst, the sonne of Dauid, the sonne of Abraham.
Abraham begat Isaac. Isaac begat Iacob. Iacob begat Iudas and hys brethren.
Iudas begat Phares and zaram of Thamar. Phares begat Esrom. Esrom begat Aram.
Aram begat Aminadab. Aminadab begat Naasson. Naasson begat Salmon.
Salmon begat Boos of Rahab. Boos begat Obed of Ruth. Obed begat Iesse.
Iesse begat Dauid the kynge. Dauid the kynge begat Salomon, of her that was the wyfe of Urye.
Salomon begat Roboam. Roboam begat Abia. Abia begat Asa.
Asa begat Iosaphat. Iosaphat begat Ioram. Ioram begat Osias.
Osias begat Ioatham. Ioatham begat Achas. Achas begat Ezechias.
Ezechias begat Manasses. Manasses begat Amon. Amon begat Iosias.
Iosias begat Ieconias and hys brethren about the tyme they were caryed awaye to Babylon.
And after they were brought to Babylon, Iechonias begat Salathiel. Salathiel begat zorobabel.
zorobabel begat Abiud. Abiud begat Eliachim. Eliachim begat Azor.
Azor begat Sadoc. Sadoc begat Achin. Achin begat Eliud.
Eliud begat Eleasar. Eleasar begat Matthan: Matthan begat Iacob.
Iacob begat Ioseph the husbande of Mary, of whom was borne Iesus, euen he that is called Chryst.
And so all the generacyons from Abraham to Dauid, are fourtene generacyons. And from Dauid vnto the captyuyte of Babylon, are fourtene generacyons. And from the captiuyte of Babylon vnto Christ, are fourtene generacyons.
The byrth of Iesus Chryst was on this wyse. When his mother Mary was maryed to Ioseph (before they came to dwell togeather) she was founde with chylde by the holy ghoost.
Then Ioseph her husbande (because he was a ryghteous man, and wolde not put her to shame) he was mynded preuely to departe from her.
But whyll he thus thought, beholde, the aungell of the Lorde appeared vnto hym in slepe, saying: Ioseph, thou sonne of Dauid: feare not to take vnto the Mary thy wyfe. For that which is conceaued in her, cometh of the holy ghost.
She shall brynge forth a sonne, and thou shalt cal hys name Iesus. For he shall saue his people from theyr synnes.
Al this was done, that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying:
Behold, a mayd shalbe wt chylde, Ꟶ shall bring forth a sonne, Ꟶ they shall call his name Emanuel, which yf a man interpret, it is asmoch to say as God with vs.
And Ioseph as sone as he awoke out of slepe, dyd as the angel of the Lorde had bydden hym: and he toke hys wyfe vnto hym,
Ꟶ knewe her not, tyll she had brought forth her fyrst begotten sonne, and called his name Iesus.
When Iesus was borne at Bethleem a cytie of Iewry, in the tyme of Herode the kynge. Beholde, there came wyse men from the east to Ierusalem,
sayinge: Where is he that is borne king of Iewes? For we haue sene hys starre in the east, and are come to worshyppe hym.
When Herode the kyng had hearde these thynges, he was troubled, and all the cyte of Ierusalem with hym.
And whan he had gathered all the chefe prestes and scrybes of the people togeather, he demaunded of them, where Christ shulde be borne.
And they sayd vnto hym: At Bethleem in Iewrye. For thus it is wrytten by the prophet:
And thou Bethleem in the lande of Iuda, art not the leest among the princes of Iuda. For oute of the shal there come vnto me the captayne, that shall gouerne my people Israel.
Then Herode (when he had preuely called the wyse men) he enquyred of them diligently what tyme the starre appered,
Ꟶ he bad them go to Bethleem, Ꟶ sayd: God your waye thither, Ꟶ searche diligently for the childe. And when ye haue founde him, bryng me word agayne, that I maye come and worshyp hym also.
When they had heard the kyng, they departed: and lo, the starre which they sawe in the easte, went before them, tyll it came, Ꟶ stode ouer the place, wherin the chylde was.
When they sawe the starre, they were exceadynge glad:
and went into the house, and found the chylde with Mary his mother Ꟶ fel downe flatt and worshipped hym, and opened their treasures Ꟶ offered vnto hym gyftes, golde, franckincense, Ꟶ myrre.
And after they were warned of God in slepe (that they shuld not go agayne to Herode) they returned into their awne countre another waye.
When they were departed, behold, the angel of the Lord appered to Ioseph in slepe saying, aryse, Ꟶ take the chyld and his mother, and flye into Egipt: and be thou there tyll I brynge the worde. For it wyll come to passe that Herode shall seke the chylde, to destroye hym.
So whan he awoke, he toke the childe and hys mother by night, and departed into Egipt,
and was there vnto the deeth of Herode, that it myght be fulfylled, which was spoken of the Lorde by the prophete, sayenge: out of Egypt haue I called my sonne.
Then Herode whan he sawe that he was mocked of the wyse men, he was exceading wroth, Ꟶ sent forth men of warre, Ꟶ slue all the chyldren that were in Bethleem, and in all the coastes, (as many as were two yeere olde or vnder) accordynge to the tyme, whych he had dilygently knowe out of the wyse men.
Then was fulfylled that, which was spoken by the prophet Ieremy: where as he sayd:
in Rama was there a voyce herde lamentacyon, weping, and great mourninge. Rachel weping for her chyldren, Ꟶ wolde not be comforted because they were not.
But when Herode was deed: beholde, an angell of the Lorde appeared in a slepe to Ioseph, in Egypte,
sayenge: aryse, and take the chylde of hys mother, and go into the lande of Israell. for they are deed which sought the chyldes lyfe.
And he arose, and toke the chylde and hys mother, Ꟶ came into the land of Israell.
But when he hearde that Arthelaus dyd raygne in Iewry, in the rowme of his father Herode, he was afrayde to go thither. Notwithstandinge, after he was warned of God in a slepe, he turned a syde into the parties of Galile,
and went and dwelt in a cyte which is called Nazareth: that it might be fulfylled which was spoken by the prophetes: he shalbe called a Nazarite.
In those dayes came Iohn the Baptist, preachyng in the wyldernesse of Iewry,
and sayeng: Repent of the life that is past, for the kingdome of heauen is at hand.
For this is he, of whom the Prophete Esaye spake, which sayeth: The voyce of a cryer in the wyldernes, prepare ye the waye of the Lorde: Ꟶ make hys pathes streyght.
Thys Iohn had hys rayment of camels heer. And a gyrdell of a skynne about hys loynes. His meat was locustes and wylde hony.
Then went out to hym Ierusalem and all Iewrye, and all the regyon rounde about Iordan,
and were baptysed of hym in Iordan, confessyng their synnes.
But when he sawe many of the Pharises and Saduces come to hys baptyme, he sayd vnto them: O generacion of vypers, who hath taught you to fle from the vengeaunce to come?
Bring forth therfore the frutes that belong to repentaunce.
And be not of soch mynde that ye wolde saye wtin your selues: we haue Abraham to oure father. For I saye vnto you: that God is able to bryng to passe, that of these stones ther shall ryse vp children vnto Abraham.
Euen now is the axe also put vnto the rote of the trees: so that euery tree which bringeth not forth good frute, is hewen downe, and cast into the fyre.
I baptyse you in water vnto repentaunce: but he that shall come after me is myghtyer then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to beare. He shall baptise you with the holy ghost and with fyre:
whose fan is in hys hand, Ꟶ he wyll purge hys floore, Ꟶ gather his wheat into the barne, but wyll burne the chaffe wt vnquencheable fyre.
Then commeth Iesus from Galile to Iordan vnto Iohn to be baptysed of hym.
But Iohn forbade hym, sayinge: I haue nede to be baptised of the: and commest thou to me?
Iesus answered Ꟶ said vnto him: Let it be so now. For thus it becometh vs to fulfyll all ryghteousnesse. Then he suffred hym.
And Iesus when he was baptised, came straight waye out of the water. And lo heuen was open vnto him: and he sawe the sprete of God descendynge lyke a doue, and lyghtyng vpon hym.
And loo, there came a voyce from heauen saienge. Thys is my beloued sonne, in whom I am well pleased.
Then was Iesus led awaye of the sprite: into wyldernes: to be tempted of the deuell.
And when he had fasted fourty dayes and fourty nyghtes, he was at the last an hungred.
And when the tempter came to hym, he sayde: yf thou be the sonne of God commaunde, that these stones be made bread:
But he answered and sayde: it is wrytten, man shall not lyue by bread onlye, but by euery worde that proceadeth out of the mouth of God.
Then the deuyll taketh him vp into the holy cytie, Ꟶ setteth hym on a pynacle of the temple,
and sayeth vnto him: yf thou be the sonne of God, cast thy selfe downe headling. For it is written he shall geue hys angels charge ouer the, Ꟶ with their handes they shal holde the vp, lest at any tyme thou dash thy fote agaynst a stone.
And Iesus sayde to hym: it is wrytten agayne: Thou shalt not tempte the Lorde thy God.
Agayne, the deuel taketh him vp into an exceading hye mountayne, and sheweth him all the kyngdomes of the world, and the glory of them,
and sayeth vnto hym: all these will I geue the, yf thou wylt fall downe, Ꟶ worshyppe me.
Then sayeth Iesus vnto hym Auoyde Satan. For it is written: Thou shalt worshyp the Lorde thy God, and hym onely shalt thou serue.
Then the deuyl leaueth him, and behold, the angels came, Ꟶ ministed vnto him.
When Iesus had heard that Iohn was taken, he departed into Galyle,
and left Nazareth, and went and dwelt in Capernaum: whych is a cytie vpon the see coast; in the borders of zabulon Ꟶ Neptalim:
that it myght be fulfilled which was spoken by Esay the prophet, saying:
The lande of zabulon Ꟶ Neptalim, by the waye of the see beyonde Iordan, Galile of the Gentils:
the people which satt in darckenesse and in the shadowe of death, sawe great light: Ꟶ to them which sat in the region Ꟶ shadowe of death, is the light sprong vp.
From that tyme, Iesus beganne to preache, and to saye: repent, for the kyngdome of heauen is at hande.
As Iesus walked by the see of Galile he sawe two brethren: Symon, which was called Peter, Ꟶ Andrew his brother, castyng a neet into the see (for they were fisshers)
and he sayth vnto them: folowe me, and I wyll make you fisshers of men.
And they streyght waye lefte the nettes, and folowed hym.
And whan he was gone forth fro thence, he sawe other two brethren, Iames the sonne of zebede, Ꟶ Iohn his brother, in the shyp wt zebede their father, mending their nettes, Ꟶ he called them.
And they immediatly lefte the shyp and theyr father, and folowed hym.
And Iesus went about all Galile, teachynge in their synagoges, Ꟶ preachynge the gospel of the kingdome, and healing all maner of sycknes, Ꟶ all maner of disease amonge the people.
And hys fame spreed abroade throughout al Siria. And they brought vnto him all syck people that were taken with dyuers diseases and grypynges, and them that were possessed with deuyls: and those which were lunatyke, Ꟶ those that had the palsye: Ꟶ he healed them.
And ther folowed hym great multitudes of people, from Galile, and from the ten cytes, and from Ierusalem, and from Iewry, and from the regions that lye beyonde Iordan.
When he sawe the people, he went vp into a mountayne, and when he was sett, hys discyples came to him:
and after that he had opened hys mouth, he taught them, sayinge:
Blessed are the poore in sprete, for theyrs is the kyngdome of heauen.
Blessed are they that mourne, for they shall receaue comfort.
Blessed are the meke: for they shall receaue the enheritaunce of the earth.
Blessed are they which honger and thyrst after ryghteousnes: for they shalbe satisfyed.
Blessed are the mercyful: for they shall obteyne mercy.
Blessed are the pure in herte: for they shall se God.
Blessed are the peace makers: for they shalbe called the children of God.
Blessed are they which suffre persecucyon for righteousnes sake: for theirs is the kingdome of heauen.
Blessed are ye, when men reuyle you, and persecute you, and shall falesy say all maner of euyll sayinge against you, for my sake.
Reioyse Ꟶ be glad for greate is your rewarde in heuen. For so persecuted they the prophetes, which were before you.
Ye are the salt of the earth: But yf the salt haue lost the saltnes, what shalbe seasoned therwith? It is thence forth good for nothynge, but to be cast out, and to be troaden downe of men.
Ye are the light of the world. A cytie that is set on an hyll cannot be hyd,
nether do men lyght a candell, and put it vnder a busshell, but on a candelstyck, and it geueth light vnto all that are in the house.
Let your light so shyne before men. That they maye se your good worckes, Ꟶ gloryfy your father, which is in heauen.
Thynke not that I am come to destroye the lawe, or the prophetes: no, I am not come to destroye, but to fulfyll.
For truely I saye vnto you: tyll heauen and earth passe, one iott or one tytle of the lawe shal not scape, tyll all be fulfylled.
Whosoeuer therfore breaketh one of these leest commaundementes, and teacheth men so, he shalbe called the leest in the kyngdome of heauen. But whosoeuer doeth and teacheth, the same shalbe called greate in the kyngdome of heauen.
For I saye vnto you: except your righteousnesse exceade the ryghteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharises, ye cannot entre into the kyngdome of heauen.
Ye haue heard that it was sayd vnto them of the olde tyme. Thou shalt no kyll: whosoeuer killeth, shalbe in daunger of iudgement.
But I say vnto you: that whosoeuer is angrye with hys brother (vnaduysedly) shalbe in daunger of iudgement. And whosoeuer saye vnto hys brother Racha, shalbe in daunger of a councell. But whosoeuer sayeth thou foole, shalbe in daunger of hell fyre.
Therfore, yf thou offrest thy gyfte at the aulter, and there remembrest that thy brother hath ought agaynst the:
leaue ther thyne offringe before the aulter Ꟶ go thy waye fyrst, and be reconcyled to thy brother, and then come, and offre thy gyfte.
Agree with thyne aduersary quycklye whyles thou art in the waye with him, lest at any tyme the aduersary deliuer the to the iudge, and the iudge delyuer the to the mynister, and then thou be cast into preson.
Uerely, I say vnto the: thou shalt not come out thence, tyll thou haue payed the vtmost farthynge.
Ye haue herde that it was sayd vnto them of olde tyme. Thou shall no committ aduoutrye.
But I say vnto you that whosoeuer loketh on another mans wyfe to lust after her, hath commytted aduoutrye with her all ready in hys hert.
Yf thy ryght eye hynder the, plucke hym out, and cast hym from the. For better it is vnto the, that one of thy membres perysshe, then that thy whole body shuld be cast into hell.
And yf thy ryght hande hynder the, cutt hym of, and cast hym from the. For better it is vnto the, that one of thy membres perysshe, then that all thy body shulde be cast into hell.
It is sayd, whosoeuer putteth awaye his wyfe, lett hym geue her a letter of the deuorcement.
But I say vnto you: that whosoeuer doth put awaye his wyfe (excepte it be for fornycacyon) causeth her to breake matrymony. And whosoeuer maryeth her that is deuorsed commiteth aduoutrye.
Agayne, ye haue hearde how it was sayd to them of olde tyme: thou shalt not forsweare thy selfe, but shalt perfourme vnto the Lorde those thinges that thou swearest.
But I say vnto you: sweare not at all: nether by heauen, for it is Goddes seate,
nor by the earth, for it is his fote stole: nether by Ierusalem, for it is the cytie of the great king:
nether shalt thou sweare by thy heed, because thou canst not make one heare whyte or blacke.
But your communicacyon shalbe, ye, ye, nay, nay: For whatsoeuer is added more then these, it commeth of euyll.
Ye haue hearde that it is sayd: an eye for an eye: and a toth for a toth.
But I saye vnto you, that ye resist not euell. But whosoeuer geue the a blowe on the ryght cheke, turne to hym the other also.
And yf eny man wyll sue the at the law, and take awaye thy coate, let him haue thy clooke also.
And whosoeuer wyll compell the to go a myle, go with him twayne.
Geue to him that asketh the, and from hym that wolde borowe, turne not thou awaye.
Ye haue heard that it is sayde, thou shalt loue thyne neyghbour, and hate thyne enemy.
But I saye vnto you: loue your enemyes. Blesse them that curse you. Do good to them that hate you. Praye for them which hurt you and persecute you,
that ye maye be the children of your father which is in heauen: for he maketh his sonne to aryse on the euell, Ꟶ on the good, Ꟶ sendeth rayne on the iust Ꟶ on the vniust.
For yf ye loue them which loue you: what reward haue ye? Do not the publycans also euen the same?
And yf ye make moche of your brethren only, what singuler thinge do ye? Do not also the publicans lykewise?
ye shall therfore be perfecte, euen as your father which is in heauen is perfecte.
Take heade, that ye geue not your almose in the sight of men, to the intent that ye wold be sene of them. Or els ye haue no rewarde with youre father which is in heauen.
Therfore, whan thou geuest thyne almes, let not trompetes be blowen before the, as the ypocrites do in the synagoges and in the stretes: for to be praysed of men. Uerely, I saye vnto you: they haue their rewarde.
But when thou wylt geue almes, let not thy left hande knowe what thy ryghte hande doth,
that thyne almes maye be in secrete: and thy father whych seeth in secrete, shall rewarde the openly.
And when thou prayest thou shalt not be as the ypocrytes are. For they vse to stand praieng in the synagoges, and in the corners of the stretes, that they maye be sene of men. Uerely, I saye vnto you: they haue theyr rewarde.
But when thou prayest entre into thy chamber, Ꟶ when thou hast shut thy dore praye to thy father which is in secrete: Ꟶ thy father which seeth in secrete, shall rewarde the openly.
But when ye praye bable not moch, as the heathen do: for they thyncke it will come to passe, that they shalbe herd for their moch bablynges sake.
Be not ye therfore lyke vnto them. For youre father knoweth what thinges ye haue neade of before ye aske of him:
after thys maner therfore praye ye. Oure father which art in heauen, halowed be thy name.
Lett thy kyngdome come. Thy will be fulfylled, as well in earth, as it is in heauen.
Geue vs this daye oure daylye bread.
And forgeue vs our dettes, as we forgeue oure detters.
And leade vs not into temptacyon: but delyuer vs from euyll. For thyne is the kyngdome and the power, and the glorye for euer. Amen.
Therfore, yf ye forgeue other men theyr trespasses, your heuenly father shall forgeue you.
But yf ye wyll not forgeue men theyr trespasses, nomore shall your father forgeue you youre trespasses.
Moreouer, when ye fast, be not sad as the ypocrites are. For they disfigure their faces, that it maye appeare vnto men, how that they fast. Uerely, I saye vnto you, they haue theyr rewarde.
But thou, when thou fastest, anoynte thyne heed, and wash thy face,
that it appere not vnto men, how that thou fastest: but vnto thy father, which is in secret: and thy father which seeth in secrete, shal rewarde the openly.
Laye not vp for your selues treasure vpon earth, where the rust and mothe doth corrupte, and where theues breake through, and steale.
But laye vp for you, treasures in heuen, where nether rust nor mothe doth corrupte, and where theues do not breake thorow nor steale.
For where your treasure is, there will youre hert be also.
The light of the body is the eye. Wherfore, yf thyne eye be single, all thy body shall be full of light.
But and yf thyne eye be wicked, all thy body shalbe full of darcknesse. Wherfore, yf the lyght that is in the be darcknes, how greate is that darcknes?
No man can serue two masters. For ether he shal hate the one and loue the other, or els leane to the one, and despyse the other: ye cannot serue God and Mammon.
Therfore I saye vnto you: be not carefull for youre lyfe, what ye shall eate or drincke, nor yet for youre bodye, what rayment ye shall put on. Is not the lyfe more worth then meat: and the body more of value then rayment?
Behold, the foules of the ayer: for they sowe not, nether do they reape, nor cary into the barnes: and youre heuenly father fedeth them. Are ye not moch better then they?
Whych of you (by takynge carefull thought) can adde one cubyte vnto hys stature?
And why care ye for rayment? Consydre the lylies of the felde, how they growe. They laboure not, nether do they spynne.
And yet I saye vnto you, that euen Salomon in all hys royalte was not arayed lyke one of these.
Wherfore, yf God so cloth the grasse of the felde (which though it stande to daye, is to morow cast into the fornasse) shall he not moch more do the same for you, O ye of lytle fayth?
Therfore, take no thought, saying: what shall we eate, or what shall we dryncke, or wherwith shall we be clothed?
after all these thynges do the gentyls seke. For youre heuenly father knoweth, that ye haue nede of all these thynges.
But rather seke ye fyrst the kyngdome of God, and the ryghteousnesse therof, and al these thinges shalbe ministred vnto you.
Care not then for the morow, for the morowe daye shall care for it selfe: sufficient vnto the daye, is the trauayle therof.
Iudge not, that ye be not iudged.
For as ye iudge, so shall ye be iudged. And with what measure ye meate, with the same shall other men measure to you.
Why seest thou a mote in thy brothers eye, but consydrest not the beame that is in thyne awne eye?
Or how sayest thou to thy brother suffre me, I wyll plucke oute a moate out of thyne eye, and beholde, a beame is in thyne awne eye.
Thou ypocryte, fyrst cast oute the beame out of thyne awne eye, and then shalt thou se clearly to plucke out the mote oute of thy brothers eye.
Geue not ye that whych hys holy vnto dogges, nether cast ye youre pearles before swyne, lest they treade them vnder their fete Ꟶ the other turne against you, Ꟶ al to rent you.
Aske, and it shalbe geuen you: Seke, Ꟶ ye shall fynde: Knocke, and it shalbe opened vnto you.
For whosoeuer asketh, receaueth: and whosoeuer seketh, fyndeth: and to hym that knocketh, it shalbe opened.
Is there eny man amonge you, which (yf hys sonne aske bread) wyll offer him a stone?
Or yf he aske fisshe, will he profer him a serpent?
If ye then (whan ye are euell) can geue youre children good gyftes, how moch more shall your father which is in heauen, geue good thynges, yf ye aske of hym?
Therfore, whatsoeuer ye wolde that men shulde do to you: do ye euen so to them also. For this is the lawe and the prophetes?
Enter in at the strayte gate: for wyde is the gate, and broade is the waye that leadeth to destruccion: and many there be which go in ther at.
For straite is the gate, and narowe is the waye, which leadeth vnto lyfe, and fewe there be that finde it.
Beware of false prophetes, which come to you in shepes clothynge, but in wardly they are rauenyng wolues.
Ye shall knowe them by theyr frutes. Do men gather grapes of thornes? or figges of thistles?
Eue so euery good tree bringeth forth good frutes. But a corrupte tree, bringeth forth euell frutes.
A good tre can not brynge forth bad frute: nether can a bad tree bring forth good frutes.
Euery tree that bringeth not forth good frute, is hewen downe, and cast into the fyre.
Wherfore, by their frutes ye shall knowe them.
Not euery one that sayth vnto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kyngdome of heauen: but he that doth the wyll of my father, which is in heauen.
Many wyll saye to me in that daye: Lord, Lorde, haue we not prophecyed thorow thy name? And thorow thy name haue cast out deuyls? And done many miraracles thorow thy name?
And then wyll I knowledge vnto them. I neuer knewe you. Departe fro me, ye that worcke iniquyte.
For whosoeuer heareth of me these wordes, Ꟶ doth the same, I will lyken hym vnto a wyse man, which buylt hys house vpon a rock:
and a shower of rayne descended, Ꟶ the flouddes came, Ꟶ the wyndes blewe, and bet vpon that house, Ꟶ it fell not, because it was grounded on the rocke.
And euery one that heareth of me these wordes, and doth them not shalbe likened vnto a folysh man, which built his house vpon sande:
and a shower of rayne descended, and the floudes came, and the wyndes blew, and bet vpon that house, and it fell, and greate was the fall of it.
And it came to passe, that when Iesus had ended these sayinges, the people were astonnyed at hys doctryne.
For he taught them as one hauinge power, and not as the scribes.
When he was come downe from the mountayne, moch people folowed hym.
And beholde, there came a leper, and worshypped him sayeng: Mayster, yf thou wylt, thou canst make me cleane.
And Iesus put forth hys hande, and touched him sayenge: I will, be thou cleane, and immediatly hys leprosye was clensed.
And Iesus sayeth vnto hym: se thou tell no man but go, Ꟶ shewe thy selfe to the preste: and offre the gyfte (that Moses commaunded to be offred) for a witnes vnto them.
And when Iesus was entred into Capernaum, ther came vnto him a Centurion, and besought him,
sayenge: Master, my seruaunt lyeth at home sycke of the palsye, and is greuously payned.
And Iesus saith whan I come vnto hym, I wyll heale hym.
The Centurion answered, Ꟶ sayd: Syr, I am not worthy, that thou shuldest come vnder my rofe: but speake the word only, and my seruaunt shalbe healed.
For I also my self am a man subiect to the aucthoryte of another, and haue soudyers vnder me, and I saye to thys man: go, Ꟶ he goeth: and to another come, and he cometh, Ꟶ to my seruaunt do this, and he doeth it.
When Iesus herd these wordes, he marueled: and sayde to them that folowed him. Uerely, I saye vnto you: I haue not founde so greate fayth in Israell.
I saye vnto you that many shall come from the east, and west, and shall rest with Abraham and Isaac and Iacob in the kyngdome of heauen:
but the children of the kyngdome shalbe cast out into vtter darcknes: there shalbe weping and gnasshing of teth.
And Iesus sayde vnto the Centurion: go thy waye, and as thou beleuest, so be it vnto the. And hys seruaunt was healed in the selfe same houre:
And when Iesus was come into Peters house, he sawe hys wyues mother lyenge in bed, and sycke of a feuer.
And he touched her hande, and the feuer left her: and she arose, Ꟶ minystred vnto them.
When the euen drue on, they brought vnto him many that were possessed with deuils. And he cast out the spretes with a worde, and healed all that were sycke,
that it myght be fulfylled, which was spoken by Esay the prophete, when he sayth: He toke on hym oure infirmytes, and bare oure sycknes.
When Iesus sawe moch people about him, he commaunded that they shulde go vnto the other syde of the water.
And a certayne scribe (whan he was come) sayde vnto him: Master, I wil folowe the whither soeuer thou goest.
And Iesus sayeth vnto him: the foxes haue holes, and the byrdes of the ayer haue nestes: but the sonne of man hath not where to reste his head.
And another of the nomber of his disciples sayd vnto him: Master, suffre me first to go and bury my father.
But Iesus sayde vnto hym: folowe me, and let the deed burye theyr deed.
And whan he entred into a shyp, his disciples folowed him.
And beholde, there arose a greate tempeste in the see, in so moche that the shyppe was couered with waues, but he was a slepe.
And hys discyples came to hym, and awoke hym, sayenge: Master, saue vs, we peryshe.
And he sayth vnto them: why are ye fearful, O ye of lytle faith? Then he arose and rebuked the wyndes and the see, and there folowed a greate calme.
But the men marueyled, sayinge: what maner of man is this, that both wyndes and see obey hym?
And when he was come to the other syde, into the countre of the Gergesites, ther met him two possessed of deuylles, which came out of the graues, and were out of measure fearce, so that no man might go by that waye.
And beholde, they cryed out sayinge: O Iesu thou sonne of God what haue we to do with the? Art thou come hyther to torment vs before the tyme?
And ther was a good waye of from them a heerd of many swyne, fedynge.
So, the deuyls besought him, sayinge, yf thou cast vs out, suffre vs to go oure waye into the heerd of swyne.
And he sayde vnto them: go youre wayes. Then went they out, and departed into the heerd of swyne. And beholde, the whole heerd of swyne was caried headlynge into the see, and perisshed in the waters,
Then they that kepte them, fledd, and went their wayes into the cytie, and tolde euery thinge, and what had fortuned vnto the possessed of the deuyls.
And beholde, the whole cytie came out to mete Iesus: and when they sawe him, they besought him that he wolde departe out of their coastes.
He entred also into a shyppe, and passed ouer, and came into his awne cytie,
and beholde, they brought to hym a man sicke of the palsye, lyinge in a bed. And when Iesus sawe the fayth of them, he sayd vnto the sicke of the palsye: sonne, be of good cheare, thy synnes be forgeuen the.
And beholde: certayne of the Scribes sayde within them selues: this man blasphemeth.
And when Iesus sawe their thoughtes, he sayde. Wherfore thyncke ye euyll in youre heartes?
Whether is easyer to saye, thy synnes be forgeuen the, or to saye, aryse and walke?
But that ye maye knowe, that the sonne of man hath power to forgeue synnes in erth. Then sayeth he vnto the sycke of the palsye: arise, take vp thy bed, and go vnto thyne house.
And he arose, and departed to his house.
But the people that sawe it, marueyled, and gloryfyed God, which had geuen soch power vnto men.
And as Iesus passed forth from thence, he sawe a man (named Mathew) syttynge at the receate of custome, and he sayeth vnto him: folow me.
And he arose, Ꟶ folowed him. And it came to passe as Iesus sat at meate in hys housse: beholde, many Publicans also and synners that came, sat downe with Iesus and his disciples.
And when the Pharises sawe it, they sayde vnto his disciples: why eateth youre master with publicans and synners?
But when Iesus heard that, he sayde vnto them. They that be stronge, nede not the phisicyon, but they that are sicke.
Goo ye rather and learne what that meaneth. I will haue mercy, and not sacrifice. For I am not come to call the ryghtewes, but synners to repentaunce.
Then came the Disciples of Iohn vnto him, saying: why do we and the Pharises fast, for the most parte: but thy disciples fast not?
And Iesus sayde vnto them: can the brydegromes children mourne as longe as the brydegrome is with them? But the dayes wyll come, when the brydegrome shalbe taken from them, and then shall they fast.
No man putteth a pece of new cloth in an olde garment. For then taketh he awaye the pece from the garment, and the rent is made worse.
Nether do men put new wyne into olde: bottels: els the bottels breake, and the wyne runneth out, and the bottels peryshe. But they putt new wyne into new bottels, and both are saued together.
Whyle he thus spake vnto them, beholde, ther came a certayne ruler, Ꟶ worshipped him, sayinge: my daughter is euen now diseased, but come and laye thy hand vpon her, Ꟶ she shall lyue.
And Iesus arose, and folowed him, and (so dyd) his disciples.
and beholde, a woman which was diseased with an yssue of bloude twelue yeres, came behynde him, and touched the hemme of his vesture.
For she sayde within her selfe: yf I may touche but euen hys vesture onely, I shalbe safe.
But Iesus tourned him aboute, and whan he sawe her, he sayde. Daughter, be of good comforte, thy faith hath made the safe. And the woman was made whole, euen that same tyme.
And when Iesus came into the rulers house, and sawe the minstrels, and the people makyng a noyse,
he sayde vnto them: get you hence, for the mayde is not deed but slepeth. And they laughed him to scorne.
But whan the people were put forth, he went in, and toke her by the hande, and the damsell arose.
And this noyse went abroade into all that lande.
And whan Iesus departed thence, two blynde men folowed him, cryinge Ꟶ sayinge: O thou sonne of Dauid, haue mercy on vs:
And when he was come into the house, the blynde came to him. And Iesus sayeth vnto them: Beleue ye, that I am able to do this? They saye vnto him: Lord, we beleue.
Then touched he their eyes, sayinge: accordynge to youre fayth be it vnto you.
And their eyes were opened. And Iesus charged them sayinge. Se that no man knowe of it.
But they, whan they were departed, spreed abroade his name in all that lande.
As they went out, beholde they brought to him a domme man possessed of a deuyll.
And whan the deuyll was cast out, the domme spake. And the people merueyled, sayinge: it was neuer so sene in Israell.
But the pharises sayde. he casteth out deuyls, thorow the prince of deuels.
And Iesus went about all cyties Ꟶ townes, teachinge in their synagoges, and preachinge the glad tydinges of the kyngdome, and healinge euery sicknes and euery disease amonge the people.
But when he sawe the people: he was moued with compassion on them, because they were destitute, and scattered abroade, euen as shepe hauynge no shepherde,
Then saieth he vnto his disciples, the heruest truly is plenteous, but the labourers are feawe.
Praye ye therfore the Lord of the haruest, that he will sende labourers into his haruest.
And whan his .xij. disciples were called vnto him, he gaue them power agaynst vncleane spretes, to cast them out, and to heale all maner of syckenesse, and all maner of dysease.
The names of the .xij. Apostles are these The fyrst, Symon which is called Peter: and Andrew his brother: Iames the sonne of zebedee, and Iohn his brother:
Philip Ꟶ Bartholomew: Thomas and Mathew, which had bene a Publican. Iames the sonne of Alphe, and Lebbeus (whose syrname was Taddeus)
Simon of Canaan, and Iudas Iscarioth, which also be traied him.
Iesus sent forth these twelue in nombre, whom he commaunded, saying. Go not into the waye of the gentyls, and into the cytie of the Samaritans enter ye not.
But goo rather to the lost shepe of the house of Israell.
Go and preache, saying: The kyngdome of heauen is at hand.
Heale the sycke, clense the lepers, rayse the deed, cast out deuyls. Frely ye haue receaued: geue frely.
Possesse not golde nor syluer nor brasse in youre purses,
nor yet scrip towardes your iorney: nether two cotes, nether shoes, nor yet a rodde. For the worckman is worthy of his meate.
But to whatsoeuer cytie or towne ye shall come, enquyre who is worthy in it, and there abyde tyll ye go thence.
And when ye come into an house, salute the same.
And yf the house be worthy, let youre peace come vpon it. But yf it be not worthy, let youre peace retourne to you agayne.
And whosoeuer shall not receaue you, nor wyll heare youre preachynge: when ye departe oute of that house or that cytie shake of the duste of youre fete.
Uerely I saye vnto you: it shalbe easier for the land of zodoma and Gomorra in the daye of iudgement, then for that cytie.
Beholde, I sende you forth, as shepe among wolues. Be ye therfore wyse as serpentes and innocent as doues.
But beware of men, for they shall delyuer you vp to the councels, and shall scourge you in their synagoges.
And ye shall be brought to the heed rulers, and kynges, for my sake, in wytnes to them and to the gentyls.
But when they delyuer you vp, take ye no thought, how or what ye shall speake: for it shalbe geuen you, euen in that same houre what ye shall speake.
For it is not ye that speke, but the spryte of youre father which speaketh in yon.
The brother shall delyuer vp the brother to deeth, Ꟶ the father the sonne. And the children shal aryse agaynst their fathers and mothers, and shall put them to deeth:
Ꟶ ye shalbe hated of all men for my name sake. But he that endureth to the ende, shalbe saued.
But when they persecute you in this cytie, flye ye into another. For verely I saye vnto you: ye shall not go thorowe all the cyties of Israell tyll the sonne of man be come.
The disciple is not aboue the master: nor the seruaunt aboue his Lord.
It is ynough for the disciple, that he be as his master is, and that the seruaunt be as his Lorde is. If they haue called the Lord of the house, Beelzebub: how moche more shal they call them of his householde so?
Feare them not therfore. For there is nothing closse, that shall not be opened: and nothynge hyd, that shall not be knowen.
What I tel you in darknes, that speake ye in lyght. And what ye heare in the eare, that preache ye on the house toppes.
And feare ye not them which kyll the body but are not able to kyll the soule. But rather feare him, which is able to destroye both soule and body into hell.
Are not two lytle sparowes sold for a farthyng? And one of them shall not lyght on the grounde with out youre father.
Yee, euen al the heares of your head are nombred.
Feare ye not therfore: ye are of more value then many sparowes.
Euery one therfore that shall knowledge me before men, him will I knowledge also before my father which is in heauen.
But whosoeuer shall denye me before men him will I also denye before my father, which is in heauen.
Thinke not that I am come to sende peace into the erth. I came not to send peace, but a sweard.
For I am come to set a man at variaunce agaynst his father, Ꟶ the daughter agaynst her mother, Ꟶ the daughter in lawe agaynst her mother in lawe.
And a mannes foes shalbe they that are of his awne houshold.
He that loueth father, or mother more then me, is not worthy of me. And he that loueth sonne or daughter more then me, is not worthy of me.
And he that taketh not hys crosse and foloweth me, is not worthy of me
He that fyndeth his lyfe, shall lose it: and he that losyth his lyfe for my sake, shall fynde it.
He that receaueth you, receaueth me: Ꟶ he that receaueth me, receaueth him that sent me.
He that receaueth a prophet in the name of a prophet, shal receaue a prophetes rewarde. And he that receaueth a ryghteous man, in the name of a ryghteous man, shall receaue a righteous mans rewarde:
And whosoeuer shall geue vnto one of these lytle ones to dryncke, a cuppe of colde water onely (in the name of a disciple) verely I saye vnyou, he shall not lose his rewarde.
And it came to passe, that when Iesus had made an ende of commaunding his twelue disciples he departed thence, to teache and to preache in theyr cyties,
When Iohn beynge in preson hearde the workes of Christ, he sent two of hys dyscyples,
Ꟶ sayde vnto hym: Art thou he that shall come: or do we loke for another.
Iesus answered and sayd vnto them: Go, and shewe Iohn agayne, what ye haue heard and sene.
The blynd receaue their sight: the lame walke, the lepers are clensed: and the deef heare, the deed are raysed vp, Ꟶ the poore receaue the glad tidinges of the gospell.
And happy is he, that is not offended by me.
And as they departed, Iesus beganne to saye vnto the people concerning Iohn. What went ye out into the wyldernes to se? A rede that is shaken with the wynde?
Or what went ye out for to se? A man clothed in softe rayment? Beholde: they that weare softe clothing: are in kinges houses.
But what went ye out for to se? A prophete: Uerely I saye vnto you: and more then a Prophete.
For this is he, of whom it is wrytten. Beholde, I sende my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy waye before the.
Uerely I saye vnto you: amonge them that are borne of wemen, arose not a greater then Iohn the Baptist. Not withstandinge he that is lesse: in the Kyngdome of heauen is gretter then he.
From the dayes of Iohn Baptist vntill this daye, the kyngedom of heuen suffreth violence, and the violent plucke it vnto them.
For all the prophetes, and the lawe it selfe prophesied vnto Iohn.
And yf ye wyll receaue it this is Helias, which was for to come.
He that hath eares to heare: let hym heare.
But wher vnto shall I lyken thys generacion? It is like vnto chyldren, which syt in the market places, and call vnto their felowes,
and saye: we haue pyped vnto you, and ye haue not daunsed: We haue mourned vnto you Ꟶ ye haue not sorowed.
For Iohn came nether eatynge nor drynkynge, Ꟶ they saye, he hath the deuyll.
The sonne of man came eatyng and drynckyng, and they saye, beholde a glutton, Ꟶ an vnmeasurable dryncker of wyne: and a frende vnto publicans and synners. And wisdome is iustifyed of her chyldren.
Then began he to vpbrayd the cyties which most of hys miracles were done in, because they repented not of their synnes.
Wo vnto the Chorasin: Wo vnto the Bethsaida: for yf the miracles which were shewed in you, had bene done in the cytie of Tyre or Sidon, they had repented of their synnes longe agon in sack cloth and asshes.
Neuerthelesse I saye vnto you: it shall be easier for Tyre Ꟶ Sidon at the daye of iudgement, then for you.
And thou Capernaum, which art lyft vp vnto heuen, shalt be brought downe to hell. For yf the miracles which haue bene done in the, had bene shewed in zodom: they had remayned vntill this daye.
Neuerthelesse, I saye vnto you: that it shalbe easier for the land of zodom in the daye of iudgement, then for the.
At that tyme Iesus answered and sayde: I thanke the O father, Lord of heauen Ꟶ erth, because thou hast hid these thinges from the wyse and prudent, and hast shewed them vnto babes,
verely father, euen so was it thy good pleasure.
All thinges are geuen ouer vnto me of my father. And noman knoweth the sonne but the father: nether knoweth eny man the father, saue the sonne, and he to whomsoeuer the sonne will open him.
Come vnto me all ye that laboure: and are laden, and I will ease you.
Take my yock vpon you, and lerne of me, for I am meke Ꟶ lowly in herte: and ye shall fynde rest vnto youre soules.
For my yocke is easy, and my burden is light.
At that tyme Iesus went on the Sabboth dayes thorowe the corne, and hys discyples were an hongred, and beganne to plucke the eares of corne, and to eate.
But when the Pharises sawe it, they sayde vnto hym: Beholde, thy discyples do that which is not lawfull to do vpon the Sabboth daye.
But he sayde vnto them. Haue ye not read what Dauid dyd, when he was an hongred, Ꟶ they that were with him?
How he entred into the house of God, and did eate the shewe breades which were not lawfull for hym to eate, nether for them which were with hym, but onely for the prestes?
Or haue ye not read in the lawe, how that (on the Sabath dayes) the preastes in the temple breake the Saboth, and are blamelesse?
But I saye vnto you: that in this place is one greater then the temple.
Wherfore, yf ye wyst what this meaneth I require mercy, Ꟶ not sacrifice: ye wolde not haue condemned innocentes.
For the sonne of man also, is Lord euen of the Sabath daye.
And he departed thence and went into their synagoge:
and beholde, ther was a man which had his hande dried vp. And they asked hym, sayinge is it lawfull to heale vpon the Saboth dayes? that they myght accuse him.
And he sayde vnto them: which of you will it be, that shall haue. a shepe, and yf it fall into a pytte on the Saboth daye, wyl he not take it and lyft it out?
Howe moch more then is a man better then a shepe? Wherfore, it is lefull to do a good dede on the Saboth dayes.
Then sayeth he to the man: stretch forth thy hande. And he stretched it forth: And it was restored vnto health, lyke as the other.
Then the Pharises went out, and helde a counsell agaynst him, how they myght destroye him.
But when Iesus knewe it, he departed thence, and moche people folowed him, and he healed them all,
and charged them, that they shuld not make him knowen:
that it myght be fulfilled which was spoken by Esay the Prophet, which sayeth:
Beholde, my childe, whom I haue chosen, my beloued, in whom my soule deliteth. I wyll put my sprete vpon him, and he shall shewe iudgement to the gentyls.
He shal not stryue ner crye, nether shall eny man heare hys voyce in the stretes,
a brosed rede shall he not breake, and smokyng flax shall he not quenche, till he sende forth iudgement vnto victorie,
Ꟶ in his name shall the gentyls trust.
Then was brought to him a blynd Ꟶ domme man, that was vexed with a deuyll, Ꟶ he healed him, in somoch, that the blynd and domme, both spake and sawe.
And all the people were amased, and sayde: Is not this that sonne of Dauid?
But when the Pharises hearde it, they sayd. This felow dryueth the deuyls no nother wyse out, but by the helpe of Belzebub the chefe of the deuyls.
But whan Iesus knewe their thoughtes he sayde vnto them: Euery kingdome deuided agaynst it selfe, shalbe brought to naught. And euery citie or house deuyded agaynst it selfe shall not stande.
And yf Satan cast out Satan, then is he deuided agaynst him selfe how shall then his kingdome endure?
Also, yf I by the helpe of Belzebub cast out deuyls, by whose helpe do youre chyldren cast them out? Therfore, they shalbe your iudges.
But yf I cast out the deuyls by the spryte of God: then is the kingdome of God come vnto you:
Or els how can one enter into a strong mannes house, and spoyle his Iewels, excepte he fyrst bynde the stronge man, and then spoyle his house?
He that is not with me, is agaynst me. And he that gathereth not with me, scattereth abrode.
Wherfore, I saye vnto you, all maner of synne and blasphemy shalbe forgeuen vnto men but the blasphemy agaynst the sprete, shall not be forgeuen vnto men.
And whosoeuer speaketh a worde agaynst the sonne of man, it shalbe forgeuen hym. But whosoeuer speaketh agaynst the holy gost, it shall not be forgeuen him, nether in this worlde, nether in the worlde to come:
Ether make the tree good, and his frute good, or els make the tree euyll, and hys frute euyll. For the tree is knowen by his frute.
O generacion of vypers, how can ye speake good thinges, when ye youre selues are euyll? For out of the aboundance of the hert, the mouth speaketh.
A good man out of the good treasure of the hert, bryngeth forth good thynges. And an euyll man, out of euyll treasure, bringeth forth euyll thynges.
But I say vnto you, of euery ydell worde that men shall haue spoken, they shall geue acountes in the daye of iudgement.
For out of thy wordes thou shalt be iustifyed: and out of thy wordes thou shalt be condemned.
Then certayne of the Scribes and of the Pharises asked him saying. Master, we wyll se a sygne of the.
But he answered and sayde to them. The euyll and aduouterous generacion seketh a signe and ther shall no sygne be geuen to them, but the signe of the Prophet Ionas.
For as Ionas was thre dayes and thre nightes in the whales belly, so shall the sonne of man be thre dayes and thre nightes in the herte of the erth.
The men of niniue shall ryse in the iudgement with this nacion, Ꟶ condemne it, because they amended at the preachyng of Ionas. Beholde, here is one greater then Ionas.
The quene of the south shall rise in the iudgement with this generacion, and shall condemne it: for she came from the vtmost partes of the worlde to heare the wysdome of Salomon. And behold, in this place is one greater then Salomon.
When the vnclene spryte is gone out of a man, he walketh throughout drye places, sekyng rest, and findeth none.
Then he saieth: I will retourne into my house, from whence I came out. And when he is come, he fyndeth it empty, and swepte, and garnisshed.
Then goeth he, and taketh vnto him seuen other spretes worse then him selfe, and so entreth he in, and dwelleth there. And the ende of that man is worse then the begynning. Euen so shall it be also, vnto this froward generacion.
Whyle he yet talked to the people: beholde his mother and his brethren stode without, desyringe to speake with him.
Then one sayde vnto him beholde, thy mother and thy brethren stande without, desyringe to speake with the:
But he answered, Ꟶ sayde vnto him that had tolde him. Who is my mother? or who are my brethren?
And he stretched forth hys hand towarde his disciples, Ꟶ sayd. beholde my mother and my brethren.
For whosoeuer doth the will of my father which is in heauen, the same is my brother, syster, and mother.
The same daye went Iesus out of the house, and sat by the see syde,
and moche people were gathered together vnto him, so gretly that he went, and sat in a shippe, and all the people stode on the shore.
And he spake many thynges to them by similitudes, sayinge: Beholde, the sower went forth to sowe.
And whan he sowed, some sedes fell by the wayes syde, and the fowles came, and deuoured them vp.
Some fell vpon stony places, where they had not moche erth, and anone they spronge vp, because they had no depnesse of erth:
and when the sonne was vp, they caught heat, Ꟶ because they had no rote, they wyddred awaye.
Agayne, some fell amonge thornes, and the thornes spronge vp and choaked them.
But some fell into good ground, Ꟶ brought forth frute: some an hundred folde, some syxtie folde, some thyrtie folde.
Whosoeuer hath eares to heare, let him heare.
And the disciples came, Ꟶ sayde vnto him? Why speakest thou to them by parables?
He answered and sayde vnto them: it is geuen vnto you to knowe the secretes of the kyngdome of heauen, but to them it is not geuen.
For whosoeuer hath, to him shall be geuen: and he shall haue aboundaunce. But whosoeuer hath not: from him shalbe taken awaye euen that also which he hath.
Therfore speake I to them by similitude: for they seinge, se not: and hearinge, they heare not: nother do they vnderstand.
And in them is fulfylled the prophecie of Esaias, which sayth: with the eares ye shall heare, and shall not vnderstand and seinge ye shall se, and shall not perceaue.
For these peoples hertes is wexed grosse, and their eares are dull of hearynge, and theyr eyes haue they closed, lest at any tyme they shuld se with their eyes, and heare with their eares, Ꟶ shuld understand with their herte, Ꟶ be conuerted, that I also myght heale them.
But blessed are youre eyes, for they se: Ꟶ youre eares, for they heare.
Uerely I saye vnto you, that many prophetes Ꟶ righteous men haue desyred to se those thinges which ye se, Ꟶ haue not sene them: Ꟶ to heare those thinges which ye heare, and haue not hearde them.
Heare ye therfore the similitude of the sower.
Whan one heareth the word of the kingdome, Ꟶ understandeth it not, then commeth the euyll man, Ꟶ taketh awaye that which was sowen in hys hert: thys is he, which was sowne by the waye syde.
But he that receaued the sede which was cast into stony places, the same is he that heareth the worde, and anone with ioye receaueth it,
yet hath he no rote in hym selfe, but dureth for a season: for whan tribulacyon or persecucyon happeneth because of the worde, by and by he falleth.
He also that receaued sede into the thornes, is he that heareth the worde: and the care of this worlde, and the dissaytfulnes of ryches, choke vp the worde, and so is he made vnfrutefull.
But he that receaued sede into the good ground is he that heareth the worde, and vnderstandeth it: which also beareth frute, Ꟶ bringeth forth, some an hundred folde, some syxtie folde, some thyrtye folde.
Another similitude put he forth vnto them, sayinge: The kyngdome of heauen is lykened vnto a man, which sowed good seed in his felde.
But whyll men slept, his enemie came, Ꟶ sowed tares among the wheate, Ꟶ went his waye.
But when the blade was sprong vp, and had brought forth frute, there appeared the tares also.
So the seruauntes of the housholder came, and sayde vnto him. Syr, dyddest not thou sowe good seed in thy felde? from whence then hath it tares?
He sayde vnto them, the enuious man hath done this. The seruauntes sayde vnto him: wylt thou then that we go, and wede them vp?
But he sayde, nay, lest while ye gather vp the tares ye plucke vp also the wheate with them,
let bothe growe together vntill the haruest, and in tyme of haruest, I wyll saye to the repers gather ye fyrst the tares, and bynde them together in sheues to be brent: but gather the wheate into my barne.
Another parable put he forth vnto them, sayinge. The kyngdome of heauen is lyke to a grayne of mustard seed, which a man toke Ꟶ sowed in his felde,
which is the leest of all seedes. But when it is growne, it is the greatest among herbes, and is a tree: so that the byrdes of the ayer come, and make theyr nestes in the braunches therof.
Another similitude spake he vnto them: The kyngdom of heauen is lyke vnto leuen, which a woman taketh and hydeth in thre peckes of meale, tyll all be leuened.
All these thinges spake Iesus vnto the people by similitudes, Ꟶ with out a parable spake he nothynge vnto them,
that it myght be fulfylled, which was spoken by the prophet, that sayth I will open my mouth in parables: I wyll speake forth thynges which haue bene kepte secrete from the begynning of the world.
When the people were sent awaye, then came Iesus into the house. And his disciples came vnto him, saying: declare vnto vs the parable of the tares of the felde.
He answered and sayd vnto them. He that soweth the good seed, is the sonne of man.
The feld is the worlde. And the chyldren of the kyngdome, they are the good seed: the tares are the chyldren of the wycked:
the enemie that soweth them, is the deuyll. The haruest is the ende of the worlde: the reapers be the Angels.
Euen as the tares therfore, are gathered Ꟶ brent in the fyre: so shall it be in the ende of this worlde.
The sonne of man shall sende forth his Angels, Ꟶ they shall gather out of his kyngdome all thinges that offende, and them which do iniquite:
and shall cast them into a furnes of fyre. There shalbe waylinge Ꟶ gnasshyng of teth.
Then shall the righteous shine as the Sonne in the kyngdom of their father. Whosoeuer hath eares to heare, let him heare.
Agayne, the kyngdom of heauen is lyke vnto treasure hid in the felde, the which a man hath found and hydd: and for ioye therof goeth Ꟶ selleth all that he hath, Ꟶ byeth the felde.
Agayne, the kyngdome of heauen is lyke vnto a marchaunt man, sekyng goodly pearles,
which (when he found one precious pearle) went Ꟶ solde all that he had, Ꟶ bought it.
Agayne, the kyngdom of heauen is lyke vnto a nett, that was cast into the see Ꟶ geathered of all kynde
which when it was full men drewe to land, Ꟶ sat downe Ꟶ geathered the good into vessels, but cast the bad awaye.
So shall it be at the ende of the worlde. The angelles shall come Ꟶ seuer the bad from amonge the good,
Ꟶ shall cast them into a furnace of fyre: there shalbe wayling Ꟶ gnasshing of teth.
Iesus saieth vnto them: haue ye vnderstande all these thinges? They saye vnto him: ye Lorde.
Then sayde he vnto them. Therfore euery Scribe which is taught vnto the kyngedome of heauen, is lyke vnto a man that is an housholder, which bryngeth forth out of his treasure, thinges newe and olde.
And it came to passe that when Iesus had finisshed these similitudes, he departed thence:
And whan he came into his awne countre, he taught them in their synagoges, in so moch, that they were astonnied and sayde: whence commeth this wysdome and powers vnto to him?
is not this the carpenters sonne? Is not hys mother called Mary? and hys brethren, Iames and Ioses and Simon and Iudas?
And are not all his systers with vs? Whence hath he then all these thynges?
And they were offended at hym. Iesus sayde vnto them: A prophete is not without honoure, saue in his awne countre, and in hys awne house.
And he did not not many miracles there, because of theyr vnbelefe.
At that tyme Herode the Tetrarcha heard of the fame of Iesu,
Ꟶ sayde vnto his seruauntes: this is Iohn the Baptist. He is rysen from the deed, Ꟶ therfore are miracles wrought by him.
For Herode had taken Iohn, Ꟶ bound him, Ꟶ put him in preson because of Herodias, his brother Philips wyfe.
For Iohn sayd vnto him: it is not lawfull for thou to haue her.
And when he wolde haue put hym to deeth, he feared the people, because they counted him as a prophet.
But when Herodes byrth daye was kepte, the daughter of Herodias daunsed before them, Ꟶ pleased Herode.
Wherfore he promysed with an othe, that he wolde geue her whatsoeuer she wolde aske.
And she beynge instructe of her mother before, sayde: geue me here Iohn Baptistes heed in a platter.
And the kynge was sory. Neuerthelesse, for the othes sake, Ꟶ them which sate also at the table, he commaunded it to be geuen her:
Ꟶ sent tourmentours, Ꟶ behedded Iohn in the preson
and his heed was brought in a platter Ꟶ geuen to that damsell, and she brought it to her mother.
And his disciples came Ꟶ toke vp hys body, and buried it: went, and tolde Iesus.
When Iesus hearde of it, he departed thence in a shyppe vnto a desert place, out of the waye. And when the people had harde therof, they folowed him on fote and left the cyties.
And Iesus went forth, Ꟶ sawe moch people, and was moued with mercy toward them, and he healed of them those that were sycke.
And when the euen drewe on, his disciples came to him, saying: this is a deserte place, Ꟶ the houre is now past, let the people departe, that they maye go into the townes, and bye them vytaylles.
But Iesus sayde vnto them. They haue no nede to go awaye. Geue ye them to eate.
They saye vnto him: we haue here but .v. loues and two fysshes.
He sayde: brynge them hyther to me.
And he commaunded the people to syt downe on the grasse, Ꟶ he toke the .v. loues Ꟶ the .ij. fysshes, and lyft vp hys eyes toward heauen Ꟶ blessed. And whan he had broken them, he gaue the loaues to hys disciples, Ꟶ his discyples gaue them to the people.
And they dyd all eate, and were suffysed. And they gathered vp (of the fragmentes that remayned.) .xij. basketesfull.
And they that dyd eate, were aboute .v.M. men, besyde wemen and chyldren.
And streyght waye Iesus made his disciples to get vp into a shippe, and to goo before him vnto the other syde whill he sent the people awaye.
And when the people were sent awaye, he went vp into a mountayne to praye alone. And when night was come, he was there him selfe alone.
But the shippe was now in the myddes of the see, Ꟶ was toost wyth waues, for it was a contrary wynde.
And in the fourth watche of the nyght, Iesus went vnto them walkynge on the see.
And when the disciples sawe hym walkynge on the see, they were troubled, sayinge: it is some sprite, Ꟶ they cryed out for feare.
But streyght waye, Iesus spake vnto them, sayinge: be of good cheare, it is I, be not afrayed.
Peter answered hym, and sayde: Lorde, yf it be thou, byd me come vnto the on the water.
And he sayde, come. And when Peter was come doune out of the shippe, he walked on the water, to go to Iesus.
But when he sawe a myghty wynde, he was afrayed. And when he beganne to syncke, he cryed sayinge: lorde saue me.
And immediatly Iesus stretched forth his hand, Ꟶ caught him, Ꟶ sayd vnto him: O thou of lytell fayth, wherfore dyddest thou dout?
And whan they were come into the shyppe, the wynde ceased.
Then they that were in the shyppe, came and worshypped hym, sayinge: of a truthe thou art the sonne of God.
And when they were gone ouer they came into the lande of Genesareth.
And when the men of the place had knowledge of him, they sent out messaungers into all that countre rounde about the coast Ꟶ brought vnto him all that were sycke,
Ꟶ besought hym, that they myght touche the hemme of his vesture only. And as many as touched it were made safe.
Then came to Iesus Scribes and Pharises (whyche were come from Ierusalem) saying:
why do thy disciples transgresse the tradicion of the elders? for they washe not theyr handes when they eate bread.
But he answered Ꟶ sayde vnto them: why do ye also transgresse the commaundement of God, because of youre awne tradicion:
For God commaundeth sayinge: honoure father and mother, and he that cursseth father or mother: let hym dye the deeth.
But ye saye: euery one shall saye to his father and mother: what gift so euer shulde haue come of me, the same is turned vnto thy profyt: Ꟶ so shall he not honoure his father or his mother.
And thus haue ye made the commaundement of God of none effecte, because of youre awne tradicyon.
Ypocrites, full well dyd Esaye prophesie of you, saying:
This people draweth nye vnto me with theyr mouth, and honoureth me with lyppes, howbeit, their hertes are farre from me:
but in vayne do they serue me; teachynge the doctrines and preceptes of men.
And he called the people to him, and sayd vnto them: heare and vnderstande.
That whych goeth into the mouth, defyleth not the man: but that which commeth out of the mouth, defyleth the man.
Then came his disciples, and sayde vnto him: knowest thou not, that the Pharises were offended at this saying?
But he answered and sayd. Euery plante which my heauenly father hath not planted, shalbe plucked vp by the rotes.
Let them alone, they be the blynde leaders of the blynde. If the blynde leade the blynde, both shall fall into the dyche.
Then answered Peter Ꟶ sayd vnto him: declare vnto vs this parable.
Iesus sayde: are ye also yet without vnderstandinge?
do not ye yet vnderstande, that whatsoeuer entreth in at the mouth, goeth into the bely, Ꟶ is cast out into the draught?
But those thynges whych procede out of the mouth, come forth from the hert, Ꟶ they defyle the man.
For out of the herte proceade euill thoughtes; murders, breakynge of wedlocke, whordoms, theftes, falsewitnesse, blasphemies.
These are the thinges, which defyle a man. But to take meate wt vnwasshen handes, defileth not a man.
And Iesus went thence, Ꟶ departed into the coastes of Tyre and Sydon
Ꟶ beholde, a woman of Canaan (which cam out of the same coastes) cryed vnto him, sayinge: haue mercy on me o Lorde, thou sonne of Dauid: My daughter is pyteously vexed wyth a deuyll.
But he answered her nothing at all, Ꟶ his disciples came, and besought him, sayinge: sende her awaye, for she crieth after vs:
But he answered, Ꟶ sayde: I am not sent but vnto the lost shepe of the housse of Israel
Then cam she, Ꟶ worshipped him, sayinge: lorde, helpe me.
He answered and said: it is not mete, to take the chyldrens bread, and to cast it to dogges.
She answered Ꟶ sayde: truthe Lorde, for the dogges eate of the crommes, which fall from their masters table.
Then Iesus answered and sayde vnto her. O woman, greate is thy faith, be it vnto the, euen as thou wilt. And her daughter was made whole euen at that same tyme.
And Iesus went awaye from thence, and cam nye vnto the see of Galile, Ꟶ went vp into a mountayne, Ꟶ sat doune there.
And moche people came vnto him, bringing wt them those that were lame, blind, deafe, maymed, and other many: Ꟶ cast them downe at Iesus fete And he healed them:
in so moch, that the people wondered, whan they sawe the domme speake, the maymed to be whole, the lame to walke, and the blynde to se. And they glorified the God of Israel.
Then Iesus called his disciples vnto him, Ꟶ sayde: I haue compassyon on the people, because they continue with me nowe .iii. dayes, Ꟶ haue nothing to eate: Ꟶ I will not let them departe fastynge, lest they myscary by the waye.
And his disciples saye vnto him whence shulde we get so moche bread in the wyldernes, as to suffyse so greate a multitude?
And Iesus sayeth vnto them: howe many loaues haue ye? And they saye seuen, Ꟶ a fewe lytle fysshes.
And he commaunded the people to syt doune on the grounde:
and toke the seuen loaues, Ꟶ the fysshes: Ꟶ after that he had geuen thankes, he brake them, and gaue to his disciples, Ꟶ the discyples gaue them to the people.
And they dyd all eate, and were suffysed. And they toke vp (of the broken meate that was lefte) seuen baskettes full.
And yet, they that dyd eate were .iiii.M. men. besyde wemen Ꟶ chyldren.
And he sent awaye the people, and toke shyppe, Ꟶ came into the parties of Magdala.
The Pharises also wt the Saduces, came and tempted him Ꟶ desyred him that he wolde shewe them a sygne from heuen.
He answered and sayde vnto them: whan it begynneth to drawe toward euen, ye saye, it wylbe fayre wether, for the skye is reed?
And in the mornynge: It wylbe foule wether to daye, for the skye is glowmyng reed. O ye ypocrites, ye can discerne the outward appearaunce of the skye: but can ye not discerne the sygnes of the tymes?
The frowarde Ꟶ aduoutrous nacyon requyreth a sygne, and there shall no sygne be geuen vnto it, but the sygne of the Prophet Ionas. And he lefte them, and departed.
And when his disciples were come to the other syde of the water, they had forgotten to take breed with them.
Then Iesus sayde vnto them. Take hede and beware of the leuen of the Pharises Ꟶ of the Saduces.
And they thought in them selues saying: we haue taken no breed wt vs.
Which whan Iesus vnderstode, he sayd vnto them: O ye of lytell faith, why take ye thought within your selues, because ye haue brought no breed?
Do ye not yet perceaue, nether remember those .v. loaues, when there were .v.M. men, Ꟶ how many baskettes toke ye vp?
Nether the .vii. loues when there were .iiii.M. men: Ꟶ how many baskettes toke ye vp?
how happeneth it that ye do not vnderstande, that I spake it not vnto you concernyng breed, that ye shulde beware of the leuen of the Pharises, Ꟶ of the Saduces?
Then vnderstode they, how that he bad not them beware of the leuen of breed: but of the doctrine of the Pharises, and of the Saduces.
When Iesus cam into the coastes of the cite which is called Cesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples sayinge whom do men saye that I the sonne of man am?
They sayde: some saye that thou art Iohn Baptist, some Helyas, some Ieremias, or one of the nombre of the prophetes.
He sayeth vnto them: but whom saye ye that I am?
Simon Peter answered Ꟶ sayde: Thou art Christ the sone of the lyuynge God.
And Iesus answered, Ꟶ sayde vnto hym: happy art thou Simon the sonne of Ionas, for fleshe Ꟶ bloud hath not opened that vnto the but my father which is in heuen.
And I saye also vnto the that thou art Peter: Ꟶ vpon this rocke I wil bylde my congregacion. And the gates of hell shal not preuayle agaynst it.
And I wil geue vnto the, the keyes of the kyngdom of heuen: And whatsoeuer thou byndest in erth, shall be bounde in heuen: Ꟶ whatsoeuer thou loosest in erth, shalbe lowsed in heuen.
Then charged he hys disciples, that they shulde tell no man, that he was Iesus Chris
From that tyme forth beganne Iesus to shewe vnto his disciples, how that he must go vnto Ierusalem, Ꟶ suffer many thinges of the elders, Ꟶ hye Prestes, Ꟶ Scribes, Ꟶ must be kylled, and be raysed agayne the thyrde daye.
And when Peter had taken him asyde, he began to rebuke him, saying: master, fauer thy selfe, this shal not happen vnto the:
but he turned him aboute, and sayde vnto Peter: go after me Satan, thou hyndrest me: for thou sauourest not the thinges that be of God, but those that be of men.
Then sayde Iesus vnto his disciples: If eny man wil folowe me, let him forsake him selfe Ꟶ take vp his crosse, Ꟶ folowe me
For whoso wil saue his lyfe, shall loose it. Agayne, whoso doth lose his life for my sake, shall fynde it.
For what doth it proffet a man, yf he wynne all the whole worlde: Ꟶ lose hys awne soule? Or what shal a man geue to redeme his soule agayne with all?
For the sonne of man shall come in the glory of his father, wt his angels: Ꟶ then shall he rewarde euery man accordinge to his dedes.
Uerely I saye vnto you, ther be stondinge here, which shall not tast of deeth, tyll they se the sonne of man come in hys kyngdome.
And after .vi. dayes, Iesus taketh Peter, Iames and Iohn hys brother, and bringeth them vp into an hye mountaine out of the waye,
and was transfygured before them and hys face dyd shyne as the sonne, and hys clothes were as whyte as the lygh
And beholde, there apered vnto them Moses Ꟶ Elias talkyng wyth hym.
Then answered Peter, and sayde vnto Iesus, Lorde, here is good beinge for vs. If thou wylt, let vs make here .iij. tabernacles: one for the, and one for Moses, and one for Helias.
Whyle he yet spake, behold, a bright cloude shadowed them And beholde, there came a voyce out of the cloude whych sayd this is my beloued sonne in whom I delyte heare hym.
And when the discyples hearde these thynges, they fell on theyr faces Ꟶ were sore afrayed.
And Iesus came Ꟶ touched them, Ꟶ sayd: aryse, Ꟶ be not a frayd.
And when they had lyft vp theyr eyes they sawe no man saue Iesus onely.
And whan they came downe from the mountayne, Iesus charged them saying: shew the vysion to no man, vntyll the sonne of man be rysen agayne from the deed.
And his disciples asked him, saying. Why then saye the Scribes, that Helias muste fyrst come?
Iesus answered, and sayde vnto them Helias trulye shall fyrst come, and restore all thynges.
But I saye vnto you, that Helias is come already, Ꟶ they knewe him not: but haue done vnto hym whatsoeuer they lusted. In lykewyse shal also the sonne of man suffre of them.
Then the disciples vnderstode, that he spake vnto them of Iohn Baptist.
And when they were come to the people, ther came to him a certayne man knelyng downe to him, Ꟶ sayeng:
Master, haue mercy on my sonne, for he is lunatike Ꟶ sore vexed, for oft tymes he falleth into the fyre, Ꟶ oft into the water,
And I brought him to thy disciples, Ꟶ they coulde not heale him.
Iesus answered Ꟶ sayd: O faythles Ꟶ croked nacion: how longe shall I be with you? how longe shall I suffre you? bring hym hyther.
And Iesus rebuked the deuyll, Ꟶ he departed out of him. And the chylde was healed euen that same tyme.
Then came the disciples to Iesus secretly Ꟶ sayde: Why could not we cast hym out?
Iesus sayd vnto them: Because of youre vnbelefe. For verely I saye vnto you: yf ye haue fayth as a grayne of musterd seed, ye shall saye vnto this mountayne: remoue hence to yonder place, and it shall remoue: nether shal eny thinge be vnpossible vnto you.
Howbeit thys kynde goeth not out, but by prayer and fastinge.
While they were occupyed in Galile Iesus sayde vnto them: it wyll come to passe that the sonne of man shalbe betrayed into the handes of men,
and they shall kyll him and the thyrd daye shall he ryse agayne. And they were exceadyng sorye.
And when they were come to the cytie of Capernaum, they that vse to receaue tribute money, cam to Peter, Ꟶ sayd: Doth your master paye trybute?
He sayeth: yee. And when he was come into the house, Iesus preuented hym saying. What thinkest thou Simon? of whom do the kynges of the erth take trybute or toll, Of theyr chyldren, or of straungers?
Peter sayeth vnto hym: of straungers: Iesus sayeth vnto him: Then are the chyldren fre:
Not withstonding, lest we shuld offende them, go thou to the see, Ꟶ cast an angle, Ꟶ take the fysh that fyrst commeth vp: Ꟶ when thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt fynde a pece of twentie pence: that take, Ꟶ geue it vnto them for me Ꟶ the.
At the same tyme came the disciples vnto Iesus, sayinge: who is the greatest in the kyngdom of heauen?
Iesus called a chylde vnto hym, Ꟶ set him in the myddes of them,
Ꟶ sayd: Uerely I saye vnto you except ye turne, Ꟶ become as chyldren, ye shall not enter into the kyngdom of heauen.
Whosoeuer therfore humbleth him selfe, as this childe, the same is the greatest in the kyngdom of heauen.
And whoso receaueth such a chyld in my name, receaueth me.
But whoso doth offende one of these lytleons whych beleue in me: it were better for hym, that a mylstone were hanged aboute hys necke, Ꟶ that he were drowned in the depth of the see.
Wo vnto the worlde because of offences. Necessary it is that offences come: But wo vnto the man, by whom the offence commeth.
Wherfore yf thy hande or thy fote hinder the, cut him of Ꟶ cast it from the. It is better for the to enter into lyfe halt or maymed, rather then thou shuldest (hauinge two handes or two fete) be cast into euerlastyng fyre.
And yf thyne eye offende the, plucke it oute, and caste it from the. It is better for the to enter into lyfe wt one eye, rather then (hauyng two eyes) to be cast into hell fyre.
Take hede: that ye despyse not one of these lytelones. For I saye vnto you, that in heauen their angels do alwayes beholde the face of my father, whych is in heauen.
For the sonne of man is come to saue that whych was lost.
How thynke ye If a man haue an hundred shepe, Ꟶ one of them be gone astray, doth he not leaue nynty Ꟶ nyne in the mountains, Ꟶ goeth Ꟶ seketh that was gone astraye?
And If it happen that he fynd it, verely I saye vnto you: he reioyseth more of that shepe then of the nynti Ꟶ nyne which went not astray.
Euen so it is not the wyll of youre father in heauen, that one of these lytelons shulde perysshe.
Moreouer yf thy brother treaspace agaynst the, go Ꟶ tell hym hys faute betwene him Ꟶ the alone. If he heare the, thou hast wonne thy brother:
But yf he heare the not, then take yet wyth the one or two, that in the mouth of two or .iij. witnesses, euery mater may be stablysshed.
If he heare not them, tell it vnto the congregacyon. If he heare not the congregacion let him be vnto the as anhethen man Ꟶ as a publican.
Uerely I saye vnto you: whatsoeuer ye bynde on erth, shalbe bounde in heauen. And whatsoeuer ye lose on erth, shalbe lowsed in heauen.
Agayne I saye vnto you that yf two of you agree in erthe vpon eny maner a thynge, whatsoeuer they desyre: they shall haue it of my father which is in heauen.
For where two or thre are gathered to gether in my name, there am I in the myddes of them
Then came Peter to hym, Ꟶ sayde: Lorde howe oft shall I forgeue my brother, yf he synne agaynst me: Tyll seuen tymes?
Iesus sayeth vnto hym: I saye not vnto the vntill seuen tymes: but seuenty tymes seuen tymes.
Therfore is the kyngdom of heauen lykened vnto a certaine man that was a king, which wolde take acountes of hys seruauntes.
And when he had begone to recken, one was brought vnto him, whych ought him ten thousand talentes,
but forasmoch as he was not able to paye, his Lord commaunded him to be solde, Ꟶ hys wyfe Ꟶ chyldren, Ꟶ all that he had, and payment to be made.
The seruaunt fell doune, Ꟶ Ꟶ be sought him, saying: Syr, haue pacience wt me, and I wyll paye the all.
Then had the Lorde pytie on that seruaunt, Ꟶ lowsed hym and forgaue hym the det.
So the same seruaunt, went out, Ꟶ founde out of hys felowes which ought him an hundred pence: Ꟶ he layed handes on hym, Ꟶ toke him by the throte, saying: paye that thou owest.
And his felowe fell downe, Ꟶ besought hym saying: haue pacyence wt me, Ꟶ I wyll paye the all.
And he wolde not, but went, Ꟶ cast hym into preson, tyll he shulde paye the det.
So, when his felowes sawe what was done, they were very sory, and came, Ꟶ tolde vnto their Lord all that had happened.
Then his Lord called hym Ꟶ sayd vnto hym: O thou vngracyous seruaunt, I forgaue the all that det, whan thou desyredst me:
shuldest not thou also haue had compassion on thy felow, euen as I had pytie on the?
And hys Lorde was wrooth, Ꟶ delyuered him to the iaylers, tyll he shuld paye all that was due vnto hym.
So lyke wyse shall my heauenly father do also vnto you yf ye from youre hertes, forgeue not (euery one his brother) theyr trespases.
And it came to passe that when Iesus had fynisshed these sayinges, he gat hym from Galile, Ꟶ came into the coastes of Iewry beyonde Iordan,
Ꟶ moche people folowed hym, Ꟶ he healed them there.
The Pharises also came vnto him temptinge him, Ꟶ saying vnto him: Is it lawfull for a man to make a deuorcement wt his wyfe for any maner of cause?
He answered Ꟶ sayd vnto them: Haue ye not red, how that he which made man at the begynnynge made them man Ꟶ woman:
Ꟶ sayd, for thys cause shall a man leaue father Ꟶ mother, Ꟶ shall cleue vnto hys wyfe, Ꟶ they twayne shalbe one flesshe.
Wherfore now, they are not twayne, but one flesshe. Let not man therfore put a sunder, that whych God hath coupled together.
They saye vnto hym: why dyd Moses then commaunde to geue a testimoniall of dyuorsement, Ꟶ to put her awaye?
He sayde vnto them: Moses (because of the hardnes of youre hertes) suffered you to put awaye youre wyfes: But from the beginnyng it was not so.
I saye vnto you: whosoeuer putteth awaye his wyfe (except it be for fornicacion) Ꟶ marieth another, breaketh wedlocke. And whoso marieth her whych is deuorsed, doeth commyt aduoutry.
Hys disciples saye vnto him: yf the mater be so betwene man Ꟶ wyfe, then is it not good to mary.
He sayd vnto them: all men cannot comprehend this saying saue they to whom it is geuen:
for ther are some chaste whych are so borne out of their mothers wombe. And ther are some chaste, which be made chaste of men. And ther be chaste, which haue made them selues chaste for the kyngdome of heuens sake. He that can comprehende it, let him comprehend it.
Then were there brought vnto hym yonge chyldren, that he shuld put hys handes on them, Ꟶ praye. And the disciples rebuked them.
But Iesus sayde vnto them: suffre the chyldren Ꟶ forbid them not to come vnto me: for of soch is the kyngdom of heauen.
And when he had put hys handes on them, he departed thence.
And beholde, one came, Ꟶ sayd vnto him: good master, what good thynge shall I do that I maye haue eternall lyfe?
He sayd vnto him: why callest thou me good? there is none good but one, Ꟶ that is God. But yf thou wilt entre into lyfe, kepe the commaundementes.
He sayeth vnto hym. Whych? Iesus sayde Thou shalt not commit manslaughter. Thou shalt not commyt aduoutrye: Thou shalt not steale: Thou shalt not beare false witnes:
honoure father and mother: and thou shalt loue thyne neybour as thy selfe.
The younge man sayeth vnto him: All these thinges haue I kepte from my youth vp: what lacke I yet?
Iesus sayd vnto hym, yf thou wilt be perfecte go Ꟶ sell that thou hast, Ꟶ geue to the poore, Ꟶ shall haue treasure in heauen, Ꟶ come Ꟶ folowe me.
But when the younge man herde that saying, he went awaye sorye. For he had grete possessyons.
Then Iesus sayd vnto his disciples: Uerely I say vnto you: it shalbe harde for the ryche to enter into the kingdom of heauen.
And agayne I saye vnto you: it is easyer for a camell to go through the eye of a nedle, then for the ryche to enter into the kyngdom of God.
When the disciples hearde this, they were excedindly amased, saying: who than can be saued?
But Iesus behelde them, and sayd vnto them: wyth men this is vnpossyble but wt God all thynges are possyble.
Then answered Peter, Ꟶ sayd vnto him: Beholde we haue forsaken all, and folowed the, what shall we haue therfore?
Iesus sayd vnto them: verely I saye vnto you: that when the sonne of man shall syt in the seate of hys maiestye, ye that haue folowed me in there generacyon shall syt also vpon .xij. seates, Ꟶ iudge the .xij. trybes of Israel.
And euery one that forsaketh house, or brethren, or systers, or father, or mother, or wyfe, or chyldren, or landes, for my names sake, shall receaue an hundred folde, Ꟶ shall inheret euerlastynge lyfe.
But many that are fyrst, shalbe last and the last shalbe fyrst.
For the kyngdom of heauen is lyke vnto a man that is an housholder, whych went out early in the mornyng to hyer labourers into hys vyneyard.
And whan the agrement was made wyth the labourers for a peny a daye, he sent them into hys vineyarde.
And he went out about the thirde houre, Ꟶ sawe other standyng ydell in the market place,
Ꟶ sayde vnto them: go ye also into the vineyarde: Ꟶ whatsoeuer is ryght, I wyll geue you. And they went theyr waye.
Agayne, he went out about the syxte Ꟶ nynthe houre, Ꟶ dyd lykewyse.
And aboute the eleuenth houre he went out, Ꟶ founde other standynge ydell, Ꟶ sayd vnto them: Why stande ye here all the daye ydell?
They saye vnto hym because no man hath hyred vs. He sayeth vnto them: go ye also into the vineyarde: Ꟶ whatsoeuer is ryght, that shall ye receaue.
So, when euen was come, the Lord of the vineyarde sayeth vnto his steward: call the labourers, Ꟶ geue them their hyer, begynnyng at the laste vntill the fyrst.
And whan they dyd come, that cam about the eleuenth houre, they receaued euery man a peny.
But whan the fyrst came also, they supposed that they shuld haue receaued more, Ꟶ they lykewyse receaued euery man a peny.
And when they had receaued it, they murmured agaynst the good man of the house,
sayinge: These last haue wrought but one houre, Ꟶ thou hast made them equall vnto vs, which haue borne the burthen Ꟶ heat of the day.
But he answered vnto one of them Ꟶ sayde: frende, I do the no wronge: dydest thou not agre wt me for a penny?
Take that thine is Ꟶ go thy waye: I wyll geue vnto thys last, euen as vnto the.
Is it not lawfull for me to do as me lysteth wt myne awne goodes? Is thyne eye euyll, because I am good?
So the last shalbe fyrst, Ꟶ the fyrste shalbe last. For many be called, but fewe be chosen.
And Iesus going vp to Ierusalem, toke the .xij. disciples asyde in the waye, Ꟶ sayd vnto them:
Beholde, we go vp to Ierusalem, Ꟶ the sonne of man shalbe betrayed vnto the chefe Prestes, Ꟶ vnto the Scribes, Ꟶ they shall condemne hym to deeth,
Ꟶ shall delyuer hym to the gentyls, to be mocked and to be scourged, and to be crucifyed: and the thyrde daye he shall ryse agayne.
Then came to him the mother of zebedes chyldren, wt her sonnes, worshyppyng him Ꟶ desyryng a certaine thynge of him.
And he sayeth vnto her, what wilt thou? She sayde vnto him: Graunte, that these my two sonnes may syt, the one on thy ryght hande, and the other on the lefte, in thy kyngdome.
But Iesus answered Ꟶ sayde: Ye wot not what ye aske. Are ye able to dryncke of that cuppe that I shall drynke of: Ꟶ to be baptised wt the baptyme, that I am baptised wt?
They saye vnto him: we are. He sayde vnto them: ye shall dryncke in dede of my cup: Ꟶ be baptised wt the baptyme that I am baptised with. But to syt on my ryght hande Ꟶ on my left, is not myne to geue: but it shall chaunce vnto them, that it is prepared for of my father.
And when the ten heard this, they disdayned at the two brethren:
But Iesus called them vnto him, Ꟶ sayde: ye knowe that the princes of the nacions haue dominion ouer them. And they that are great men, exercyse auctorite vpon them.
It shall not be so amonge you. But whosoeuer wyll be greate amonge you, let him be youre minister:
and whoso will be chefe amonge you, let him be youre seruaunt:
euen as the sonne of man cam, not to be ministred vnto, but to minister, Ꟶ to geue his lyfe a redempcion for many.
And as they departed from Hiericho, moch people folowed him.
And beholde, two blynd men sittinge by the waysyde, when they hearde that Iesus passed by, they cried sayinge: O lord thou sonne of Dauid, haue mercy on vs.
And the people rebuked them, because they shulde holde their peace. But they cried the more sayinge: haue mercy on vs. O Lord thou sonne of Dauid.
And Iesus stode still, and called them, Ꟶ sayde: what wyll ye that I shall do vnto you:
They saye vnto him: Lorde, that oure eyes maye be opened:
So Iesus had compassion on them, and touched their eyes, Ꟶ immediatly their eyes receaued syght. And they folowed him.
And whan they drew nye vnto Ierusalem, and were come to Bethphage, vnto mounte Olyuete: then sent Iesus two discyples,
saying vnto them: Go into the towne that lyeth ouer agaynst yon, and anone ye shall fynde an asse bound, and a colte with her: loose them, Ꟶ bringe them vnto me.
And yf eny man saye ought vnto you, say ye: the Lorde hath neade of them: Ꟶ streyght waye he wyll let them go.
All this was done, that it might be fulfylled which was spoken by the prophete, saying.
Tell ye the daughter of Sion: beholde, thy kynge commeth vnto the, meke, syttinge vpon an asse Ꟶ a colte, the fole of the asse vsed to the yocke.
The discyples went Ꟶ dyd as Iesus commaunded them,
Ꟶ brought the asse, Ꟶ the colte, Ꟶ put on them their clothes, Ꟶ sett him theron.
And many of the people spred their garmentes in the waye. Other cut doune braunches from the trees, Ꟶ strawed them in the waye.
Moreouer, the people that went before, Ꟶ they that came after, cried saying: Hosanna to the sonne of Dauid Blessed is he that commeth in the name of the Lord Hosanna in the hyest.
And when he was come to Ierusalem, all the citie was moued, saying: who is this?
And the people sayd: this is Iesus the Prophet of Nazareth (a cyte) of Galile
And Iesus went into the temple of God, Ꟶ cast out all them that solde Ꟶ bought in the temple, Ꟶ ouerthrew the tables of the mony chaungers, Ꟶ the seates of them that solde doues,
Ꟶ sayd vnto them: It is wrytten my house shalbe called the house of prayer. But ye haue made it a denne of theues.
And the blynde Ꟶ the halt came to him in the temple, Ꟶ he healed them.
When the chefe Prestes Ꟶ Scribes sawe the wonders that he dyd, Ꟶ the chyldren cryinge in the temple (Ꟶ sayinge: Hosanna to the sonne of Dauid) they disdayned,
and sayd vnto him: hearest thou what these saye? But Iesus saieth vnto them why not? haue ye neuer redde. Out of the mouth of babes Ꟶ suckelynges thou haste ordeyned prayse?
And he lefte them, and went out of the cytie vnto Bethanie, Ꟶ had his abydinge there.
In the mornynge as he returned into the cytie agayne, he hungred:
Ꟶ whan he had spyed a fygge tree in the waye, he came to it, Ꟶ founde nothynge theron, but leaues onely, Ꟶ sayde vnto it: Neuer frute growe on the hence forwardes. And anone the fygg tree widdered awaye.
And when hys discyples sawe it, they marueled, saying. How soone is the fygge tree wydderd awaye?
Iesus answered, and sayd vnto them: Uerely I saye vnto you yf ye haue fayth Ꟶ dout not, ye shal not onely do this that is happened vnto the fygge tree: but also yf ye shall saye vnto this mountayne, remoue, Ꟶ cast thy selfe into the see, it shalbe done.
And all thinges whatsoeuer ye aske in prayer (yf ye beleue) ye shall receaue them.
And when he was come in to the temple, the chefe Prestes Ꟶ the elders of the people came vnto him (as he was teachinge) Ꟶ sayde By what auctorite doest thou these thinges? Ꟶ who gaue the thys power?
Iesus answered Ꟶ sayde vnto them: I also wyll aske of you a certayne thing, which yf ye tell me, I in lyke wyse will tell you by what auctorite I do these thinges.
The baptime of Iohn: whence was it? from heauen or of men? And they thought amonge them selues, saying: yf we saye from heauen, he wyll saye vnto vs: why dyd ye not then beleue him?
But yf we shall saye of men, then feare we the people. For all men holde Iohn as a prophet.
And they answered vnto Iesus Ꟶ sayde: we cannot tell. And he sayd vnto them: nether tell I you, by what auctorite I do these thynges.
What saye ye to this? A man had two sonnes, Ꟶ cam to the fyrst, Ꟶ sayde: sonne, go Ꟶ worke to daye in my vineyarde.
He answered Ꟶ sayde, I wyll not, but afterward, he repented, Ꟶ went.
Then cam he to the seconde, Ꟶ sayd lykewise. And he answered, Ꟶ sayd: I will syr, Ꟶ went not.
Whether of them twayne dyd the wyll of the father? And they saye vnto him: the fyrst. Iesus sayeth vnto them: verely I saye vnto you, the publicans Ꟶ harlotes go into the kyngdom of God before you.
For Iohn cam vnto you by the waye of ryghtewesnes, and ye beleued hym not: but publicans Ꟶ harlottes beleued hym. And ye (whan ye had sene it) were not moued afterwarde wyth repentaunce, that ye myght haue beleued hym.
Herken another symilitude Ther was a certaine man an housholder, whych planted a vineyarde, Ꟶ hedged it rounde about, Ꟶ made a wynepresse in it, Ꟶ bilt a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, Ꟶ went into a straung countre.
And when the tyme of the frute drewe neare, he sent his seruauntes to the husbandmen that they myght receaue the frutes of it.
And the husbandmen caught his seruauntes, Ꟶ bet one, killed another, Ꟶ stoned another.
Againe, he sent other seruauntes, moo then the fyrst: and they dyd vnto them lykewyse.
But last of all, he sent vnto them his awne sonne, saying: they wyll stande in awe of my sonne.
But when the husbandmen sawe the sonne, they sayd amonge them selues: This is the heyre: come, let vs kyll him, Ꟶ let vs enioye his inheritaunce
And they caught hym, Ꟶ thrust hym out of the vineyarde, Ꟶ slewe him.
When the Lord therfore of the vineyard commeth, what wil he do vnto those husbandmen?
They sayd vnto him: For asmoch as they be euell, he will cruellye destroye them, Ꟶ will let out his vineyard vnto other husbandmen, which shall delyuer hym the frute in due seasons.
Iesus sayeth vnto them: dyd ye neuer reade in the scriptures The stone whych the bylders refused, the same is become the heade of the corner: thys is the Lordes doinge, Ꟶ it is meruelous in youre eyes.
Therfore saye I vnto you, the kyngdom of God shalbe taken from you, and geuen to a nacion, whych shall brynge forth the frutes therof.
And whosoeuer falleth on this stone, shalbe broken in peces: but on whomsoeuer it falleth it shall all to grynd hym.
And when the chefe Prestes and Pharises had hearde hys parables, they perceaued, that he speake of them.
And they went about to laye handes on him but they feared the people, because they tooke him as a Prophet
And Iesus answered, Ꟶ spake vnto them agayne by parables and sayde.
The kyngdome of heauen is lyke vnto a man that was a kynge, whych made a mariage for hys sonne
Ꟶ sent forth his seruauntes, to call them that were byd to the weddynge, Ꟶ they wolde not come.
Agayne, he sent forth other seruauntes sayinge: Tell them whych are bydden: beholde, I haue prepared my dynner: my oxen Ꟶ my fatlynges are kylled, Ꟶ all thinges are ready, come vnto the mariage.
But they made lyght of it, Ꟶ went their wayes: one to his ferme place, another to hys marchaundise,
Ꟶ the remnaunt toke his seruauntes, Ꟶ intreated them shamefully and slewe them.
But when the kyng hearde therof, he was wroth, Ꟶ sent forth his men of warre Ꟶ destroyed those murtherers, and brent vp theyr cytie.
Then sayd he to his seruauntes: the mariage in dede is prepared. But they whych were bydden, were not worthy.
Goo ye therfore out into the hye wayes: Ꟶ as many as ye fynde byd them to the mariage.
And the seruauntes went out into the hye wayes, Ꟶ gathered together all, as many as they coulde fynde, both good Ꟶ bad, Ꟶ the weddynge was furnisshed with gestes.
Then the kyng came in, to se the gestes, Ꟶ whan he spyed there a man, whych had not on a weddynge garment,
he sayd vnto hym: frende, how camest thou in hyther not hauyng a weddynge garment? And he was euen spechlesse.
Then sayd the king to the ministers: take Ꟶ bynde him hand and fote, Ꟶ cast hym into vtter darcknes there shall be wepynge Ꟶ gnasshynge of teth.
For many be called but feaw are chosen.
Then went the pharises, Ꟶ toke counsell how they myght tangle him in his wordes.
And they sent out vnto hym theyr discyples wyth Herodes seruauntes, sayinge: Master, we knowe that thou art true, Ꟶ teachest the waye of God truely, nether carest thou for eny man, for thou regardest not the outward appearaunce of men.
Tell vs therfore: how thynkest thou? Is it lawfull the trybute be geuen vnto Cesar or not?
But Iesus perceauyng theyr wyckednes, sayde: Why tempte ye me ye ypocrites?
Shewe me the tribute mony. And they toke him a peny.
And he sayde vnto them: whose is this ymage Ꟶ superscripcion?
They saye vnto him, Cesars. Then sayd he vnto them. Geue therfore vnto Cesar, the thinges whych are Cesars: Ꟶ vnto God, those thinges that are Gods
When they had hearde these wordes, they marueled, Ꟶ left hym, Ꟶ went theyr waye.
The same daye came to him the Saduces (which saye that there is no resurreccion) Ꟶ asked him
sayinge: Master, Moses sayde: that yf a man dye hauynge no chylde, hys brother shulde mary hys wyfe, Ꟶ reyse vp seed vnto his brother.
Ther were with vs seuen brethren: Ꟶ the fyrste maried a wyfe, Ꟶ deceased wtout yssue Ꟶ lefte his wyfe vnto his brother.
Lykewyse, the seconde Ꟶ the thyrd, vnto the seuenth.
Laste of all the woman dyed also.
Therfore, in the resurreccion, whose wyfe shall she be of the seuen? For they all had her.
Iesus answered Ꟶ sayde vnto them: ye do erre, not knowinge the scriptures, nor the power of God.
For in the resurreccyon, they nether mary, nor are maryed but are as the Angels in heauen.
But as touchyng the resurreccyon of the deed: haue ye not red that which is spoken vnto you of God, whych sayth:
I am the God of Abraham Ꟶ the God of Isaac, Ꟶ the God of Iacob? God is not a God of deed, but of lyuinge.
And when the people heard this, they were astonnyed at his doctryne.
But when the pharises had heard, that he had put the Saduces to sylence, they came together,
Ꟶ one of them which was (a doctour of lawe) asked him a question, temptinge him, Ꟶ saying:
Master, which is the greate commaundement in the lawe?
Iesus sayd vnto hym: Thou shalt loue the Lord thy God wyth all thy herte, and wyth all thy soule, Ꟶ wyth all thy mynde.
This is the fyrst Ꟶ greate commaundement.
And the seconde is lyke vnto it. Thou shalt loue thyne neyboure as thy self.
In these two commaundementes hange all the lawe and the Prophetes.
Whyle the Pharises were gathered together, Iesus asked them,
saying: what thynke ye of Chryst? Whose sonne is he? They saye vnto him: the sonne of Dauid.
He sayde vnto them how then doeth Dauid in sprete, call him Lorde sayinge:
The Lord sayd vnto my Lorde syt the on my ryght hande tyll I make thyne enemyes thy foote stoole.
If Dauid then, call him Lord, how is he then his sonne?
And no man was able to answere him anye thing: nether durste eny man (from that daye forth) aske him any moo questions.
Then spake Iesus to the people, and to his disciples,
saying: The Scribes and the Pharises syt in Moses seate.
All therfore whatsoeuer they byd you obserue, that obserue and do: but do not ye after theyr workes:
for they saye, and do not. Yee, they bynde together heuy burthens and greuous to be borne, Ꟶ laye them on mennes shoulders: but they them selues wyll not heaue at them with one of their fyngers.
All theyr worckes do they for the intent, that they maye be sene of men. They set abroade their philateries, Ꟶ make large the borders of their garmentes,
Ꟶ loue the vppermoste seates at feastes, Ꟶ to sytt in the chefe place in councels,
Ꟶ gretynges in the markett, and to be called of men, Rabbi.
But be not ye called Rabbi. For one is youre master, euen Chryst, and all ye are brethren.
And call no man youre father vpon the erth, for one is your father which is in heauen
Nether be ye called masters, for one is youre master, euen Chryst.
He that is greatest amonge you, shalbe youre seruaunt.
But whosoeuer exalteth him selfe? shalbe brought lowe. And he that humbleth him selfe, shalbe exalted.
Wo vnto you Scribes Ꟶ Pharises, ye ypocrites, for ye shutt vp the kyngdome of heauen before men ye nether go in your selues, nether suffre ye them that come, to enter in.
Wo vnto you Scribes, Ꟶ pharises, ye ypocrites: for ye deuoure wyddowes houses: and that vnder a pretence of longe prayer: therfore shall ye be the sorer punysshed.
Wo be vnto you Scrybes and Pharises, ye ypocrytes: for ye compasse see and lande, to make one proselyte: Ꟶ when he is become one, ye make hym two folde moare the chylde of hell, then ye youre selues are.
Wo be vnto you ye blynde gydes, ffor ye saye: whosoeuer doth sweare by the temple: it is nothynge: but whosoeuer sweareth by the golde of the temple, he is gyltye.
Ye fooles Ꟶ blinde: For whether is greater: the gold, or the temple that sanctifyeth the gold?
And whosoeuer sweareth by the aultre, it is nothinge, but whosoeuer sweareth by the gyft that is vpon it, he is giltye,
ye foles Ꟶ blynd for whether is greater? the gyft: or the altare that sanctifieth the gyft?
Whoso therfore sweareth by the aultre, sweareth by it, and by all thinges that are there on.
And whoso sweareth by the temple, sweareth by it, Ꟶ by hym that dwelleth therin.
And he that sweareth by heauen, sweareth by the seate of God, and by hym that sytteth theron.
Wo vnto you Scribes Ꟶ Pharises, ye ypocrites: For ye tyth mynt, and anyse, Ꟶ commyn, Ꟶ haue leaft the wayghtier matters of the lawe: iudgement, mercy, Ꟶ fayth. These ought ye to haue done, Ꟶ not to leaue the other vndone.
ye blynde gydes, which strayne out agnat, Ꟶ swalowe a Camell.
Wo vnto you Scrybes and pharises, ye ypocrites: for ye make cleane the vtter syde of the cuppe, Ꟶ of the platter: but within they are full of brybery and excesse.
Thou blynde Pharise, clense fyrst that whych is wt in the cup Ꟶ platter, that the outesyde of them maye be cleane also.
Wo vnto you Scrybes Ꟶ pharises, ye ypocrites: for ye are lyke vnto painted sepulcres which in dede appeare beautifull outwarde but are wythin full of deed mens bones Ꟶ of all fylthynes.
Euen so ye also, outwardlye appere ryghteous vnto men: But wythin, ye are full of faynednesse and iniquyte.
Wo vnto you Scribes and Pharises, ye ypocrites: ye buylde the tombes of the Prophetes, and garnysihe the sepulchres of the ryghteous,
Ꟶ saye: yf we had bene in the dayes of our fathers, we wolde not haue bene parteners wyth them in the bloude of the Prophetes.
And so ye be wytnesses vnto youre selues, that ye are the chyldren of them whych kylled the prophetes.
Fulfyll ye lykewyse the measure of your fathers.
Ye serpentes, ye generacion of vypers, how wyll ye scape the damnacyon of hell?
Wherfore beholde I sende vnto you Prophetes Ꟶ wyse men, Ꟶ scrybes, and some of them ye shall kyll Ꟶ crucifye: Ꟶ some of them shal ye scourge in youre synagoges, Ꟶ persecute them from cytie to cytie:
that vpon you maye come all the ryghteous bloude whych hath bene shedd vpoon the erthe, from the bloude of ryghteous. Abel, vnto the bloude of zachary sonne of Barachias, whom ye slewe betwene the temple Ꟶ the altare.
Uerely I saye vnto you: all these thynges shall come vpon this generacion.
O Ierusalem, Ierusalem, thou that kyllest the prophetes, Ꟶ stonest them which are sent vnto the: how often wolde. I haue gathered thy chyldren together, euen as the henne gathereth her chyckens vnder her wynges, Ꟶ ye wolde not?
Beholde youre house is left vnto you desolate.
For I saye vnto you: ye shall not se me hence forth, tyll that ye saye blessed is he, that commeth in the name of the Lorde.
And Iesus went out, Ꟶ departed from the temple: Ꟶ hys discyples came to him, for to shewe him the byldynges of the temple.
Iesus sayde vnto them: Se ye not all these thinges? Uerely I saye vnto you ther shall not be here lefte one stone vpon another, that shall not be destroyed.
And as he sat vpon mount Oliuete, hys disciples came vnto him secretly, saying: Tell vs: when shall these thinges be: Ꟶ what shalbe the token of thy commyng Ꟶ of the ende of the world?
And Iesus answered, and sayd vnto them: take hede, that no man deceaue you.
For many shall come in my name, sayinge: I am Chryst: Ꟶ shall deceaue many
ye shall heare of warres, Ꟶ tidinges of warres: be not troubled. For all must come to passe, but the ende is not yet.
Nacion shall ryse agaynst nacion, and realme agaynst realme: and ther shalbe pestilence, Ꟶ hunger, and erthquakes in all places.
All these are the begynnynges of sorowes.
Then shall they put you to trouble, and shall kyll you: Ꟶ ye shalbe hated of all nacions for my names sake.
And then shall many be offended, Ꟶ shall betraye one another, Ꟶ shall hate one another.
And many false prophetes shall aryse, Ꟶ shall deceaue many.
And because iniquite shall haue the vpper hand, the loue of many shall abate.
But he that endureth to the ende, the same shalbe safe.
And this Gospell of the kyngdome shalbe preached in all the worlde, for a wytnes vnto all nacyons, and then shall the ende come.
When ye therfore shall se the abhominacion of desolacion (that was spoken of by Daniel the prophet) stande in the holy place: whoso readeth it let him vnderstande.
Then lett them whych be in Iewry, flye into the mountaynes.
And let hym whych is on the house toppe, not come downe to fet eny thinge out of hys house.
Nether let him whych is in the felde, returne backe to fetche his clothes.
Wo shalbe in those dayes to them that are wt chylde, Ꟶ to them that geue sucke.
But praye ye that youre flyght be not in the winter, nether on the Saboth daye.
For then shalbe great tribulacions suche as was not sens the begynning of the worlde to this tyme, nor shalbe.
Ye Ꟶ except those dayes shulde be shortened, there shulde no fleshe be saued: but for the chosens sake, those dayes shalbe shortened.
Then yf eny man saye vnto you: lo here is Chryst, or there: beleue it not.
For there shall aryse false Chrystes, and false prophetes and shall shew great miracles, Ꟶ wondres. In so moch (that yf it were possyble) the verie electe shuld be deceaued:
behold, I haue tolde you before.
Wherfore, yf they saye vnto you: beholde, he is in the desert, go not ye forth: behold, he is in the secret places, beleue it not.
For as the lyghtnynge commeth out of the East, and appeareth into the west: so shall the commynge of the sonne of man be.
For wheresoeuer a deed karkas is, euen thether wyll the Egles also be gathered together.
Immediatly after the tribulacyons of those dayes, shall the sonne be derkened: Ꟶ the moone shall not geue her lyght, and the starres shall fall from heauen, Ꟶ the powers of heauen shall be moued.
And then shall appeare the token of the sonne of man in heauen. And then shall all the kynredes of the earth mourne, and they shall se the sonne of man commyng in the cloudes of heauen, wyth power Ꟶ greate glorie
And he shall sende his Angels wt the greate voyce of a trompett, Ꟶ they shall gather to gether his chosen, from the foure wyndes: euen from the hyghest partes of heauen, vntyll the endes ther of.
Learne a symilitude of the fygge tree: When hys braunches is yet tender, Ꟶ the leaues sprong, ye knowe that sommer is nye.
So lykewyse ye, when ye se all these thinges, be ye sure that it is neare, euen at the dores.
Uerely I saye vnto you: this generacion shal not passe, tyll all these thinges be fulfylled
Heauen Ꟶ earth shall passe, but my wordes shall not passe.
But of that daye and houre knoweth no man, no not the angels of heauen, but my father onely.
But as the dayes of Noe were, so shall also the commynge of the sonne of man be.
For as in the dayes (that went before the floud) they dyd eate and dryncke, mary, and were maryed, euen vntyll the daye that Noe entred into the shyppe,
and knewe not tyll the floud came and toke them all awaye: So shall also the commynge of the sonne of man be.
Then shall two be in the felde, the one receaued, Ꟶ the other refused
two wemen shalbe gryndinge at the myll, the one receaned Ꟶ the other refused.
Watch therfore, for ye knowe not what houre your lord will come.
Of this yet be sure, that yf the good man of the house knew what houre the thefe wolde come: he wolde suerly watche, Ꟶ not suffre hys house to be broken vp.
Therfore, be ye also ready, for in soch an houre as ye thynke not: wyll the sonne of man come.
Who is a faythfull Ꟶ wyse seruaunt, whom his Lorde hath made ruler ouer his housholde, to geue them meate in season.
Blessed is that seruaunt whom hys Lord (when he cometh) shall fynde so doynge:
Uerely I saye vnto you, that he shall make hym ruler ouer all hys goodes.
But Ꟶ yf that euyll seruaunt saye in hys herte, my Lorde wyll be long a commyng
(and so begynne to smyte his felowes, yee, and to eate Ꟶ drincke wyth the droncken)
the same seruauntes Lord shall come in a daye when he loketh not for hym, and in an houre that he is not ware of,
Ꟶ shall hewe him in peces, Ꟶ geue hym his porcyon wyth ypocrites: there shalbe wepynge and gnasshynge of teth.
Then shall the kyngdom of heauen be like vnto ten virgins, which toke their lampes, Ꟶ went to mete the brydgrome
But fyue of them were foolysshe, Ꟶ fyue were wise.
They that were folysshe, toke their lampes, but toke none oyle wt them.
But the wyse toke oyle wt them in their vessels with the lampes also.
Whyle the brydegrome taryed, they all slombred Ꟶ slept.
And euen at midnyght, there was a crye made: behold, the brydgrome commeth, go out to mete hym.
Then all those virgins arose, Ꟶ prepared theyr lampes.
So the folysshe sayde vnto the wyse: geue vs of youre oyle: for oure lampes are gone out.
But the wyse answered, sayinge: not so, lest ther be not ynough for vs and you: but go ye rather to them that sell, Ꟶ by for your selues.
And whyll they went to bye, the brydgrome came: Ꟶ they that were ready went in with hym to the mariage, Ꟶ the gate was shut vp.
Afterwarde came also the other virgins, saying: Lorde, Lorde, open to vs.
But he answered Ꟶ sayd: verely I saye vnto you: I knowe you not.
Watche therfore: for ye knowe nether the daye nor yet the houre wherin the sonne of man shall come.
Lykewise as a certeine man ready to take his iorney to a straunge countre, called his seruauntes, Ꟶ delyuered vnto them hys goodes.
And vnto one he gaue .v. talentes, to another .ij. Ꟶ to another one: to euery man after his habilite, Ꟶ streight waye departed.
Then he that had receaued the fyue talentes, went, Ꟶ occupied wt the same, Ꟶ wanne other fyue talentes.
Lykewyse also, he that receaued two, gayned other two.
But he that receaued that one, went Ꟶ dygged in the erth, and hid his Lordes money.
After a longe season, the Lorde of those seruauntes came, and rekened wyth them.
And so he that had receaued fyue talentes came, Ꟶ brought other fyue talentes, sayinge: Sir, thou delyueredst vnto me fyue talentes: beholde, I haue gayned with them fyue talentes moo:
His Lord sayde vnto him: well thou good and faythfull seruaunt. Thou hast bene faythfull ouer fewe thinges, I wyll make the ruler ouer many thinges: entre thou into the ioye of thy Lorde.
He also that had receaued two talentes, came and sayde: Sir, thou delyueredst vnto me two talentes: beholde, I haue wone two other talentes with them:
his Lord sayd vnto him: well good Ꟶ faythfull seruaunt. Thou hast bene faythfull ouer fewe thinges. I will make the ruler ouer many thinges: Entre thou into the ioye of thy Lorde.
Then he whych had receaued the one talent, came, Ꟶ sayd: Sir I knewe the that thou art an harde man: reaping where thou hast not sowen, Ꟶ gathering where thou hast not strawed,
and therfore was I afrayde, Ꟶ went, and hyd thy talent in the erth: lo, there thou hast that thine is.
His lord answered Ꟶ sayd vnto him thou euyll Ꟶ slowthfull seruaunt, thou knewest, that I reape where I sowed not, Ꟶ gather, where I haue not strawed:
thou oughtest therfore to haue delyuered my money to the exchaungers, Ꟶ then at my commynge shulde I haue receaued myne awne with vauntage.
Take therfore the talent from hym, Ꟶ geue it vnto hym which hath ten talentes.
For vnto euery one that hath shalbe geuen, and he shall haue aboundance: But he that hath not, from hym shalbe taken awaye, euen that which he hath.
And cast the vnprofytable seruaunt into vtter dercknes there shalbe wepinge and gnasshinge of teeth.
When the sonne of man commeth in his glorye, Ꟶ all the holy angels wyth him, then shall he syt vpon the seate of hys glorie,
and before him shalbe gathered all nacions. And he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherde deuydeth the shepe from the goates:
and he shall set the shepe on hys ryght hande, but the goates on the lyfte.
Then shall the Kynge saye to them that shalbe on hys ryghte hande: Come ye blessed of my father, inheret the kyngdome prepared for you from the begynninge of the worlde.
For I was an hongred, Ꟶ ye gaue me meate. I was thyrstye, Ꟶ ye gaue me drincke. I was herbourlesse, Ꟶ ye toke me in:
Naked, Ꟶ ye clothed me: Sicke Ꟶ ye visyted me. I was in preson, and ye came vnto me.
Then shall the righteous answere him saying: Lord, when sawe we the an hongred, and fedd the? or thirstye, Ꟶ gaue the drinke?
when sawe we the herborlesse, Ꟶ tooke the in? or naked, and clothed the?
or when sawe we the sycke, or in preson, and came vnto the?
And the kyng shall answere, and saye vnto them: veryly I saye vnto you: in as moch as ye haue done it vnto one of the leest of these my brethren, ye haue done it to me.
Then shall he saye also vnto them, that shalbe on the lyfte hand: departe from me ye cursed into euerlastynge fyre: whych is prepared for the deuyll and his angels.
For I was an hungred, and ye gaue me no meate. I was thirstye, and ye gaue me no drynke.
I was harborlesse, and ye toke me not in. I was naked, and ye clothed me not. I was sycke Ꟶ in preson, and ye visyted me not.
Then shall they also answere him saying, lorde, when sawe we the an hungred, or a thyrst, or herbourlesse, or naked, or sycke, or in preson, Ꟶ dyd not minister vnto the?
Then shall he answere them sayeng: Uerely I saye vnto you, in as moche as ye dyd it not to one of the leest of these, ye dyd it not to me.
And these shall go into euerlastynge payne: the ryghteous into lyfe eternall.
And it came to passe, when Iesus had fynisshed all these sayinges he sayde vnto his discyples:
ye knowe that after two dayes shalbe Easter, and the sonne of man shalbe delyuered ouer, to be crucifyed.
Then assembled together the chefe prestes Ꟶ the scrybes Ꟶ the elders of the people vnto the palace of the hye preste, (whych was called Cayphas)
and helde a counsell, that they myght take Iesus by suttelte, and kyll him.
But they sayd: not on the holy daye, lest there be an vproure amonge the people.
When Iesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,
ther came vnto him a woman hauyng an alabaster boxe of precious oyntment, and powred it on his heed, as he sate at the bourde.
But when his disciples sawe it, they had indignacyon, sayinge. Wherto serueth this wast?
This oyntment myght haue bene well solde, and geuen to the poore.
When Iesus vnderstode that, he sayde vnto them: why trouble ye the wooman? For she hath wrought a good worcke vpon me.
For ye haue the poore all wayes, with you: But me shal ye not haue alwayes.
And in that she hath cast this oyntment on my bodye, she dyd it to burye me.
Uerely I saye vnto you: wheresoeuer thys gospell shalbe preached in all the world, there shall also this that she hath done, be tolde for a memoriall of her.
Then one of the twelue (which was called Iudas Iscarioth) went vnto the chefe prestes,
and sayd vnto them: what will ye geue me, and I wyll delyuer him vnto you? And they apoynted vnto hym thyrty peces of syluer.
And from that tyme forth, he sought oportunite to betraye him.
The fyrst daye of swete breed, the disciples came to Iesus, sayinge vnto him: where wilt thou that we prepare for the, to eate the passeouer?
And he sayd: go into the cytie, to soche a man, and saye vnto him, the master sayeth: my tyme is at hand, I will kepe myne Easter by the, wyth my disciples:
And the disciples dyd as Iesus had apoynted them, and they made ready the passeouer.
When the euen was come, he sate doune wyth the twelue.
And as they dyd eate, he sayd: Uerely, I saye vnto you, that one of you shall betraye me.
And they were exceadynge sorowfull, and beganne euery one of them to saye vnto him: Lord, is it I?
He answered and sayde: he that dyppeth hys hande with me in the disshe, the same shall betraye me.
The sonne of man truly goeth, as it is written of him: but wo vnto that man, by whom the sonne of man is betrayed. It had bene good for that man, if he had not bene borne.
Then Iudas which betrayed him, answered, and sayd: master, is it I? He sayde vnto him: thou hast sayd.
Whan they were eatyng, Iesus toke bread, and whan he had geuen thankes, he brake it, Ꟶ gaue it to the disciples, Ꟶ sayd: Take, eate, this is my body.
And he toke the cup, Ꟶ thanked, and gaue it them, sayinge: drincke ye all of this.
For this is my bloud (which is of the new testament) that is shed for many, for the remissyon of synnes.
But I saye vnto you: I will not dryncke hence forth of this frute of the vyne tree, vntyll that daye, when I shall drincke it newe with you in my fathers kyngdome.
And when they had sayde grace, they went out vnto mount Oliuete.
Then sayeth Iesus vnto them: all ye shalbe offended because of me this nyght. For it is wrytten: I will smyte the shepeherde, Ꟶ the shepe of the flocke shalbe scattered abroade.
But after I am rysen agayne, I will go before you into Galile.
Peter answered, Ꟶ sayde vnto him: though all men be offended because of the, yet will not I be offended.
Iesus sayd vnto him: Uerely, I saye vnto the, that in this same myght, before the cocke crowe, thou shalt denye me thryse.
Peter sayde vnto him. Yee, though I shuld dye with the, yet will I not denye the: Like wyse also sayde all the disciples.
Then came Iesus wt them vnto a farme. place (which is called Gethsemane) and sayde vnto the disciples: syt ye here while I go and praye yonder.
And he toke with him Peter and the two sonnes of zebede, and began to wexe sorowfull and heuye.
Then sayde Iesus vnto them: my soule his heuy, euen vnto the deeth. Tary ye here: and watche wt me.
And he went a lytell farther, and fell flat on his face, and prayed, sayinge: O my father, yf it be possible, let this cuppe passe from me: neuerthelesse, not as I will, but as thou wilt.
And he came vnto the disciples, Ꟶ founde them aslepe, and sayeth vnto Peter: what, coulde ye not watch with me one houre:
watche, and praye, that ye entre not into temptacyon. The sprete is willinge, but the fleshe is weake.
He went awaye once agayne and prayed, sayinge, O my father, yf this cuppe maye not passe awaye from me, excepte I drincke of it, thy will be fulfylled.
And he came, and founde them aslepe agayne. For their eyes were heuy.
And he lefte them Ꟶ went agayne, and prayed the thyrd tyme, sayinge the same wordes.
Then commeth he to his disciples, and sayeth vnto them Slepe on now, and take youre rest. Beholde, the houre is at hande Ꟶ the sonne of man is betrayed into the handes of synners.
Ryse, let vs be goinge: beholde, he is at hande, that doth betraye me.
Whil he yet spake: lo: Iudas one of the nombre of the twelue, came Ꟶ with him a greate multitude, wt sweardes and staues, sent from the chefe prestes and elders of the people.
But he that betrayed him gaue them a token, sayinge: whomsoeuer I kysse, that same is he, hold him fast.
And forth with he came to Iesus, and sayde, hayle Master: and kyssed him.
And Iesus sayde vnto him: frende, wherfore art thou come? Then came they, and layed handes on Iesus and toke him.
And beholde, one of them whych were with Iesus, stretched out his hande, and drue his swearde, and stroke a seruaunt of the hye hye prestes, and smote of his eare.
Then sayd Iesus vnto him: put vp thy swearde into his sheath. For All they that take the swearde, shall perishe with the swearde.
Thinkest thou that I cannot now praye to my father, and he shall geue me more then twelue Legions of angels?
But how then shall the scriptures be fulfylled? for this must it be.
In that same houre sayde Iesus to the multitude: ye be come out as it were vnto a thefe, with swerdes and staues, for to take me. I sat daylie with you, teachinge in the temple, and ye toke me not.
But all this is done, that the scriptures of the prophetes myght be fulfilled.
Then all the disciples forsoke him, and fleed. And they toke Iesus, Ꟶ led him to Cayphas the hye Preste, where the Scribes and the elders were assembled.
But Peter folowed him a farre of, vnto the hye prestes palace: Ꟶ went in, and sate with the seruauntes, to se the ende.
The chefe Prestes and the elders, and all the councell, sought false witnes agaynst Iesus (for to put hym to deeth)
but founde none: yee, when many false witnesses came, yet founde they none. At the last came two false witnesses,
and sayde: This felowe sayde. I am able to destroye the temple of God, Ꟶ to buylde it agayne in thre dayes.
And the chefe preste arose, Ꟶ sayd vnto him: answerest thou nothyng? Why do these beare wytnes against the?
But Iesus helde hys peace. And the chefe preste answered and sayde vnto him: I charge the by the lyuinge God, that thou tell vs, whether thou be Christ the sonne of God.
Iesus sayeth vnto hym, thou hast sayd. Neuerthelesse I saye vnto you here after shall ye se the sonne of man syttinge on the right hande of power, and commyng in the cloudes of the skye.
Then the hye preste rent his clothes, sayinge: he hath spoken blasphemye. what nede we of eny moo witnesses? Beholde, now ye haue hearde his blasphemy:
what thinke ye? They answered, and sayde: he is worthy to dye:
Then dyd they spytt in his face, Ꟶ buffeted him with fistes. And other smote him on hys face wyth the palme of their handes,
sayinge: tell vs thou Christ, who is he that smote the?
Peter sat with oute in the palace. And a damsell came to him, sayinge: Thou also wast with Iesus of Galile:
but he denyed before them all, saying. I woot not what thou sayest.
When he was gone out into the porche, a nother wenche sawe him, and sayde vnto them that were there: This felowe was also with Iesus of Nazareth.
And agayne he denyed with an othe: (sayeng.) I do not knowe the man.
And after a whyle, came vnto him they (that stode by) and sayde vnto Peter. surely thou art euen one of them, for thy speache be wrayeth the.
Then beganne he to curse and to sweare, that he knewe not the man. And immediatly the cocke krew.
And Peter remembred the worde of Iesu, which sayde vnto him: before the cocke crowe, thou shalt denye me thryse: and he went out, and wepte bytterly.
When the mornynge was come, all the chefe prestes and the elders of the people helde a counsayle agaynst Iesus, to put him to deeth,
and brought him bounde and delyuered him vnto Poncius Pylate the debite.
Then Iudas (which had betrayed him) seyng that he was condempned, repented him selfe, and brought agayne the thirtye plates of syluer, to the chefe Prestes and elders,
sayinge: I haue synned, betrayinge the innocent bloud. And they sayd: what is that to vs? Se thou to that.
And he cast downe the syluer plates in the temple, and departed and went and hanged hym selfe.
And the chefe prestes toke the syluer plates and sayd: it is not lawfull for to put them into the treasure, because it is the pryce of bloud.
And they toke counsell: and bought wt them a potters felde to bury straungers in.
Wherfore that felde is called the felde of bloud, vntyll this daye.
Then was fulfylled, that which was spoken by Ieremy the Prophet, sayinge: and they toke thirtye syluer plates, the pryse of him that was valued, whom they bought of the chyldren of Israel,
and gaue them for the potters felde, as the Lorde apoynted me.
Iesus stode before the debite, and the debite asked him, sayinge: art thou the kyng of the Iewes? Iesus sayeth vnto him: Thou sayest.
And when he was accused of the chefe prestes Ꟶ elders, he answered nothyng.
Then sayeth Pilate vnto him: hearest thou not, how many witnesses they laye agaynst the?
and he answered him to neuer a worde: in so moch that the debyte marueyled greatlye.
At that feast, the debite was wonte to delyuer vnto the people a presoner, whom they wold desier.
He had then a notable presoner, called Barrabas.
Therfore, when they were gathered together, Pilate sayd: whether wil ye that I geue loosse vnto you? Barrabas, or Iesus, whych is called Chryst?
For he knewe that for enuie they had delyuered him.
When he was set downe to geue iudgement, his wyfe sent vnto him sayinge: haue thou nothinge to do with that iust man. For I haue suffered many thinges this daye in my slepe because of him.
But the chefe prestes and the elders persuaded the people, that they shulde aske Barrabas, and destroye Iesus.
The debite answered, and sayde vnto them: whether of the twayne, will ye, that I let loosse vnto you? They sayd: Barrabas.
Pilate sayde vnto them: what shall I do then with Iesus whych is called Christ? They all sayd vnto him: let him be crucifyed.
The debite sayde: what euyll hath he done? But they cryed the more, sayinge: let him be crucifyed.
When Pilate sawe that he coulde preuayle nothinge, but that more busynes was made, he toke water, and wasshed hys handes before the people, sayinge: I am innocent of the bloud of this iust person, ye shall se.
Then answered all the people, and sayd his bloud be on vs, and on oure children.
Then let he Barrabas loose vnto them, and scourged Iesus, and delyuered him to be crucifyed.
Then the soudeours of the debite toke Iesus in the comen hall, and gathered vnto him al the company.
And they stripped him, and put on him a purpill robe,
and platted a croune of thornes and put vpon his heed, and a rede in his ryght hande: and bowed the knee before him: Ꟶ mocked him, saying: hayle, kyng of the Iewes:
and whan they had spytt vpon him, they toke the rede, and smote him on the heed.
And after that they had mocked him, they toke the roabe of him agayne, and put hys awne rayment on him, Ꟶ led him awaye to crucifye him.
And as they came out, they founde a man of Cyren (named Simon) him they compelled to beare his crosse.
And they came vnto the place which is called Golgotha (that is to saye, a place of deed mens sculles)
and gaue hym veneger to drincke myngled with gall. And when he had tasted therof, he wolde not drincke.
When they had crucifyed him, they parted his garmentes, Ꟶ dyd cast lottes: that it myght be fulfylled which was spoken by the Prophet. They departed my garmentes amonge them: and vpon my vesture dyd they cast lottes.
And they sate and watched him there,
and set vp ouer his heed the cause of hys deeth, wrytten: This is Iesus the kynge of the Iewes.
Then were there two theues crucifyed with him, one on the ryght hande, and another on the lyfte.
They that passed by, reuyled him, waggynge their heades,
and sayinge: thou that destroydest the temple of God and dyddest bylde it in thre dayes, saue thy selfe If thou be the sonne of God, come downe from the crosse.
Like wyse also the hye prestes, mocking him with the Scribes and elders sayde:
He saued other, him selfe can he not saue. If he be the kynge of Israel: let him now come doune from the crosse, Ꟶ we will beleue him.
He trusted in God, let him delyuer him now, yf he wyll haue him: for he sayde, I am the sonne of God.
The theues also, which were crucifyed with him, cast the same in his tethe.
From the syxte houre was there dercknes ouer all the lande vnto the nynth houre.
And about the nynth houre, Iesus cryed, wyth a loude voyce, sayinge: Eli, Eli lamasabaththany. That is to saye: my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?
Some of them that stode there, when they herde that, sayde: This man calleth for Helias.
And streyght waye one of them ranne, and toke a sponge, and whan he had fylled it full of veneger, he put it on a rede, and gaue him to drincke.
Other sayde, let be: let vs se whether Helias will come, Ꟶ delyuer him.
Iesus, whan he had cried agayne wt a loude voyce, yelded vp the goost.
And beholde, the vayle of the temple dyd rent in to two partes, from the toppe to the bottome, and the earth dyd quake, and the stones ren
and graues dyd open: and many bodyes of sainctes which slept, arose,
Ꟶ went out of the graues after his resurreccyon, and came in to the holy cytie, and appeared vnto many.
When the Centurion and they that were with him watchinge Iesus, sawe the erth quake, those thinges which happened, they feared greatly, saying: Trulye, this was the sonne of God.
And many wemen were there (beholdinge hym a farre of) whych folowed Iesus from Galile, mynistringe vnto him.
Amonge which was Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother of Iames and Ioses, and the mother of zebedes chyldren.
When the euen was come there came a riche man of Aramathia named Ioseph, which also was Iesus disciple:
He went to Pilate and begged the body of Iesus. Then Pilate commaunded the bodye to be delyuered.
And whan Ioseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a cleane lynnen cloth,
and layed it in hys newe tombe, whych he had hewen out, euen in the rocke, and rolled a greate stone to the dore of the sepulcre Ꟶ departed.
And there was Mary Magdalene and the other Mary syttynge ouer agaynste the sepulcre.
The nexte daye that folowed the daye of preparinge, the hye prestes and Pharises came together vnto Pilate,
sayeng: Syr, we remembre, that this deceauer sayde whyle he was yet alyue. After thre dayes I wyll aryse agayne.
Commaunde therfore that the sepulcre be made sure vntyll the thyrd daye, lest hys disciples come, Ꟶ steale him awaye and saye vnto the people: he is rysen from the deed, Ꟶ the last errour shalbe worse then the fyrst.
Pylate sayde vnto them: Ye haue the watch go your waye, make it as sure as ye can.
So they went, and made the sepulcre sure with watche men, and sealed the stone.
Vpon an euening of the Sabbothes, whych dawneth the fyrst daye of the Sabbathes, came Mary Magdalene Ꟶ the other Mary, to se the sepulcre.
And beholde, ther was a greate earthquake. For the angell of the Lord descended from heauen, Ꟶ came Ꟶ rowlled backe the stone from the dore, and sat vpon it.
Hys countenaunce was lyke lyghtnynge, and his rayment whyte as snowe.
And for feare of him the kepers were astonnyed, and became as deed men.
The angell answered, Ꟶ sayd vnto the wemen, feare ye not. For I knowe, that ye seke Iesus which was crucifyed:
he is not here: he is rysen as he sayde. Come se the place where the the Lord was layed:
Ꟶ go quickly, Ꟶ tell his disciples, that he is rysen agayne from the deed. And behold, he goeth before you into Galile, there ye shall se him. Lo I haue tolde you:
And they departed quickly from the sepulcre, with feare and greate Ioye, Ꟶ dyd runne, to bryng his disciples worde.
And as they went to tell his disciples: beholde, Iesus met them, sayinge: All hayle. And they came, Ꟶ held him by the fete, Ꟶ worshipped him.
Then sayd Iesus vnto them: be not afrayde. Go tell my brethren, that they go into Galile Ꟶ there shal they se me.
When they were gone, behold, some of the kepers came into the cytie Ꟶ shewed vnto the hye prestes, all the thinges that had happened.
And they gathered them together with the elders, Ꟶ toke counsell, Ꟶ gaue large money vnto the soudiers,
saying: Saye ye, that his disciples came by nyght Ꟶ stole hym awaye whyle ye slept.
And yf this come to the rulers eares, we will persuade him, and saue you harmeles.
So they toke the money, Ꟶ dyd as they were taught. And this sayinge is noysed amonge the Iewes vnto this daye.
Then the .xj. disciples went awaye into Galile, into a mountayne where Iesus had appoynted them.
And when they sawe him, they worshipped him. But some douted.
And Iesus came, and spake vnto them, sayinge: All power is geuen vnto me in heauen, Ꟶ in erth.
Go ye therfore, Ꟶ teach all nacions, baptising them in the name of the father, Ꟶ of the sonne, Ꟶ of the holy goost:
Teachinge them to obserue all thinges, whatsoeuer I haue commaunded you. And lo I am wyth you allwaye, euen vntyll the ende of the worlde.
The begynnynge of the Gospell of Iesu Chryst the sonne of God,
as it is written in the Prophetes, behold, I sende my messenger before thy face which shall prepare thy waye before the.
The voyce of a cryer in the wildernes: prepare ye the waye of the Lorde, Ꟶ make his pathes strayte.
Iohn dyd baptyse in the wyldernes, and preached the baptyme of repentaunce, for the remissyon of synnes.
And all the lande of Iewrie and they of Ierusalem, went out vnto hym, and were all baptised of him in the ryuer Iordan, confessynge their synnes.
Iohn was clothed with camilles herr, and wt a gerdyll of a sayng about hys loynes. And he dyd eate locustes and wilde hony,
and preached sayinge. He that is stronger then I, commeth after me, whose sho latchet I am not worthy to stoupe downe, and vnlose,
I haue baptysed you wyth water: but he shall baptyse you with the holy gost.
And it came to passe in those dayes, that Iesus cam from Nazareth, of Galile: and was baptysed of Iohn in Iordan:
And assone as he was come vp out of the water: he sawe heauen open, Ꟶ the sprete descendynge vpon him lyke adoue:
And ther came a voyce from heauen. Thou art my deare sonne in whom I delyte.
And immediatly sprete droue him into wildernes:
and he was there in the wyldernes .xl. dayes, and was tempted of Satan, Ꟶ was with wilde beastes. And the angels minystred vnto hym.
After that Iohn was taken Iesus came into Galile preachinge the Gospell, of the kyngdom of God,
Ꟶ sayinge. the tyme is come, Ꟶ the kyngdom of God is at hand repent, and beleue the Gospell.
As he walked by the see of Galile, he sawe Simon Ꟶ Andrew his brother, castynge nettes into the see, for they were fisshers.
And Iesus sayde vnto them: folowe me, Ꟶ I will make you to become fysshers of men.
And strayght waye, they forsoke their nettes, and folowed him.
And when he had gone a lytell further thence, he sawe Iames the sonne of zebede, and Iohn his brother, which also were in the shyppe, mendynge their nettes.
And anone he called them. And they leeft their father zebede in the shyp wyth the hyred seruauntes, and folowed hym.
And they came into Capernaum: and streyght waye on the Saboth dayes, he entred into the synagoge, Ꟶ taught.
And they were astonnyed at hys learnynge. For he taught them as one that had auctorite, Ꟶ not as the Scribes.
And there was in their Sinagoge a man vexed with an vnclene spirite, and he cryed
sayinge: Alas, what haue we to do with the thou Iesus of Nazareth? Art thou come to destroye vs? I knowe the what thou art euen that holy one of God.
And Iesus rebuked hym sayinge: holde thy peace, and come out of the man.
And whan the vncleane spirite had toarne him, Ꟶ cryed with a loude voyce, he came out of him.
And they were all amased, in so moch that they demaunded one of another amonge them selues sayinge: what thyng is this? What newe doctrine is thys? For with auctorite commaunded he the foule spirites, and they obeyed hym.
And immediatly his fame spred abroad through out all the region borderinge on Galile.
And forth with, whan they were come out of the Synagoge they entred into the house of Symon and Andrew, wyth Iames and Iohn.
But Simons mother in lawe laye sycke of a feuer. And anone they tell him of her.
And he came, Ꟶ toke her by the hande: Ꟶ lifte her vp: Ꟶ ymediatly the feuer forsoke hyr, Ꟶ she mynistred vnto them.
And at euen when the sonne was downe, they brought vnto him all that were dyseased, and them that were vexed with deuyls.
And all the cytie was gathred to gether at the dore,
and he healed many that were sycke of dyuers deseases, and cast out many deuyls, Ꟶ suffred not the deuyls to speake, because they knewe him.
And in the mornynge very early, Iesus (whan he was rysen vp) departed, and went out into a solitary place, and there prayed.
And Symon and they that were with hym, folowed after hym.
And when they had founde him, they saye vnto him: all men seke for the.
And he sayd vnto them: let vs go into the next townes, that I maye preach there also: for therfore am I come.
And he preached in their Synagoges, in all Galile, and cast the deuyls out.
And ther came a leper to him, besechynge hym, and knelyng downe, and sayeng vnto him, yf thou wilt, thou cannest make me cleane.
And Iesus had compassion on hym, Ꟶ puth forth his hande, touched hym, Ꟶ sayeth vnto him: I wyll, be thou cleane.
And assone as he had spoken, immediatly the leprosy departed from him,
and he sent him awaye forth with,
and sayeth vnto hym. Se thou saye nothynge to any man: but get the hence, shewe thy selfe to the Preaste, and offer for thy clensinge, those thinges whych Moses commaunded, for a witnesse vnto them.
But he (assone as he was departed) beganne to tell many thinges, and to publyshe the sayenge: in so moch that Iesus coulde nomore openly entre into the cytie, but was with out in desert places. And they came to hym from euery quarter.
After a feawe dayes also, he entred into Capernaum agayne, and it was noysed that he was in the house.
And anone many were gathered together, in so moch that now there was no rome to receaue them, no not so moche as about the dore. And he preached the worde vnto them.
And they came vnto him, bringing one sycke of the palsye whych was borne of fowre men.
And when they coulde not come nye vnto him for prease, they vncouered the rofe of the house that he was in. And when they had broken vp the rofe, they dyd (wyth coardes) let downe the bed wherin the sycke of the palsye laye.
When Iesus sawe their fayth, he sayde vnto the sycke of the palsye: sonne thy synnes be forgeuen the.
But ther were certayne of the Scribes syttinge there, Ꟶ thinking in their hertes:
why doth he speake thys blasphemyes? who can forgeue synnes, but God onely?
And immediatly when Iesus perceaued in hys sprete, that they so thought wyth in them selues, he sayeth vnto them: why thynke ye soch thinges in youre hertes?
Whether is it esayer to saye to the sycke of the palsye: thy synnes be forgeuen the: or to saye, aryse, take vp thy bed, and walke?
But that ye maye knowe, that the sonne of man hath power in earth to forgeue synnes, he spake vnto the sycke of the palsye:
I saye vnto the: aryse, and take vp thy beed, and get the hense vnto thyne awne house.
And immediatly he arose, toke vp the bed, and went forth before them all: in so moch that they were all amased, Ꟶ glorifyed God, sayinge: we neuer sawe it on this fassyon.
And he went agayne vnto the see, Ꟶ all the people resorted vnto hym, and he taught them.
And as Iesus passed by, he sawe Leuy the sonne of Alphe, sytting at the receyte of custome, and sayde vnto him: folowe me. And he arose, and folowed hym.
And it came to passe that whan Iesus sate at meate in hys house, many publicans and synners sate also together at meate wyth Iesus and his disciples. For there were many, that folowed hym.
And when the Scrybes and Pharises sawe him eate with publicans and synners, they sayde vnto his disciples: how happeneth it, that he eateth Ꟶ dryncketh wyth publicans and synners?
When Iesus hearde that, he sayde vnto them: They that be whole, haue no nede of the Phisycion, but they that are sycke. I came not to call the ryghtwyse, but synners to repentaunce.
And the disciples of Iohn and the Pharises dyd fast: and they come and saye vnto him. Why do the disciples of Iohn and of the Pharises fast, but thy disciples fast not?
And Iesus sayde vnto them: can the children of the weddinge fast while the brydgrome is with them? As longe as they haue the brydgrome with them, they cannot fast.
But the dayes wyll come, when the brydgrome shalbe taken awaye from them, and then shall they fast in those dayes.
No man also soweth a pece of new cloth vnto an olde garment, els taketh he awaye the new pece therof from the olde, Ꟶ so is the rent worse.
And no man powreth new wine into olde botels: els the new wynd doth burst the bottels, and the wyne runneth out, and the bottels are marred. But new wine must be putt into new bottels.
And it chaunsed that he went thorow the corne feldes on the Sabboth dayes, and hys disciples, beganne by the waye to plucke the eares of corne.
And the Pharises sayde vnto him: beholde, why do they on the Sabboth dayes, that whych is not laufull?
And he sayde vnto them: haue ye neuer red what Dauid dyd, when he had nede, Ꟶ was an hongred, both he, and they that were with him?
How he went into the house of God in the dayes of Abiathar the hye Preast, and dyd eate the shewbread, (whych is not lawfull to eate, but for the Prestes onely) Ꟶ gaue also to them whych were wyth hym?
And he sayde vnto them: the Sabboth was made for man, Ꟶ not man for the Sabboth.
Therfore is the sonne of man, Lorde also of the Sabboth.
And he entred agayne into the synagoge, and ther was a man there whych and a wythred hande.
And they watched hym, whether he wolde heale hym on the Sabboth daye, that they myght accuse hym.
And he sayde vnto the man whych had the wythred hande: aryse, and stande in the middes.
And he sayth vnto them, whether is it lawfull to do good on the Sabboth dayes, or to do euyll? to saue lyfe, or to kyll? But they helde their peace.
And whan he had looked round aboute on them, wyth anger, mournynge on the blyndnes of their hertes, he sayeth to the man, stretch forth thine hande. And he stretched it out. And hys hande was restored, euen as whole as the other.
And the Pharises departed, and streight waye gathred a councell (with them that belonged to Herode) agaynst hym, that they myght destroye him.
But Iesus auoyded wt his disciples to the see. And a greate multitude folowed hym from Galile: and from Iurie,
and from Ierusalem, and from Idumea, and from beyonde Iordane, and they that dwelled about Tyre and Sidon, a greate multitude of men: which (when they had herde what thinges he dyd) came vnto hym.
And Iesus commaunded his disciples, that a ship shuld wayt on hym, because of the people, leste they shuld thronge him.
For he had healed many, in somoch that they preased vpon him, for to touch him, as many as had plages.
And when the vncleane spretes sawe him, they fell downe before him, Ꟶ cryed, sayinge: thou art the sonne of God.
And he straytly charged them, that they shuld not make him knowne.
And he went vp into a mountayne, Ꟶ called vnto hym whom he wolde, and they came vnto him.
And he ordeyned the twelue that they shuld be with him, and that he myght sende them forth to preach:
Ꟶ that they myght haue power to heale syknesses, Ꟶ to cast out deuyls.
And he gaue vnto Symon to name, Peter.
And he called Iames the sonne of zebede and Iohn, Iames brother, and gaue them to name Boanarges, whych is to saye, the sonnes of thonder.
And Andrew, Ꟶ Philip, and Bartholomew, and Mathew, Ꟶ Thomas, and Iames the sonne of Alphe, and Thaddeus, and Symon of Canaan,
and Iudas Iscarioth: whych also betrayed him. And they came into the house,
and the people assembled together agayne, so that they had not leysar, so moch as to eate breed.
And when they that belonged vnto hym, heard of it, they went out to laye handes vpon him. For they sayde: he is madd.
And the Scrybes whych came downe from Ierusalem, sayde: he hath Belzebub, and by the chefe deuyll, casteth he out deuyls.
And he called them vnto him, and sayde vnto them in parables. How can Satan dryue out Satan?
And yf a realme be deuyded agaynste it selfe, that realme cannot endure:
And yf a house be deuided againste it selfe, that house cannot contynue.
And yf Satan make insurreccyon agaynst him selfe, Ꟶ be deuided, he cannot contynue, but hath an ende:
No man can entre into astronge mans house, Ꟶ take awaye hys goodes, excepte he fyrst bynde the stronge man, Ꟶ then spoyle his house.
Uerely I saye vnto you, all synnes shalbe forgeuen vnto mens children: and blasphemyes wherwith soeuer they haue blasphemed.
But he that speaketh blasphemy agaynst the holy goost, hath neuer forgeuenes, but is in daunger of eternall damnacyon:
For they sayde: he hath an vncleane sprete.
There came also his mother Ꟶ his brethren, and stode with out, and sent vnto him to call him out.
And the people sat aboute him, and sayde vnto him: beholde, thy mother Ꟶ thy brethren seke for the with out.
And he answered them, sayinge: who is my mother and my brethren?
And whan he had loked rounde about on his discyples, which sat in compasse about him, he sayde: behold my mother and my brethren.
For whosoeuer doeth the wyll of God, the same is my brother and my syster and mother.
And he began agayne, to teach by the see syde. And there gathered together vnto him moch people, so greatly that he entred into a ship, and sat in the see, and all the people was by the see syde on the shore.
And he taught them many thinges by parables, and sayde vnto them in his doctrine?
Herken to: beholde, there went out a sower to sowe.
And it fortuned as he sowed, that some fell by the waye syde, and the fowles of the ayre came, and deuoured it vp:
Some fell on stony grounde where it had not moch erth: and immediatly sprange vp, because it had not deepth of erth:
but as sone as the sonne was vp, it caught heat: Ꟶ because it had not rotynge, it wyddred awaye.
And some fell amonge thornes, Ꟶ the thornes grew vp, and choked it, and it gaue no frute.
And some fel vpon good grounde, and dyd yelde frute that sprong vp, and grewe, and brought forth, some thyrty folde, and some syxtye folde, and some an hundred folde.
And he sayde vnto them: he that hath eares to heare let him heare.
And when he was alone, they that were aboute hym wyth the twelue asked hym of the parable.
And he sayde vnto them. To you is it geuen to knowe the mystery of the kyngdome of God. But vnto them that are with out, all thinges happen by parables:
that when they se, they maye se, and not discerne, and when they heare, they maye heare, and not vnderstande: lest at any tyme they shulde turne, and their synnes shuld be forgeuen them.
And he sayde vnto them: Knowe ye not this parable? and how then wyll ye knowe all other parables?
The sower soweth the worde.
And they (wherof some be rehearsed to be by the waye syde) are those, where the worde is sowen: And whan they heare, Sathan cometh immediatly, and taketh awaye the worde that was sowen in theyr hertes.
And lyke wyse the other that receaue sede in to the stonye grounde, are they: whych when they heare the worde, at once receaue it wt gladnes,
yet haue no rote in them selues, and so endure but a tyme: and anone whan trouble Ꟶ persecucyon aryseth for the wordes sake, they fall immediatly.
There be other also that receaue sede into thornes and those are soche as heare the worde,
Ꟶ the cares of this worlde, and the disseytfulnes of ryches and the lustes of other thinges, entre in and choke the worde, and it is made vnfrutfull:
and other ther be, that haue receaued sede into a good ground: they are soche that heare the worde, and receaue it, so that one corne doth brynge forth thyrty, some syxty, some an hundred.
And he sayde vnto them: is the candle lyghted, to be put vnder a bushell, or vnder the table? Is it not lyghted to be put on a candelstyk?
For there is nothynge so preuy, that shall not be opened: nether hath it bene so secret, but that it shall come abroade.
If eny man haue eares to heare, let him heare.
And he sayde vnto them: take hede what ye heare: With what measure ye meete, with the same shall other men measure vnto you agayne. And vnto you that heare, shall more be geuen.
For vnto him that hath, shall it be geuen, and from him that hath not, shalbe taken awaye, euen that which he hath.
And he sayde: so is the kyngdome of God, euen as yf a man shuld sowe sede in the grounde
and shulde slepe, and ryse vp nyght and daye: and the sede shuld sprynge and growe vp, while he is not aware.
For the earth bryngeth forth frute of her selfe: fyrst the blade, then the eare, after that the full corne in the eare.
But whan the frute is brought forth, anone he throusteth in the sykell, because the heruest is come.
And he sayde: where vnto shall we lyken the kyngdome of God? or with what comparison shall we compare it?
It is lyke a grayne of mustarst seed: whych when it is sowen in the earth, is lesse then all seedes that be in the earth:
whan it is sowen, it groweth vp, and is greater then all herbes: and beareth greate braunches, so that the fowles of the ayre maye make their nestes vnder the shadow of it.
And with many soche parables spake he the worde vnto them, after as they myght heare it.
But wyth out parable spake he nothynge vnto them. But when they were alone, he expounded all thynges to his discyples.
And the same daye when euen was come, he sayde vnto them: let vs passe ouer vnto the other syde,
And they lefte the people, Ꟶ toke him euen as he was in the ship. And ther were also wyth hym other shippes.
And ther arose a great storme of wynde, Ꟶ the waues dashed in to the ship, so that it was now full.
And he was in the sterne a slepe on a pelowe. And they awake him, Ꟶ saye vnto hym: Master, carest thou not, that we perishe?
And he rose vp, and rebuked the wynde, and sayde vnto the see: peace, be styll. And the wynde ceassed, and ther folowed a greate calme.
And he sayde vnto them: why are ye so fearfull? How happeneth it, that ye haue no fayth?
And they feared exceadingly, and sayde one to another: who is thys? For both wynde and see obeye hym.
And they cam ouer to the other syde of the see into the countre of the Gaderenites.
And when he was come out of the shippe, immediatly there met hym out of the graues a man possessed of an vncleane sprete,
whych had hys abydinge amonge the graues. And no man coulde bynde him: no not with cheynes,
because that when he was often bounde with fetters and cheynes, he plucked the chaynes a sundre, and brake the fetters in peces, Nether coulde eny man tame him.
And alwayes, nyght and daye he was in the mountaynes and in the graues, cryeng and beatyng hym selfe wyth stones.
But when he had spyed Iesus a farre of, he ranne, and worshipped him,
and cryed with a loude voyce and sayde what haue I to do wyth the: Iesus thou sonne of the moost hyest God? I requyre the in the name of God that thou torment me not.
For he sayd vnto hym: come out of the man thou foule sprete.
And he asked hym: what is thy name? And he answered and sayde vnto hym: my name is Legion, for we are many.
And he prayd hym instantly, that he wolde not sende them awaye out of the countre.
But ther was there nye vnto the mountayns a greate heerd of swyne fedynge,
Ꟶ all the deuyls besought him, sayinge: sende vs in to the heerd of swyne, that we maye enter into them.
And anone Iesus gaue them leaue. And the vncleane spretes went out, and entred in to the swyne. And the heerd was caryed headlyng into the see. They were allmost .ij.M. and were drowned in the see.
And the swyne heerdes fleed, and tolde it in the cytie, and in the feldes. And they went out for to se, what had happened:
Ꟶ came to Iesus, and sawe him that was vexed with the fende Ꟶ had the Legion, syt, both clothed and in his ryght mynde, and they were afrayed.
And they that sawe it tolde them, how it had happened to him that was possessed wyth the deuyll: Ꟶ also of the swyne.
And they beganne to praye hym, that he wolde departe out of their coast.
And when he was come into the shippe, he that had the deuyll, prayed hym, that he myght be wt him.
Howbeit, Iesus wolde not suffre hym, but sayde vnto him: go to thyne awne house and to thy frendes, and shewe them how great thynges the Lorde hath done for the, and how he hath had compassyon on the.
And he departed, Ꟶ beganne to publyshe in the ten cytyes, how greate thinges Iesus had done for hym, and all men dyd merueyle.
And when Iesus was come ouer agayne by shyppe vnto the other syde, moch people gathered vnto him, and he was nye vnto the see.
And beholde, ther came one of the rulers of the Synagoge, whose name was Iairus: and when he sawe him, he fel downe at his fete,
and besought hym greatly, sayinge: my daughter lyeth at poynt of deeth, I pray the come, and laye thy hande on her, that she maye be safe and lyue.
And he went with hym, Ꟶ moch people folowed him, Ꟶ thronged hym.
And ther was a certen woman, which had bene diseased of an yssue of bloude .xij. yeres,
and had suffred many thinges of many physycions, Ꟶ had spent all that she had, Ꟶ felte none amendement at all, but rather was worsse, and worsse.
When she had herde of Iesus, she came in the preasse behinde him, Ꟶ touched his garment.
For she sayde: yf I maye but touch his clothes, I shall be whole.
And streyght waye the fountayne of her bloude was dryed vp, Ꟶ she felt in her body, that she was healed of that plage.
And Iesus immediatly felynge in him selfe, that vertue proceaded from him, tourned him aboute in the prease, and sayde, who touched my clothes?
And hys dyscyples sayde vnto him: thou seest the people thrust the, and askest, thou who dyd touch me?
And he loked round about for to se her that had done thys thynge.
But the woman fearing and trembling (knowyng what was done wyth in her) came, and fell downe before him, Ꟶ tolde him all the truth.
And he sayd vnto her: Daughter thy fayth hath saued the: go in peace, and be whole of thy plage.
Whyll he yet spake, ther came from the ruler of the Synagoges house, certayne which sayd: thy daughter is deed: why diseasest thou the Master any further?
Assone as Iesus hearde the worde that was spoken, he sayde vnto the ruler of the Synagoge: be not afrayed, onely beleue.
And he suffred no man to folowe him, saue Peter, and Iames, and Iohn the brother of Iames.
And he came vnto the house of the ruler of the Synagoge, and sawe the wondringe: and them that wepte and wayled greatly,
and went in, and sayde vnto them: why make ye this a doo, and wepe? The damosell is not deed, but slepeth.
And they laught him to scorne. But he put them all out, and taketh the father and the mother of the damosell, and them that were wyth him, and entreth in where the damosell laye,
Ꟶ taketh the damosell by the hande Ꟶ sayeth vnto hyr: Tabita, cumi: whych is (yf one do interprete it) damosell, I saye vnto the: aryse.
And streyght waye the damosell arose, and walked. For she was of the age of twelue yeres. And they were astonyed out of measure.
And he charged them straytely, that no man shuld knowe of it, and commaunded, to geue her meate.
And he departed thence, Ꟶ cam into hys awne countre, and hys dyscyples folowed hym.
And when the Sabboth daye was come, he beganne to teache in the synagoge. And many that hearde hym were astonnyed, and sayd: from whence hath he these thynges? And what wysdome is thys that is geuen vnto hym: and suche vertues that are wrought by hys handes?
Is not thys the carpenter Maryes sonne, the brother of Iames and Ioses and of Iuda Ꟶ Symon? Ꟶ are not hys systers here wyth vs? And they were offended at hym.
Iesus sayd vnto them: a Prophet is not despysed, but in hys awne countre, and amonge hys awne kynne, and in his owne houshold.
And he coulde there shewe no myracle, but layde hys handes vpon a fewe sycke folcke, and healed them,
and merueyled, because of theyr vnbelefe. And he went aboute by the tounes that laye on euery syde, teaching.
And he called the twelue, and beganne to sende them forth two Ꟶ two, and gaue them power agaynst vncleane spretes.
And commaunded them, that they shuld take nothing in their iorney saue a rodde onely: no scryppe, no bread, no money in theyr pourse,
but shuld be shood wt sandals. And that they shuld not put on two cootes.
And he sayde vnto them: whersoeuer ye entre in to an house, there abide, tyll ye departe thence.
And whosoeuer shall not receaue you nor heare you, when ye departe thence, shake of the duste that is vnder youre fete, for a witnesse vnto them. I saye verely vnto you: it shalbe easier for zodom Ꟶ Gomor in the daye of iudgement, then for that cytie.
And they went out Ꟶ preached, that men shuld repent:
Ꟶ they cast out many deuyls: Ꟶ annoynted many that were sycke wyth oyle, and healed them.
And kynge Herode hearde of hym (for hys name was spred abroade) and he sayde: Iohn Baptyste is rysen agayne from the deed, Ꟶ therfore myracles are wrought by him.
Other sayd it is Helyas: some sayd: it is a prophet, as one of the Prophetes.
But when Herode hearde of hym, he sayde: it is Iohn whom I beheaded, he is rysen from deeth agayne.
For Herode hym selfe had sent forth men of warre, and layed handes vpon Iohn, and bounde hym, Ꟶ cast hym into preson for Herodias sake, hys brother Phylyppes wyfe (because he had maryed her).
For Iohn sayde vnto Herode. It is not lawfull for the to haue thy brothers wyfe.
Herodias layd wayte for hym, and wolde haue kylled him, but she coulde not.
For Herod feared Iohn, knowing that he was a iust man Ꟶ an holy: Ꟶ gaue hym reuerence: and when he hearde hym, he dyd many thynges, and hearde hym gladly.
And when a conuenyent daye was come, that Herode on hys byrth daye, made a supper to the lordes hye captayns, Ꟶ chefe estates of Galile:
Ꟶ whan the daughter of the same Herodias cam in, Ꟶ daunsed, Ꟶ pleased Herode Ꟶ them that sate at bourde also: the kynge sayde vnto the damosell: aske of me what thou wilt, and I wyll geue it the.
And he sware vnto hyr: whatsoeuer thou shalt aske of me, I wyll geue it the euen vnto the one halfe of my kyngdome.
And she went forth, Ꟶ sayde vnto her mother: what shall I aske? she sayd: Iohn Baptystes head.
And she cam in streyght waye wyth haste vnto the kynge, Ꟶ asked, sayinge: I wyll, that thou geue me by and by in a charger, the heed, of Iohn Baptyst.
And the kynge was sory: howbeit for hys othes sake, and for theyr sakes whych sate at supper also, he wolde not cast her off.
And immediatly the kyng sent the hangman, and commaunded hys head to be brought in. And he went, and beheaded hym in the preson,
and brought his head in a charger, and gaue it to the damosell, and the damosell gaue it to her mother.
And when hys dyscyples hearde of it, they came, and toke vp hys body, and layed it in a graue.
And the Apostles gathered them selues together vnto Iesus, and told hym all thynges both what they had done, and what they had taught.
And he sayd vnto them come ye alone out of the waye into the wyldernes, Ꟶ rest a whyle. For there were many commers, and goers, and they had no leasure so moch as to eate.
And he went by shyp out of the waye into a deserte place.
And the people spyed them when they departed: Ꟶ many knewe hym, Ꟶ ranne a fote thyther out of all cyties, and cam thyther before them, and came together vnto hym.
And Iesus went out Ꟶ sawe moche people, Ꟶ had compassyon on them, because they were lyke shepe, not hauinge a shepherde. And he beganne to teach them many thynges.
And when the daye was now farre spent, hys discyples came vnto hym, sayinge: thys is a desert place, and now the tyme is farre passed,
let them departe, that they maye go into the countrey round about, and into the tounes, Ꟶ bye them bread: for they haue nothynge to eate.
He answered and sayd vnto them, geue ye them to eate. And they sayde vnto him: shall we go Ꟶ bye two hundred penyworth of bread, Ꟶ geue them to eate?
He sayde vnto them: how many loaues haue ye. Go Ꟶ loke. And when they had searched, they sayd: fyue Ꟶ two fysshes.
And he commaunded them, to make them all syt doune by companyes vpon the grene grasse.
And they sate doune here arowe and there arowe, by hundredes and by fyfties.
And whan he had taken the fyue loaues and the two fysshes, and loked vp to heauen, he blessed and brake the loaues, and gaue them to hys discyples, to set before them: Ꟶ the two fysshes deuided he among them all:
And they all dyd eate, and were satysfyed.
And they toke vp twelue baskettes full therof, and of the fysshes.
And they that dyd eate, were about fyue thousand men.
And streyght waye he caused his disciples to go into the shyppe, and to go ouer the see before vnto Bethsayda, whyle se sent awaye the people.
And assone as he had sent them awaye, he departed into a mountayne to pray.
And when euen was come, the shyppe was in the myddes of the see, and he alone on the lande,
Ꟶ he sawe them troubled in rowynge, for the wynde was contrary vnto them. And aboute the fourth watch of the nyght, he came vnto them, walkynge vpon the see, and wolde haue passed by them.
But when they sawe hym walkynge vpon the see, they supposed it had bene a sprete, Ꟶ cryed out:
for they all sawe hym, and were afrayed. And anone he talked wyth them, and sayd vnto them: be of good cheare, it is I, be not afrayed.
And he went vp vnto them into the shyppe, Ꟶ the wynde ceased, Ꟶ they were sore amased in them selues beyonde measure, and marueyled.
For they remembred not of the loaues, because their herte was blynded.
And whan they were ouer the water, they came into the lande of Genezareth Ꟶ drue vp into the hauen,
And assone as they were come out of the shyppe, streyght waye they knewe him,
and ranne forth through out all the regyon rounde about, Ꟶ began to cary about in beddes those that were sycke, when they heard that he was there.
And whyther soeuer he entred, into tounes, cytyes, or vyllages, they layde the sycke folkes in the streates, Ꟶ prayed hym that they myght touche, Ꟶ it were but the hemme of hys vesture. And as many as touched hym, were safe.
And the Pharyses came together vnto hym, Ꟶ dyuers of the Scrybes whych came from Ierusalem.
And when they sawe certaine of his discyples eate bread wyth commen (that is to saye, with vnwesshen) handes, they complayned.
For the Pharyses and all the Iewes, excepte they wasshe theyr handes ofte, eate not, obseruyng the tradicyons of the elders.
And when they come from the market, except they washe, they eate not. And many other thynges there be, which they haue taken vpon them to obserue, as the wasshynge of cuppes and cruses, and, brasen vessels, and of tables.
Then asked hym the Pharyses Ꟶ Scribes: why walke not thy dyscyples accordyng to the custome, ordeyned by the elders, but eate bread wyth vnwasshen handes?
He answered Ꟶ sayd vnto them: well prophesyed Esayas of you, ypocrytes, as it is wrytten: Thys people honoreth me wyth theyr lyppes, but theyr herte is farre from me:
howbeit, in vayne do they serue me, teachyng the doctrines and commaundementes of men.
For ye laye the commaundement of God a parte, Ꟶ obserue the constitucyons of men, as the wesshinge of cruses Ꟶ of cuppes, and many other soch lyke thynges ye do.
And he sayde vnto them: well, ye cast a syde the commaundement of God, to mayntayne youre awne constitucyons.
For Moses sayd: honoure thy father Ꟶ thy mother: Ꟶ whoso curseth father or mother, let him dye the death.
But ye saye: a man shall saye to father or mother, Corban: whych is: what gyfte soeuer commeth fro me, shalbe for thy profyt.
And so ye suffre him no more to do ought for hys father or his mother,
and make the worde of God of none effecte, through youre awne constitucyon whych ye haue ordeyned. And many soche thynges do ye.
And whan he had called all the people vnto hym, he sayde vnto them: herken vnto me, euery one of you, and vnderstande.
There is nothynge wyth out a man that can defyle him, when it entreth into him: but the thynges whych proceade out of a man, those are they that defyle the man.
If eny man haue eares to heare, let hym heare.
And when he came in to the house awaye from the people, his discyples asked him of the symilitude.
And he sayd vnto them: are ye also so greatly wyth out vnderstandinge? Do ye not yet perceaue, that what soeuer thynge from wtout, entreth into a man, it cannot defyle him,
because it entreth not into his hert but into the bely: Ꟶ goeth out into the draught, pourgyng out all meates?
And he sayde: that whych commeth out of a man
defyleth the man. For from wyth in, euen out of the herte of men proceade euyll thoughtes, aduoutry, fornicacyon, murther,
theft, couetousnes, fraude, deceyte, vnclennes, a wycked eye, blasphemyes, pryde, folyshnes:
all these euyll thynges come from wt in, and defyle a man.
And from thence he rose, Ꟶ went into the borders of Tyre Ꟶ Sidon: Ꟶ entred into an house, Ꟶ wolde that no man shuld haue knowen. But he coulde not be hyd.
For a certayne woman (whose daughter had a foule sprete) as soone as she heard of hym, came, and fell at hys fete.
The woman was a Greke out of the nacyon of Syrophenicia, Ꟶ she besought him, that he wolde cast out the deuyl from her daughter.
But Iesus sayd vnto her: let the chyldren fyrst be fedd. For it is not mete, to take the chyldrens bread, and to cast it vnto whelpes.
She answered Ꟶ sayde vnto hym: euen so lorde, neuerthelesse, the whelpes also eat vnder the table of the chyldrens cromes.
And he sayde vnto her: for thys sayinge go thy waye, the deuyl is gone out of thy daughter.
And when she was come home to her house, she founde that the deuyll was departed, and her daughter lyinge on the bedd.
And he departed agayne from the coastes of Tyre and Sidon, and came vnto the see of Galile thorow the myddes of the coastes of the ten cyties.
And they broughte vnto him one that was deaffe and had an impediment in hys speche, and they prayd hym to put his hande vpon him.
And when he had taken hym asyde from the people, he put hys fyngers into hys eares, and dyd spyt, Ꟶ touched hys tonge,
and loked vp to heauen, and syghed, and sayde vnto hym: Ephata, that is to saye, be opened.
And strayght waye his eares were opened, and the stryng of his tounge was lowsed, and he spake playne.
And he commaunded them, that they shulde tell no man. But the more he forbad them, so moch the more a greate deale they publisshed,
saying: He hath done all thynges well, he hath made both the deaffe to heare, and the dome to speake.
In those dayes when ther was a very great company, and had nothynge to eate. Iesus called his disciples to him, and sayde vnto them:
I haue compassion on the people, because they haue nowe bene wt me thre dayes, and haue nothing to eate:
and yf I sende them a waye fastyng to theyr awne houses, they shall faynt by the waye. For diuers of them came from farre.
And his discyples answered hym: where shulde a man haue bread here in the wyldernes to satysfye these?
And he asked them: how many loues haue ye? They sayde: seuen.
And he commaunded the people to syt downe on the grounde. And he toke the seuen loaues, and whan he had geuen thanckes, he brake, and gaue to hys dyscyples, to set before them. And they did set them before the people.
And they had a fewe small fysshes. And whan he had blessed, he commaunded them also to be sett before them.
And they dyd eate, and were suffysed. And they toke vp of the broken meate that was left seuen baskettes full.
And they that dyd eate: were about foure thousande. And he sent them awaye.
And anone he entred into a shyp with his disciples, and came into the parties of Dalmanutha.
And the Pharyses came forth, and beganne to dispute with hym, sekynge of hym a sygne from heauen, temptynge hym.
And whan he had syghted in hys sprete, he sayeth: why doth thys generacyon seke a sygne? Uerely I saye vnto you, there shall no sygne be geuen vnto thys generacyon.
And he left them, and went into the ship agayne, and departed ouer the water.
And they had forgotten to take bread wt them, nether had they in the shyp with them more then one loafe.
And he charged them, saying. Take hede, beware of the leuen of the Pharises, and of the leuen of Herode.
And they reasoned amonge them selues sayenge: We haue no bread.
And Iesus knewe it, and saith vnto them: why take ye thought, because ye haue no breed? perceaue ye not yet nether vnderstande? Haue ye youre hert yet blynded?
Haue ye eyes, and se not? and haue ye eares, and heare not? Do ye not also remembre?
When I brake fyue loaues among fyue thousande men, how many baskettes full of broken meat toke ye vp? They saye vnto him, twelue.
When I brake seuen amonge foure thousand, how many baskettes of the leauynges of the broken meate toke ye vp? They sayd: seuen.
And he sayd vnto them: how happeneth it that ye do not vnderstande?
And he came to Bethsayda, and they brought a blinde man vnto hym, and desired hym to touche him.
And he caught the blynde by the hand, and lead him out of the towne: and whan he had spyt in his eyes, and put his handes vpon him, he asked him yf he sawe ought.
And he loked vp, Ꟶ sayd: I se the men: for I perceaue them walke, as they were trees.
After that, he put hys handes agayne vpon hys eyes, and made hym se. And he was restored, and sawe euery man clearly.
And he sent him home to his house, saieng: nether go into the towne, ner tel it to eny in the towne.
And Iesus went out, Ꟶ hys disciples into the townes that longe to the cytie called, Cesarea Philippi. And by the waye he asked his disciples, saying vnto them: whom do men saye that I am?
And they answered: some saye, that thou art Iohn baptist, Ꟶ some saye, Helias. Agayne, some saye, that that thou arte one of the nombre of the prophetes.
And he sayde vnto them: but whom saye ye that I am? Peter answereth Ꟶ sayth vnto him: thou art very Christ.
And he charged them, that they shulde tell no man of him.
And he beganne to teach them how that the sonne of man must suffre many thinges, and be reproued of the elders, and of the hye prestes, and scribes, and be kylled, Ꟶ after thre dayes aryse agayne.
And he spake that sayinge openly. And Peter toke hym aside, and began to chyde him.
But he turned about, and loked on hys disciples, and rebuked Peter, saying: Go after me Satan. For thou sauerest not the thinges that be of God, but the thynges that be of men.
And when he had called the people vnto hym with hys discyples also, he sayde vnto them. Whosoeuer wyll folowe me, lett hym forsake him self, and take vp hys crosse, and folowe me.
For whosoeuer wil saue his life, shal lose it. But whosoeuer shal lose his life, for my sake Ꟶ the gospels, the same shall saue it.
For what shall it profet a man, yf he wynne all the world, and lose his awne soule:
or what shall a man geue to redeme hys soule with all agayne?
Whosoeuer therfore shalbe asshamed of me and of my wordes, in thys aduoutrous and synfull generacion: of hym also shall the sonne of man be asshamed, when he commeth in the glorye of hys father with the holy angels.
And he sayd vnto them: Uerely, I saye vnto you: Ther be some among them that stande here, which shall not taste of death, tyll they haue sene the kyngdome of God come with power.
And after sixe dayes Iesus taketh Peter and Iames, and Iohn, and leedeth them vp into an hye mountayne out of the waye alone: and he was transfigured before them.
And hys rayment dyd shyne, and became very whyte, euen as snowe: so whyt as no fuller can make vpon the earth.
And ther appeared vnto them Elias with Moses. And they talked with Iesu.
And Peter answered Ꟶ sayth to Iesu: Master, here is good beynge for vs: let vs make also .iij. tabernacles, one for the, and one for Moses, and one for Helias.
For he wyst not what he sayd: for they were afrayed.
And there was a cloude that shadowed them. And a voyce came out of the cloude, saying: Thys is my beloued sonne: heare hym.
And sodenly whan they had loked rounde aboute, they sawe no man more then Iesus onely with them.
And as they came downe from the hyll, he charged them, that they shuld tell no man those thynges that they had sene, tyll the sonne of man were rysen from death agayne.
And they kepte that saieng with them, and demaunded one of another, what the rysyng from death agayne shulde meane?
And they asked hym, sayenge: why then saye the scribes, that Helias must first come?
He answered and sayd: vnto them: Helias verely when he commeth fyrst, restoreth all thynges. And the sonne of man (as it is writen of him) shall suffre many thynges, Ꟶ be sett at naught.
But I saye vnto you, thut Helias is come, and they haue done vnto hym whatsoeuer they wolde, as it was wryten of hym.
And whan he came to hys disciples, he sawe moch people about them, Ꟶ the scribes disputing wt them.
And streight waye all the people (whan they behelde hym) were amased, and ran to hym, Ꟶ saluted hym.
And he asked the scribes: what dispute ye among them?
And one of the company answered, Ꟶ sayde: Master, I haue brought vnto the my sonne, whych hath a dome sprete.
And whensoeuer he taketh him, he teareth him, and he fometh, and gnassheth with hys teth, and pineth awaye. And I spake to thy disciples that they shuld caste hym out, and they coulde not.
He answereth him, and sayth: O faithles nacion, how longe shall I be wt you? How longe shall I suffre you? Brynge hym vnto me.
And they brought him vnto hym. And assone as the sprete sawe hym, he tare him. And he fell downe on the ground, walowing Ꟶ foming.
And he asketh his father: how longe is it ago: sens thys happened hym? And he sayde: of a chylde:
Ꟶ oft tymes it hath cast hym into the fyre, Ꟶ into the water, to destroye hym. But yf thou canst do eny thing, haue mercy on vs and helpe vs.
Iesus sayd vnto hym: yf thou couldest beleue all thynges are possyble to hym that beleueth.
And streyght waye the father of the chyld cried with teares, saieng, Lord, I beleue, helpe thou myne vnbelefe.
When Iesus sawe that the people came runnyng together vnto him, he rebuked the foule sprete, saying vnto hym: Thou domme Ꟶ deeff sprete, I charge the come out of him, and entre nomore into him.
And the sprete (whan he had cried, Ꟶ rent hym sore) came out of hym, and he was as one that had bene dead, in so moch that many sayd: he is deed.
But Iesus caught hys hand, and lyft him vp: and he rose.
And when he was come into the house, his disciples asked hym secretly: why coulde not we cast hym oute?
And he sayde vnto them: this kynde can come forth by nothing: but by prayer and fastynge.
And they departed thens, Ꟶ toke theyr iorney thorow Galile, and he wold not, that eny man shuld knowe it.
For he taught hys disciples, and sayd vnto them: the sonne of man shalbe deliuered into the handes of men, and they shall kyll hym: and after that he is kylled, he shall aryse agayne the thyrd daye.
But they wist not what he sayde, and were afrayed to aske him.
And he came to Capernaum. And when he was come into the house, he asked them: what was it that ye disputed among yourselues by the waye?
And they helde their peace: for by the waye they had reasoned among them selues, who shuld be the chefest.
And when he was set downe, he called the twelue to hym, and sayd vnto them: yf eny man desyre to be fyrst, the same shalbe last of all, and seruaunt to all.
And he toke a chylde, and set hym in the myddes of them: Ꟶ when he had taken hym in hys armes, he sayde vnto them:
whosoeuer receaueth eny soche a childe in my name, receaueth me. And whosoeuer receaueth me, receaueth not me, but hym that sent me.
Iohn answered hym, sayinge: Master, we sawe one cast out deuyls in thy name, Ꟶ he foloweth not vs: and we forbade hym, because he foloweth vs not.
But Iesus sayde: forbyd him not. For ther is no man whych (yf he do a myracle in my name) can lyghtely speake euill of me.
For he that is not agaynst vs, is on oure parte.
Whosoeuer shall in my name geue you a cuppe of water to drincke, because ye belonge to Chryste, verely I saye vnto you: he shall not loose hys reward.
And whosoeuer shall offende one of these lytelons, that beleue in me, it were better for hym, yf a mylstone were hanged aboute his necke, and he were cast into the see.
Wherfore yf thy hande hynder the, cut it of. It is beter for the, to entre into lyfe maymed, then (hauynge two handes) to go into hell, into fyre that neuer shalbe quenched,
where theyr worme dyeth not, and the fyre goeth not out.
And yf thy fote be a hynderaunce vnto the, cut it of. It is better for the to go halt into lyfe, then (hauynge two fete) to be cast into hell, into fyre that neuer shalbe quenched:
where theyr worme dyeth not, and the fyre goeth not out.
And yf thyne eye hinder the plucke it out. It is better for the to go into the kyngedome of God wyth one eye, then (hauynge two eyes) to be cast into hell fyre:
where theyr worme dyeth not, and the fyre goeth not out.
Euery man shalbe salted wyth fyre. And euery sacrifyce shalbe seasoned with salt.
Salt is good. But yf the salt be vnsauery, what shall ye season ther wyth? haue salt in youre selues: and haue peace amonge youre selues, one wyth another.
And whan he rose from thence, he went into the coastes of Iurye through the regyon that is beyonde Iordan: And the people resorted vnto hym a freshe. and as he was wont, he taught them agayne.
And the Pharyses came, and asked hym. Is it lawfull for a man to put awaye hys wyfe: to proue hym.
And he answered, and sayd vnto them: what dyd Moses byd you do:
and they sayde, Moses suffered to wryte a testimonall of deuorsement, and to put her awaye.
And Iesus answered and sayde vnto them: For the hardnes of youre herte he wrote thys precept vnto you.
But at the fyrst creacyon. God made them man and woman.
Therfore shall a man leaue hys father Ꟶ mother, Ꟶ byde by, hys wyfe,
Ꟶ they twayne shalbe one fleshe. So then are they now not twayne, but one fleshe.
Therfore, what God hath coupled together let not man separate.
And in the house hys discyples asked him againe of the same matter.
And he sayeth vnto them. Whosoeuer putteth awaye hys wyfe, Ꟶ maryeth another, breaketh wedlocke to her warde.
And yf a woman forsake her husband, and be maryed to another, she commytteth aduoutrye.
And they brought chyldren to hym, that he shulde touch them. And hys discyples rebuked those that brought them.
But when Iesus sawe it, he was dyspleased Ꟶ sayd vnto them: Suffre the children to come vnto me, forbyd them not. For of soch is the kyngdome of God.
Uerely I saye vnto you, whosoeuer doth not receaue the kyngdome of God as a childe, he shal not entre therin.
And whan he had taken them vp in hys armes, he put his handes vpon them, and blessed them.
And when he was gone forth into the waye, ther came one runnynge and kneled to hym, Ꟶ asked hym: good master, what shal I do, that I maye enheret eternall lyfe?
Iesus sayde vnto hym: why callest thou me good? There is no man good, but one, which is God.
Thou knowest the commaundementes: breake not matrimony: kyll not: steale not, beare no false wytnes: defraude no man: honoure thy father and mother.
He answered and sayd vnto hym: Master, all these, I haue obserued from my youth.
Iesus behelde hym, and fauoured hym, and sayd vnto hym: one thynge thou lackest. Go thy waye Sell that thou hast, and geue to the poore, and thou shalt haue treasure in heauen, and come, folowe me and take vp my crosse vpon thy shulders.
But he was discomforted because of that sayinge, and went awaye mournyng for he had great possessyons.
And whan Iesus had looked rounde aboute, he sayde vnto his discyples. How vneasye shall they that haue money: entre into the kyngdome of God.
And the discyples were astonnyed at hys wordes. But Iesus answereth againe, Ꟶ sayeth vnto them: children, how harde is it for them, that trust in money, to entre into the kingdome of God?
It is easyer for a camell to go thorow the eye of an nedle, then for the ryche to entre into the kyngdome of God.
And they were astonnyed out of measure, sayinge betwene them selues: who then can be saued?
Iesus loked vpon them, and sayd. with men it is vnpossible, but not with God: for with God all thynges are possyble.
And Peter beganne to saye vnto hym: Lo: We haue forsaken all, Ꟶ haue folowed the.
Iesus answered, Ꟶ sayde: Uerely I saye vnto you, ther is no man that hath forsaken house, or brethren, or systers, or father, or mother, or wyfe, or chyldren, or landes for my sake Ꟶ the Gospelles,
but he shall receaue an hundred foold nowe in this lyfe, houses and brethren, and systers, and mothers, and chyldren, and landes wyth persecucyons: Ꟶ in the worlde to come, eternall lyfe.
But many that are fyrst, shalbe last: Ꟶ the last, fyrst.
And they were in the waye goynge vp to Ierusalem. And Iesus went before them, and they were amased, Ꟶ folowed, and were afrayde. And Iesus toke the twelue agayne, and beganne to tell them what thynges shulde happen vnto hym.
Beholde, we go vp to Ierusalem, Ꟶ the sonne of man shalbe delyuered vnto the hye Prestes and vnto the Scribes: and they shall condemne hym to deeth, and shall delyuer hym to the gentyls,
and they shall mocke hym, and scourge hym, spyt vpon him, and kyll hym. And thyrde daye he shall ryse agayne.
And Iames and Iohn the sonnes of zebede came vnto him, sayinge: Master: we wolde, that thou shuldest do for vs whatsoeuer we desyre.
He sayde vnto them: what wolde ye that I shuld do for you?
They sayde vnto hym: graunt vnto vs, that we maye sytte, one on thy ryght hande, and the other on thy lyfte hande, in thy glory.
But Iesus sayd vnto them: Ye wote not what ye aske: Can ye dryncke of the cup, that I dryncke of? and be baptysed wyth the baptyme, that I am baptysed with?
And they sayde vnto hym: that we can. Iesus sayde vnto them: ye shall in dede dryncke of the cup that I dryncke of: and wyth the baptyme that I am baptysed wyth all, shall ye be baptysed in:
but to syt on my ryght hande Ꟶ on my lyfte hande, is not myne to geue, but it shall happen vnto them, for whom it is prepared.
And when the ten hearde it, they began to dysdayne at Iames and Iohn.
But Iesus whan he had called them to hym, sayd vnto them: ye knowe, that they whych are sene to beare rule amonge the people, raygne as Lordes ouer them.
And they that be greate amonge them, exercyse auctoryte vpon them. Neuertheles, so shall it not be amonge you: but whosoeuer of you wylbe greate amonge you, shalbe youre mynister.
And whosoeuer wylbe chefe, shalbe seruaunt of all.
For the sonne of man also came not to be mynystred vnto: but to mynister, and to geue hys lyfe for the redempcyon of many.
And they came to Hierico: And as he went out of the cytie of Hierico wyth his dyscyples, and a greate nombre of people: blynde Bartymeus the sonne of Tymeus, sate by the hye wayes syde beggyng.
And when he hearde that it was Iesus of Nazazeth, be began to crye, and to saye: Iesus, thou sonne of Dauid, haue mercy on me.
And many rebuked hym, that he shuld holde hys peace. But he cryed the more a greate deale: thou sonne of Dauid haue mercy on me.
And Iesus stode styll, and commaunded hym to be called: And they called the blynde, sayinge vnto hym: Be of good comforte: ryse he calleth the.
And he threwe awaye hys cloke, and rose, and came to Iesus.
And Iesus answered, and sayde vnto hym: what wylt thou that I do vnto the? The blynde sayde vnto hym: Master, that I myght se.
Iesus sayde vnto hym: go thy waye, thy fayth hath saued the. And immediatly he receaued hys syght, Ꟶ folowed Iesus in the waye.
And when they came nye to Ierusalem vnto Betphage Ꟶ Bethanie, besydes mount Olyuete, he sendeth forth two of hys discyples,
and sayeth vnto them: Go youre waye into the toune, that is ouer agaynst you. And as sone as ye be entred into it: ye shall fynde a colte bounde, wheron neuer man sate: lose hym, and brynge hym hither.
And yf eny man saye vnto you: why do ye so? Saye ye, that the Lorde hath neade of hym: and streyght waye he wyll sende hym hyther.
And they went theyr waye, and found the colte tyed by the dore wythout in a place wher two wayes met, Ꟶ they losed hym.
And dyuers of them that stode there, sayde vnto them: what do ye, losynge the colte?
And they sayde vnto them, euen as Iesus had commaunded. And they let them go.
And they brought the colte to Iesus and cast theyr garmentes on hym: and he sate vpon hym.
And many sprede theyr garmentes in the waye. Other cut downe braunches of the trees, and strawed them in the waye.
And they that went before and they that folowed: cryed, saying. Hosanna: blessed is he that commeth in the name of the Lorde.
Blessed be the kyngdome, that commeth in the name of hym that is Lorde of oure father Dauid: Hosanna in the hyest
And the Lorde entred into Ierusalem and into the temple. And when he had loked round about vpon all thynges, and now the euen tyde was come, he went out vnto Bethany wyth the twelue.
And on the morow when they were come out from Bethany, he hungred.
And whan he had spyed a fyg tree a farre of, hauynge leaues, he came to se, yf he myght fynde eny thynge theron. And when he came to it, he founde nothynge but leaues: for the tyme of fygges was not yet.
And Iesus answered, and sayde vnto the fygg tre: neuer man eate frute of the here after whyll the worlde standeth. And hys discyples hearde it.
And they came to Ierusalem. And Iesus went into the temple, Ꟶ beganne to cast out them that solde and bought in the temple, and ouer threwe the tables of the money chaungers, Ꟶ the stoles of them that solde doues:
and wolde not suffre, that eny man shuld carye a vessel thorow the temple.
And he taught, sayinge vnto them: is it not wrytten: my house shalbe called the house of prayer vnto all nacyons? But ye haue made it a denne of theues.
And the Scrybes and hye prestes hearde it, and sought howe to destroye hym. For they feared hym, because all the people marueled at hys doctryne.
And when euen was come, Iesus went out of the cytie.
And in the morninge as they passed by, they sawe the fygge tree dryed vp by the rotes.
And Peter remembred, and sayde vnto him: master, beholde, the fygg tree whych thou cursedst, is wyddred awaye.
And Iesus answered and sayde vnto them: haue confydens in God.
Uerely I saye vnto you, that whosoeuer shall saye vnto thys mountayne: remoue, and cast thy selfe into the see, and shall not doute in hys herte, but shall beleue that those thinges which he sayeth shal come to passe, whatsoeuer he sayeth he shall haue.
Therfore I saye vnto you, what thinges soeuer ye desyre when ye praye, beleue that ye receaue them, and ye shall haue them.
And when ye stand Ꟶ praye, forgeue, yf ye haue ought agaynst eny man, that youre father also whych is in heauen, maye forgeue you youre trespasses.
n/a
And they came agayne to Ierusalem. And as he walked in the temple, ther came to him the hye Prestes, Ꟶ the Scrybes, Ꟶ the elders,
and saye vnto hym: by what auctorite doest thou these thynges? and who gaue the thys auctorite, to do these thynges?
Iesus answered, and sayd vnto them: I wyll also aske of of you a certayne thynge Ꟶ answere ye me, Ꟶ I will tell you by what auctorite I do these thinges.
The baptime of Iohn, whether was it from heauen or of men? Answer me.
And they thought in them selues, sayinge: yf we saye, from heauen: he wyll saye why then did ye not beleue hym?
but yf they had sayd, of men, they feared the people. For all men counted Iohn, that he was a verye Prophete.
And they answered Ꟶ sayd vnto Iesu: we cannot tell. And Iesus answered, and sayd vnto them: nether will I tell you by what auctorite I do these thinges.
And he beganne to speake vnto them by parables. A certayne man planted a vyneyarde, and compassed it aboute wt an hedge, and ordeined a wyne presse, and bylt a toure, and let it out to hyre vnto husbandmen, and went into a straunge countre.
And when the tyme was come, he sent to the husbandmen a seruaunt, that he myght receaue of the husbandmen of the frute of the vyneyarde.
And they caught hym, and bet hym, and sent hym awaye agayne emptye.
And moreouer, he sent vnto them another seruaunt, and at hym they cast stones and brake hys heed, Ꟶ sent him awaye agayne all to reuyled.
And agayne, he sent another, and him they kylled: and many other, beatynge some, and kyllinge some.
And so whan he had yet but one beloued sonne, he sent him also at the last vnto them, sayinge: they wyll feare my sonne.
But the husbandmen sayd amongest them selues: this is the heyre: come let vs kyl him, Ꟶ the inheritaunce shalbe oures.
And they toke him Ꟶ kylled him, Ꟶ cast hym out of the vyneyard.
What shall therfore the Lorde of the vyneyarde do? He shall come, ad destroye the husbandmen, Ꟶ let out the vyneyarde vnto other.
Haue ye not red this scrypture? The stone whych the buylders dyd refuse, is become the chefe stoone of the corner?
this is the Lordes doynge, Ꟶ it is meruelous in oure eyes.
They went about also to take him, Ꟶ feared the people. For they knewe, that he had spoken the parable agaynst them. And they left hym and went theyr waye:
And they sent vnto hym certayne of the Pharises Ꟶ Herodes seruauntes, to take him in his wordes.
And assone as they were come, they sayd vnto him: Master, we knowe that thou arte true, Ꟶ carest for no man: for thou consyderest not the outward appearaunce of men, but teachest the waye of God truly: Is it laufull to paye tribute to Cesar, or not?
Ought we to geue, or ought we not to geue? But he vnderstode theyr symulacyon, and sayd vnto them: Why tempte ye me? Bringe me a peny, that I maye se it.
And they brought it. And he sayeth vnto them: Whose is thys ymage Ꟶ superscripcyon? And they sayde vnto hym: Cesars.
And Iesus answered, and sayde vnto them: Geue to Cesar the thinges that belonge to Cesar: and to God, the thynges whych perteyne to God. And they meruelled at hym.
There came also vnto hym the Saduces, whych saye that ther is no resurreccyon. And they asked hym sayinge:
Master Moses wrote vnto vs, yf eny mans brother dye, and leaue hys wyfe behynde hym, and leaue no chyldren: that hys brother shuld take hys wyfe, and reyse vp seed vnto hys brother.
There were seuen brethren, and the fyrst toke a wyfe: and when he dyed, left no seed behynde hym.
And the seconde toke hyr, and dyed: nether left he any seed. And the thyrde lykewyse.
And seuen had her, and left no seed behynde them. Last of all the wyfe dyed also.
In the resurreccyon therfore when they shall ryse agayne: whose wyfe shall she be of them? For seuen had her to wyfe.
And Iesus answered, and sayd vnto them: Do ye not therfore erre, because ye vnderstande not the scriptures, nether the power of God?
For when they shall ryse agayne from deeth, they nether mary, nor are maryed: but are as the angels, whych are in heauen.
As touching the deed, that they ryse agayne: haue ye not redde in the boke of Moses, how in the bushe, God spake vnto hym, sayinge: I am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob?
He is no God of deed, but the God of lyuynge. Ye are therfore greatly deceaued.
And whan ther came one of the Scrybes, and had hearde them disputynge to gether (and perceaued that he had answered them well) he asked hym: whych is the fyrst of all the commaundementes?
Iesus answered him, the fyrste of all the commaundementes is: Heare O Israell: The Lorde oure God, is Lord onely:
And thou shalt loue the Lorde thy God with all thy hert, Ꟶ wyth all thy soule, and wyth all thy mynde, and with all thy strength. This is the fyrste commaundment.
And the seconde is lyke vnto thys: Thou shalt loue thy neyghbour as thy selfe. Ther is none other commaundment greater then these.
And the Scrybe sayde vnto him: well master, thou hast sayd the truthe, for ther is one God, Ꟶ ther is none but he.
And to loue hym wyth all the herte, and wyth all the mynde, Ꟶ wyth all the soule, Ꟶ wyth all the strength: and to loue a mans neyghbour as hym selfe, is a greater thynge, then all burt offerynges and sacrifyces.
And when Iesus sawe that he answered discretly, he sayde vnto hym: Thou art not farre from the kyngdome of God. And no man after that, durst aske hym any questyon.
And Iesus answered Ꟶ sayde, teachinge in the temple: how saye the Scrybes that Chryst is the sonne of Dauid?
for Dauid him selfe inspired wt the holy goost, sayd: The Lorde sayde to my Lorde, syt on my ryght hande tyll I make thyne enemyes thy fote stole.
Dauid him selfe calleth him Lord: Ꟶ how is he then hys sonne? And moche people hearde him gladly:
And he sayde vnto them in his doctrine: beware of the Scribes, which loue to go in longe clothynge: Ꟶ loue salutacions in the market places,
and the chefe seates in the congregacyons, and the vppermost roumes at feastes:
whych deuoure wydowes houses, and vnder a pretence, make longe prayers. These shall receaue greater dampnacyon.
And whan Iesus sat ouer agaynst the treasury, he behelde, how the people put money into the treasury. And many that were ryche, cast in moch.
And ther cam a certayne poore wydowe, and she threwe in two mytes, whych make a farthynge.
And he called vnto him hys discyples Ꟶ sayeth vnto them. Uerely I saye vnto you, that thys poore wydowe hath cast moare in, then all they which haue cast into the treasury.
For they all dyd cast in of their superfluyte: but she of her pouerte, dyd cast in all that she had, euen all her lyuynge.
And as he went of the temple, one of his discyples sayde vnto hym: Master, se what stones, and what byldynges are here.
And Iesus answered and sayde vnto hym: Seest thou these greate buyldynges? There shall not be lefte one stone vpon another, that shall not be throwen downe.
And as he sate on mounte Olyuete, ouer agaynst the temple, Peter, and Iames, and Iohn, and Andrew, asked hym secretly:
tell vs, when shal these thynges be? And what is the sygne when all these thynges shalbe fulfylled?
And Iesus answered them, and began to saye: take hede, lest any man deceaue you.
For many shall come in my name sayinge: I am Chryst, and shall deceaue many.
When ye shall heare of warres, and tydinges of warres, be ye not troubled. For soch thynges must nedes be? But the ende is not yet.
For ther shall nacyon aryse agaynste nacyon, and kyngdome agaynste kyngdome. And ther shalbe erth quakes in all quarters, and famyshment shall ther be, and troubles. These are the begynnynge of sorowes.
But take ye hede to youre selues. For they shall brynge you vp to the counsels, and into the synagoges, and ye shalbe beaten: yee, and shalbe brought before rulers and kinges for my sake, for a testimoniall vnto them.
And the Gospell must fyrste be publyshed amonge all nacyons.
But when they leade you and present you, take ye no thought, nether ymagin aforehande what ye shall saye: but what soeuer is geuen you in the same houre, that speake. For it is not ye that speake, but the holy ghost.
The brother shall delyuer vp the brother to deeth, and the father the sonne: and the chyldren shall ryse agaynste theyr fathers Ꟶ mothers, and shall put them to deeth.
And ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake. But whoso endureth vnto the ende, the same shalbe safe.
Moreouer, when ye se the abhominacion of desolacion (wherof is spoken by Daniel the prophet) stand where it ought not: let hym that readeth vnderstand. Then lett them that be in Iurye, flye to the mountaynes.
And let hym that is on the house toppe, not go downe into the house, nether entre therin, to fetch eny thing out of his house.
And let him that is in the felde, not tourne backe agayne vnto the thinges which he left behynde him, for to take his clothes with him.
Wo shall be then to them that are with chylde, and to them that geue sucke in those dayes.
But praye ye that youre flyght be not in the winter.
For ther shalbe in those dayes suche tribulacion, as was not from the begynnyng of creatures (which God created) vnto this tyme, nether shalbe.
And excepte that the Lord shuld shorten those dayes no flesshe shulde be saued. But for the electes sake, whom he hath chosen, he hath shortened those dayes.
And then, yf eny man saye to you, lo here is Christ: lo, he is there, beleue not.
For false Christes Ꟶ false prophetes shall ryse, Ꟶ shall shewe myracles Ꟶ wondres, to deceaue yf it were possible, euen the electe.
But take ye hede: behold, I haue shewed you all thinges before.
Moreouer, in those dayes, after that tribulacion, the sonne shall wexe darke, and the mone shal not geue her light,
Ꟶ the starres of heauen shall fall: Ꟶ the powers whych are in heauen, shall moue:
And then shall they se the sonne of man commynge in the cloudes, wt greate power Ꟶ glory.
And then shall he sende hys angels, Ꟶ shall gather together his electe from the fowre wyndes, from the ende of the erthe, to the vttemost parte of heauen.
Learne a symilitude of the fygge tree. When his braunche is yet tender, and hath brought forth leaues, ye knowe, that sommer is neare.
So ye in lyke maner: when ye se these thynges come to passe: vnderstand, that he is nye euen at the dores.
Uerely I saye vnto you, that thys generacion shall not passe, tyll these thinges de done.
Heauen and erth shall passe, but my wordes shall not passe;
But of that daye Ꟶ tyme knoweth no man: no not the Angels which are in heauen: nether the sonne him selfe: saue the father only.
Take hede, watche Ꟶ praye, for ye knowe not when the tyme is
As a man which is gone into a straunge contrey, and hath lefte his house, and geuen his substaunce to his seruauntes, and to euery man his worke, and commaunded the porter to watche.
Watche ye therfore, for ye knowe not when the master of the house will come, at euen, or at mydnyght, whether at the cocke crowyng, or in the dawnynge:
lest yf he come sodenly, he finde you slepynge.
And that I saye vnto you, I saye vnto all watche.
After two dayes was Easter, and the dayes of swete breed And the hye Prestes and the Scribes sought, how they myghte take hym by crafte, Ꟶ put him to deeth.
But they sayde: not in the feast daye, leest any busynes aryse amonge the people.
And whan he was at Bethania, in the house of Simon the leper, euen as he sate at meate, ther cam a woman hauyng an alabaster boxe of oyntment, called Narde, that was pure and costly: Ꟶ she brake the boxe, Ꟶ powred it on his heed.
And ther were some, that were not content wyth in them selues, Ꟶ sayde: what neded this waste of oyntment?
For it myght haue bene solde for more then thre hundred pens, Ꟶ haue bene geuen vnto the poore. And they grudged agaynst her.
And Iesus sayde: left her alone, why trouble ye her? She hath done a good worke on me.
For ye haue poore wt you all wayes Ꟶ when soeuer ye wyll, ye maye do them good: but me haue ye not alwayes.
She hath done that she coulde: she came a fore hande, to anoynt my body to the buryinge.
Uerely I saye vnto you: wheresoeuer this Gospell shalbe preached thorow out the whole worlde: this also that she hath done, shalbe rehearsed in remembraunce of her.
And Iudas Iscarioth, one of the twelue went awaye vnto the hye Prestes, to betraye him vnto them.
When they herde that, they were glad, and promysed that they wolde geue hym money. And he sought, how he myght conueniently betraye him.
And the fyrste daye of swete breed (when they offred Passeouer) his disciples sayd vnto him: where wylt thou that we go Ꟶ prepare, that thou mayest eate the Passeouer?
And he sendeth forth two of his disciples, Ꟶ sayeth vnto them: Go ye into the cytie, Ꟶ ther shall mete you a man bearing a pitcher of water, folowe him.
And whither soeuer he goeth in, saye ye to the good man of the house, the master sayeth: where is the geest chambre, where I shall eate passeouer wyth my disciples?
And he wyll shewe you a greate parlour, paued and prepared: there make ready for vs.
And hys disciples went forth, and came into the cytie, and founde as he had sayde vnto them: and they made ready the Passeouer.
And whan it was now euen tyde he came with the .xij.
And as they sate at borde Ꟶ dyd eate Iesus sayde: Uerely I saye vnto you: one of you (that eateth with me) shall betraye me.
And they beganne to be sorie, Ꟶ to saye to him one by one: is it I? And another sayde: is it I?
He answered Ꟶ sayd vnto them: It is one of the .xij. euen he that dyppeth wyth me in the platter.
The sonne of man trulye goeth as it is wrytten of him: but wo to that man by whom the sonne of man is betrayed. Good were it for that man, yf he had neuer bene borne.
And as they dyd eate, Iesus toke breed: and whan he had geuen thankes he brake it, and gaue to them, and sayde: Take, eate, this is my body.
And he toke the cup, Ꟶ when he had geuen thankes he toke it to them, Ꟶ they all dranke of it.
and he sayde vnto them: This is my bloude of the newe Testament, whych is shedd for many.
Uerely I saye vnto you: I wyll dryncke nomore of the frute of the vyne: vntyll that daye, that I drincke it newe in the kyngdome of God.
And when they had sayde grace: they went out to mount Oliuete.
And Iesus sayeth vnto them: All ye shalbe offended because of me this nyght. For it is written: I wyll smyte the shepherd, Ꟶ the shepe shalbe scattered:
But after that I am rysen agayne, I wyll go into Galile before you.
Peter sayde vnto him: And though all men be offended, yet wyll not I.
And Iesus sayeth vnto him: Uerely I saye vnto the, that this daye, euen, in this nyght before the cocke crowe twyse, thou shalt denye me thre tymes.
But he spake more vehemently: no, yf I shulde dye with the, I wyll not denye the. Lyke wyse also sayde they all.
And they came into a place which was named Gethsemani. And he sayeth to his disciples: Syt ye here, whyle I go asyde, and praye.
And he taketh wyth him Peter Ꟶ Iames Ꟶ Iohn, Ꟶ began to waxe abasshed, Ꟶ to be in an agonye,
Ꟶ sayeth vnto them: My soule is heuy, euen vnto the deeth, tary ye here and watche.
And he went forth a lytle Ꟶ fell downe flatt on the grounde, Ꟶ prayed: that yf it were possible, the houre myght passe from him.
And he sayde: Abba father, all thinges are possible vnto the, take awaye this cup from me. Neuerthelesse, not that I will: but that thou wilt, be done.
And he cam Ꟶ founde them slepyng, Ꟶ sayeth to Peter: Simon, slepest thou? Couldest not thou watche one houre?
watche ye, Ꟶ praye, leest ye entre into temptacion, the sprete trulye is ready, but the flesh is weake.
And agayne he went asyde, Ꟶ prayde, and spake the same wordes.
And he returned, Ꟶ founde them a slepe agayne. For their eyes were heuy: nether wist they, what to answere him.
And he came the thirde tyme Ꟶ sayde vnto them: slepe hens forth, and take youre ease, it is ynough. The houre is come, beholde, the sonne of man is betrayed into the handes of synners.
Ryse vp, let vs go. Lo, he that betrayeth me, is at hande.
And immediatly whill he yet spake, commeth Iudas (which was one of the twelue) Ꟶ with him a greate nomber of people wyth sweardes and staues from the hye Prestes and Scrybes Ꟶ elders.
And he that betrayed him, had geuen them a generall token, saying: whosoeuer I do kysse, that same is he: take him Ꟶ leade him awaye warely.
And as sone as he was come, he goeth streight waye to him, Ꟶ sayeth vnto him: Master, Master, Ꟶ kyssed him:
And they layde their handes on him, and toke him.
And one of them that stode by, drue out a swearde, and smote a seruaunt of the hye Preste, Ꟶ cut of his eare.
And Iesus answered Ꟶ sayd vnto them: ye be come out as vnto a thefe wt sweardes Ꟶ wt staues, for to take me.
I was daylye wt you in the temple, teachinge, Ꟶ ye toke me not: but these thinges come to passe, that the scriptures shuld be fulfylled.
And they all forsoke him, Ꟶ ranne awaye.
And there folowed him a certayne younge man, clothed in lynnen vpon the bare, Ꟶ the yongmen caught him,
Ꟶ he lefte his lynnen garment, Ꟶ fled from them naked.
And they ledd Iesus awaye to the hyest Preste of all Ꟶ with him come all the hye Prestes, Ꟶ the elders, Ꟶ the Scribes.
And Peter folowed him a greate waye of (euen tyll he was come into the palace of the hye preste) and he sat with the seruauntes, and warmed him selfe at the fyre.
And the hye Prestes Ꟶ all the counsell sought for witnes agaynst Iesu, to put hym to death, Ꟶ founde none:
for many bare false witnes agaynste hym, but their wytnesses agreed not together.
And ther arose certayne, and brought falsse witnes agaynst hym, sayinge.
We herde him saye: I will destroye this temple that is made wyth handes, and wyth in thre dayes I wyll buylde another, made without handes.
But yet their wytnesses agreed not together.
And the hye Preste stode vp amongest them, and asked Iesus, sayinge: answerest thou nothinge? How is it that these beare witnes agaynst the?
But he helde his peace, Ꟶ answered nothing. Agayne the hyeste Preste asked him, Ꟶ sayde vnto him. Art thou Christ the sonne of the blessed?
And Iesus sayd: I am. And ye shall se the sonne of man sytting on the ryght hand of power, Ꟶ commyng in the cloudes of heauen.
Then the hye preste rent his clothes, Ꟶ sayd: what nede we eny further of wytnesses?
Ye haue heard blasphemy, what thincke ye? and they all condemned hym to be worthy of deeth.
And some beganne to spit at him, Ꟶ to couer his face, Ꟶ to beate him with fistes, and to saye vnto him, Areade: And the seruauntes boffeted him on the face.
And as Peter was beneth in the palace ther cam one of the wenches of the hyest preste:
Ꟶ when she sawe Peter warminge hym self, she loketh on hym, Ꟶ sayeth: wast not thou also wt Iesus of Nazareth?
And he denyed, saying: I knowe hym not, nether wote I what thou sayest. And he went out into the porche, and the cocke crewe.
And a damsell (whan she sawe him) beganne agayne to saye to them that stode by, this is one of them.
And he denyed it agayne. And an one after, they that stode by, sayde agayne to Peter: suerly thou art one of them, for thou art of Galyle, Ꟶ thy speache agreth therto.
But he beganne to cursse, Ꟶ to sweare, sayinge: I knowe not thys man of whom ye speake.
And agayne the cocke krewe, Ꟶ Peter remembred the worde that Iesus sayde vnto him: before the cocke crowe twyse, thou shalt denye me thre tymes. And he beganne to wepe.
And anone in the dawninge the hye Prestes helde a counsell wt the elders Ꟶ the Scrybes, Ꟶ the whole congregacion, Ꟶ bounde Iesus, Ꟶ ledde him awaye, Ꟶ deliuered him to Pilate.
And Pilate asked him: art thou the kynge of the Iewes? And he answered, Ꟶ sayd vnto hym: thou sayest it.
And the hye prestes accused him of many thinges.
So Pilate asked him agayne, sayinge: Answerest thou nothing? Beholde, how many thinges they lay vnto thy charge.
Iesus yet answered nothing, so that Pilate merueyled.
At that feast Pilate dyd delyuer vnto them a presoner: whomsoeuer they wolde desyre.
And ther was one that was named Barrabas, whych laye bounde with them that made insurreccyon: he had commytted murther.
And the people called vnto him, and began to desyre him, that he wolde do, accordynge as he had euer done vnto them.
Pylate answered them sayenge: Will ye that I let lowse vnto you the kyng of the Iewes?
For he knewe, that the hye Prestes had delyuered him of enuy.
But the hye prestes moued the people, that he shulde rather delyuer Barrabas vnto them.
Pylate answered agayne, and sayde vnto them: What wyll ye then that I do vnto him, whom ye call the kyng of the Iewes?
And they cryed agayne: crucifye him:
Pylate sayd vnto them, What euyll hath he done: And they cryed the moare feruentlye: Crucifye hym:
And so Pylate wyllinge to content the people, let lose Barrabas vnto them Ꟶ delyuered vp Iesus (when he had scourged hym) for to be crucifyed.
And the soudyers leed him awaye into the commen hall, and called together the whole multitude,
Ꟶ they clothed him with purple, Ꟶ they platted a croune of thornes, Ꟶ crouned him withall,
Ꟶ beganne to salute him: Hayle kynge of the Iewes.
And they smote hym, on the heed wt a rede and dyd spitt vpon hym Ꟶ bowed their knees, Ꟶ worshyped him.
And when they had mocked him, they toke the purple of hym, Ꟶ put his awne clothes on him, Ꟶ ledde hym out, to crucifye him.
And they compelled one that passed by, called Simon of Cyrene (the father of Alexander and Rufus) which came out of the felde, to beare his crosse.
And they brought him to a place named Golgotha (whych is yf a man interprete it: the place of deed mens sculles)
and they gaue him to drinke, wyne mingled wyth myrre, but he receaued it not.
And when they had crucifyed him they parted hys garmentes, castinge lotes vpon them, what euery man shulde take.
And it was aboute the third houre, Ꟶ they crucifyed him.
And the tytle of his cause was wrytten: The kynge of the Iewes.
And they crucified with him two theues. the one on the right hande, Ꟶ the other on his lyfte.
And the scrypture was fulfylled which sayeth: he was counted amonge the wycked.
And they that went by, rayled on hym: wagging their heedes, and saying: A wretche thou that destroyest the temple, and byldest it in thre dayes:
saue thy selfe, Ꟶ come doune from the crosse.
Lykewyse also mocked hym the hye Prestes amonge them selues with the Scrybes Ꟶ sayde, he saued other men, hym selfe he cannot saue.
Let Christ the kynge of Israell descende now from the crosse, that we maye se, Ꟶ beleue. And they that were crucifyed with him checked him also.
And when the syxte houre was come, darcknes arose ouer all the erth, vntyll the nynth houre.
And at the nynth houre Iesus cryed with a loude voyce, saying: Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? whych is (yf one interpret it) my God, my God why hast thou forsaken me?
And some of them that stode by, when they hearde that, sayd: beholde, he calleth for Helias.
And one ran, and fylled a sponge full of veneger, and put it on a rede, Ꟶ gaue him to drincke, sayinge: let him alone, let vs se, whether Helias wyll come and take hym downe:
But Iesus cryed with a loude voyce, and gaue vp the goost.
And the vayle of the temple dyd rent in two peces, from the toppe to the bottome.
And when the Centurion (which stode before him) sawe, that he so cryed, and gaue vp the goost, he sayde: truly this man, was the sonne of God.
Ther were also wemen a good waye of, beholdinge him: amonge whom was Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother of Iames the lytle: Ꟶ of Ioses, Ꟶ Mary Salome
(which also when he was in Galile had folowed him Ꟶ mynistred vnto him) and many other wemen, whych came vp with him vnto Ierusalem.
And now when the euen was come (because it was the daye of preparing that goeth before the Sabboth)
Ioseph of the cite of Aramathia, a noble Councellour which also loked for the kyngdome of God, came, Ꟶ went in boldely vnto Pilate, Ꟶ begged of hym the body of Iesu.
And Pilate merueled, that he was alredy deed, and called vnto him the Centurion, and asked of him, whether he had bene eny whyle deed.
And when he knewe the trueth of the Centurion, he gaue the body to Ioseph.
And he bought a lynnen clothe, and toke him downe, and wrapped him in the lynnen clothe, and layde him in a sepulcre, that was hewen out of the rocke.
And Mary Magdalen and Mary Ioses behelde where he was layde.
And when the Saboth was past, Mary Magdalen, Ꟶ Mary Iacob, Ꟶ Salome, bought swete odoures, that they myght come, Ꟶ anoynt him?
And early in the mornyng the fyrst daye of the Sabboth they came vnto the sepulcre, when the Sonne was rysen.
And they sayd among them selues: who shall rolle vs awaye the stone from the dore of the sepulchre?
And when they loked, they sawe how that the stone was rolled awaye, for it was a very greate one.
And they went into the sepulcre, and sawe a younge man syttyng on the ryghtsyde, clothed in a longe white garment, Ꟶ they were afrayed.
And he sayeth vnto them, be not afrayed: ye seke Iesus of Nazareth, whych was crucifyed. He is rysen, he is not here. Beholde the place where they had put him.
But goo youre waye, and tell his disciples, Ꟶ Peter, that he goeth before you into Galile: there shall ye se him, as he sayd vnto you.
And they went oute quyckly, and fledd from the sepulcre. For they trembled Ꟶ were amased. Nether sayde they eny thynge to eny man, for they were afrayed.
When Iesus was rysen early the fyrst daye after the Sabboth he appeared fyrst to Mary Magdalen, out of whom he had cast seuen deuyls.
And she went, and tolde them that were with him, as they mourned Ꟶ weapte.
And they, whan they herde that he was a lyue, and had appered vnto her, beleued it not.
After that, appeared he vnto two of them in a straunge fygure, as they walked, Ꟶ went in to the country.
And they went Ꟶ tolde it to the remnaunt. And they beleued not these also.
Afterwarde he appeared vnto the eleuen as they sate at meate: and cast in their teth their vnbelefe, and hardnes of herte: because they beleued not them whych had sene that he was rysen agayne from the deed.
And he sayde vnto them: Goo ye into al the worlde, and preache the gospell to all creatures,
he that beleueth Ꟶ is baptised, shalbe saued. But he that beleueth not, shalbe dampned.
And these tokens shall folowe them that beleue. In my name they shall cast out deuyls, they shall speake with newe tonges,
they shall dryue awaye serpentes. And yf they drynke any deadly thynge, it shall not hurte them. They shall laye their handes on the sycke, Ꟶ they shall recouer.
So then, when the Lorde had spoken vnto them he was receaued into heauen, and is on the right hand of God.
And they went forth, and preached euery where: the Lorde workyng with them and confyrmyng the worde with myracles folowing.
For as moche as many haue taken in hande to set forth the declaracion of those thinges, which are most surely to be beleued amonge vs,
euen as they delyuered them vnto vs, whych from the begyndyng sawe them them selues with their eyes, and were ministers of the thinges that they declared:
I determyned also (as sone as I had searched out dyligently all thinges from the begynnyng) that then I wolde wryte vnto the, good Theophilus:
that thou myghtest knowe the certente of those thinges wherof thou hast bene infourmed.
There was in the dayes of Herode the Kynge of Iurie, a certayne Preste named zacharias of the course of Abia. And his wyfe was of the daughters of Aaron: and her name was Elizabeth:
they were, both ryghteous before God, and walked in all the lawes and ordynaunces of the Lorde, that no man coulde fynde fawte with them.
And they had no chylde, because that Elizabeth was barren, and they booth were now well stricken in age.
And it came to passe, that whan zachary executed the Preastes offyce before God, as hys course came
(accordyng to the custome of the prestes office) hys lot fell to burne incence.
And he went into the temple of the Lorde, Ꟶ the whoale multitude of the people were without in prayer, whill the incense was a burninge.
And ther appeared vnto him an Angell of the Lorde, standynge on the ryght syde of the aultare of incense.
And when zacharias sawe him, he was abashed, Ꟶ feare cam on him.
But the Angell sayde vnto him: feare not zachary, for thy prayer is hearde. And thy wyfe Elizabeth shall beare the a sonne, and thou shalt call his name Iohn,
and thou shalt haue ioye and gladnes, and many shall reioyce at his byrth.
For he shalbe greate in the syght of the Lorde, and shall nether drincke wyne ner stronge drincke. And he shalbe fylled with the holy goost, euen from his mothers wombe:
and many of the chyldren of Israel shall tourne to their Lord God.
And he shall go before him in the sprite Ꟶ power of Helias to tourne the hertes of the fathers to the children, and the vnbeleuers to the wysdome of the iuste men, to make readye a perfecte people for the Lorde.
And zacharias sayde vnto the angell: by what token shall I knowe this? For I am olde, and my wyfe well strycken in yeres.
And the angell answered, and sayd vnto him. I am Gabriel, that stande in the presens of God, and am sent to speake vnto the: and to shewe the these glad tydinges.
And beholde it shall come to passe, that thou shalt be domme, and not be hable to speake, vntill the daye that these thinges be performed, because thou beleuedst not my wordes, which shalbe fulfylled in their season.
And the people wayted for zacharias, and merueyled that he taryed in the temple.
And when he came out, he coulde not speke vnto them. And they perceaued, that he had sene a visyon in the temple. And he beckened vnto them, and remayned speachlesse.
And it fortuned, that as sone as the dayes of his office were out, he departed into his awne house.
And after those dayes, his wyfe Elizabeth conceaued, Ꟶ hid her selfe fyue monethes, sayinge:
Thys wyse hath God dealte with me, in the dayes wherin he hath loked on me, to take from me my rebuke amonge men.
And in the syxt moneth the angell Gabriel was sent from God vnto a cytie of Galile, named Nazareth,
to a virgin spoused to a man, whose name was Ioseph, of the house of Dauid, and the virgins name was Mary.
And the angell went in vnto her, and sayde. Hayle full of grace, the Lorde is with the: blessed art thou amonge wemen.
When she sawe him, she was abasshed at his sayinge: and cast in her mynde, what maner of salutacion that shulde be.
And the angell sayde vnto her: feare not Mary: for thou hast founde grace with God.
Behold, thou shalt conceaue in thy wombe, Ꟶ beare a sonne, Ꟶ shalt call his name Iesus.
He shalbe greate, Ꟶ shalbe called the sonne of the hyest. And the Lorde God shall geue vnto him the seate of his father Dauid
and he shall raygne ouer the house of Iacob for euer, and of his kyngdome there shalbe none ende.
Then sayde Mary vnto the angell: How shall this be, seynge I knowe not a man?
And the angell answered, Ꟶ sayde vnto her. The holy goost shall come vpon the, and the power of the hyest shall ouer shaddowe the. Therfore also that holy thynge which shalbe borne, shalbe called the sonne of God.
And beholde, thy cosyn Elizabeth, she hath also conceaued a sonne in her age. And this is her syxt moneth, which was called barren:
for with God shall nothinge be vnpossible.
And Mary sayde: beholde the hande mayden of the Lorde, be it vnto me according to thy worde, And the angell departed from her.
And Mary arose in those dayes, Ꟶ went into the mountayns with haste into the cytie of Iewrie,
and entred into the house of zachary, and saluted Elizabeth.
And it fortuned, that whan Elizabeth hearde the salutacyon of Mary, the babe sprange in her wombe. And Elizabeth was fylled with the holy ghost,
Ꟶ cried with a loude voyce, and sayde: Blessed art thou among wemen, and blessed is the frute of thy wombe.
And whence happeneth this to me, that the mother of my Lorde shulde come to me?
For lo, as sone as the voyce of thy salutacion sownded in myne eares, the babe sprange in my wombe for ioye.
And blessed art thou that hast beleued: for those thinges shalbe performed, which were tolde the from the Lorde.
And Mary sayde. My soule magnifieth the Lord.
And my sprete hath reioysed in God my sauyour
For he hath loked on the lowe degre of hys hande mayden: for lo: now from hence forth shall all generacions call me blessed.
Because he that is myghty, hath done to me greate thinges, Ꟶ holye is his name.
And his mercy is on them that feare him, from generacion to generacion.
He hath shewed strength with his arme, he hath scattered them that are proude in the ymaginacyon of their herte.
He hath putte downe the myghty from theyr seates, and exalted them of lowe degre.
He hath fylled the hongrye with good thynges: and sent awaye the ryche emptye.
He hath helped hys seruaunt Israel, in remembraunce of hys mercye.
Euen as he promysed to oure fathers, Abraham, and to his seede for euer.
And Mary abode with her aboute a .iij. monethes, and retourned agayne to her awne house.
Elizabeths tyme came that she shulde be delyuered, and she brought forth a sonne.
And her neyghboures and her cosyns hearde howe the Lorde had shewed greate mercy vpon her, and they reioysed with her.
And it fortuned that in the eyght daye, they came to circumcyse the chylde: and called his name zacharias, after the name of hys father.
And his mother answered and sayde: not so but he shalbe called Iohn.
And they sayd vnto her: Ther is none in thy kynred, that is named with this name:
And they made sygnes to his father, howe he wolde haue him called.
And he asked for wrytinge tables, and wrote, saying: his name is Iohn. And they maruelled all.
And hys mouth was opened immediatly, Ꟶ his tonge also, Ꟶ he spake, and praysed God.
And feare came on all them that dwelt nye vnto them. And all these sayinges were noysed abroade throughout all the hyll countre of Iurie:
and all they that herde them layde them vp in their hertes, saying: What maner of chylde shall this be? And the hande of the Lorde was with him:
And his father zacharias was filled with the holy goost, and prophisyed sayinge?
Praysed be the Lord God of Israel, for he hath visited and redemed his people:
And hath raysed vp an horne of saluacion vnto vs, in the house of his seruaunt Dauid.
Euen as he promysed by the mouth of his holy prophetes, which were sens the worlde began.
That we shulde be saued from oure enemies, and from the hande of all that hate vs.
That he wolde deale mercifully with oure fathers, and remember his holy couenaunt.
And that he wolde performe the oothe, which he sware to oure father Abraham,
for to geue vs. That we deliuered oute of the handes of oure enemies, might serue him with out feare,
all the dayes of oure lyfe, in such holynes and rightewesnes as are accept before him
And thou chylde shalt be called the Prophet of the hiest: for thou shalt go before the face of the Lorde, to prepare his wayes:
to geue knowlege of saluacyon vnto his people for the remission of synnes.
Through the tender mercy of oure God, wherby the daye springe from an hye hath visited vs.
To geue light to them that sate in darcknes Ꟶ in the shadowe of deathe, to gyde oure fete into the waye of peace.
And the child grewe and wexed strong in sprete, and was in wildernes, tyll the daye came, when he shulde shewe him selfe vnto the Israelites.
And it chaunced in those dayes: that ther went oute a commaundement from Augustus the Emperour, that all the world shulde be taxed.
And thys taxinge was the fyrst, Ꟶ executed when Syrenius was leftenaunt in Syria.
And euery man went vnto his awne cytie to be taxed.
And Ioseph also ascended from Galile, out of a cytie called Nazareth, into Iewry: vnto the cytie of Dauid, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and lynage of Dauid,
to be taxed with Mary his spoused wyfe, which was with childe.
And it fortuned that while they were there, her tyme was come that she shulde be deliuered.
And she broughte forth her fyrst begotten sonne, Ꟶ wrapped him in swadlinge clothes, and layde him in a maunger, because ther was no rowme for them in the ynne.
And ther were in the same region shepherdes, watchynge and kepinge their flocke by night.
And lo, the angell of the Lorde stode harde by them, and the brightnes of the Lorde shone rounde aboute them, Ꟶ they were sore afrayed.
And the angell sayde vnto them: Be not afrayed. For beholde, I bringe you tydinges of greate ioye, that shall come to all people:
for vnto you is borne this daye in the cytie of Dauid, a saueoure which is Christ the Lord.
And take this for a sygne: ye shall fynde the childe wrapped in swadlinge clothes, Ꟶ layed in a manger.
And streyght waye ther was with the angel a multitude of heauenly sowdyers, praysing God: Ꟶ sayinge:
Glory to God on hye, and peace on the erth, Ꟶ vnto men a good wyll.
And it fortuned, as sone as the angels were gone awaye from them into heauen, The shepherdes sayde one to another: let vs go now euen vnto Bethlehem, and se this thing that we heare saye is happened, which the Lorde hath shewed vnto vs.
And they came wt hast, Ꟶ founde Mary and Ioseph Ꟶ the babe layde in a manger.
And when they had sene it, they publisshed a brode the sayinge, which was tolde them of that chylde.
And all they that hearde it, wondred at those thynges which were tolde them of the shepherdes.
But Mary kepte all those saienges, and pondered them in her hert.
And the shepherdes retourned, praysynge and laudinge God for all the thinges that they had herde and sene, euen as it was tolde vnto them.
And when the eyght daye was come that the childe shulde be circuncised his name was called Iesus which was named of the Angell, before he was conceaued in the wombe.
And when the tyme of their purificacion (after the lawe of Moses) was come, they brought him to Hierusalem, to present him to the Lorde
(as it is wrytten in the lawe of the Lorde euery man chylde that fyrst openeth the matrix, shalbe called holy to the Lord)
and to offer (as it is sayde in the lawe of the Lorde) a payre of turtle doues, or two yonge pigions.
And beholde, ther was a man in Hierusalem whose name was Simeon. And the same man was iuste Ꟶ godly, Ꟶ loked for the consolacion of Israel, and the holy goost was in him.
And an answer had he receaued of the holy goost that he shulde not se deeth, excepte he fyrst sawe the Lordes Christ.
And he came by inspiracion into the temple. And when the father Ꟶ mother brought in the chylde Iesus: to do for him after the custome of the lawe,
then toke he him vp in his armes, Ꟶ sayd:
Lorde, now lettest thou thy seruaunt departe in peace, accordynge to thy promes.
For myne eyes haue sene the saluacion:
which thou hast prepared before the face of all people
A lyght to lighten the gentyls, Ꟶ the glory of thy people Israel.
And his father Ꟶ mother: meruylled at those thinges, whych were spoken of hym.
And Simeon blessed them, and sayde vnto Mary his mother: beholde, this chyld is sett to be the fall and vprising agayne of many in Israel, Ꟶ for a sygne which is spoken agaynst.
And moreouer, the swearde shall pearce thy soule that the thoughtes of manyhertes maye be opened.
And ther was a Prophetisse, one Anna, the daughter of Phanuel of the trybe of Aser: which was of a greate age, Ꟶ had lyued with an husbande .vij. yeres from her virginite.
And she had bene a wedowe aboute .iiij. scoore Ꟶ .iiij. yere, which departed not from the temple, but serued God with fastinges and prayers nyght Ꟶ daye.
And she came forth that same houre, and praysed the Lorde, Ꟶ spake of him, to all them that loked for redempcyon in Hierusalem.
And whan they had perfourmed all thinges accordyng to the lawe of the Lorde, they returned into Galile, to their awne citie Nazareth.
And the chylde grewe, and wexed stronge in sprete, Ꟶ was fylled with wysdome, Ꟶ the grace of God was vpon him.
And his father Ꟶ mother went to Hierusalem euery yere at the feaste of easter.
And when he was .xij. yere olde, they went vp to Hierusalem after the custome of the feast daye.
And when they had fulfylled the dayes: as they returned home, the chylde Iesus a bode styll in Ierusalem, Ꟶ hys father Ꟶ mother knewe not of it:
but they supposyng him to haue bene in the company, came a dayes iorney Ꟶ sought him amonge their kynsfolke Ꟶ acquayntaunce.
And when they founde him not, they went backe agayne to Hierusalem, and sought him.
And it fortuned that after .iij. dayes, they founde him in the temple, syttynge in the middes of the doctours, hearyng them, Ꟶ posynge them
And all that hearde him, were astonnyed at his vnderstonding Ꟶ answers.
And when they sawe him, they marueyled. And his mother sayde vnto him: sonne, why hast thou thus dealt with vs? Beholde, thy father Ꟶ I haue sought the, sorowenge.
And he sayde vnto them: how is it that ye sought me? Wist ye not, that I must goo aboute my fathers busynes?
And they vnderstode not that sayinge which he spake vnto them.
And he went downe wt them, Ꟶ came to Nazareth, Ꟶ was obedient vnto them. But his mother kept all these sayenges together in her hert.
And Iesus prospered in wysdome Ꟶ age, and in fauoure, with God Ꟶ men.
In the fyfteneth yere of the raygne of Tyberius the Emperoure, Pontius Pylate beynge leftenaunt of Iewrie, and Herode beinge Tetrach of Galile, and his brother Philip Tetrach of Iturea Ꟶ of the region of the Traconites, Ꟶ Lysaniath the Tetrach of Abyline
(when Anna and Cayphas were the hye prestes) the worde of the Lorde came vnto Iohn the sonne of zacharias in the wyldernes.
And he came in to all the coastes aboute Iordan, preaching the baptyme of repentaunce for the remission of synnes,
as it is wrytten in the boke of the wordes of Esayas the prophet, sayenge: The voyce of a cryar in wyldernes: prepare ye the waye of the Lord, make his pathes strayght.
Euery valley shalbe fylled, Ꟶ euery mountayne Ꟶ hyll shalbe brought lowe. And thinges that be croked, shalbe made streyght: Ꟶ the rough wayes shalbe made playne:
Ꟶ all flesshe shall se the Saluacion of God.
Then sayde he to the people, that were come forth to be baptysed of him. O ye generacion of vypers, who hath taught you to flye from the wrath to come?
Brynge forth therfore due frutes of repentaunce, Ꟶ begyn not to saye wyth in youre selues: we haue Abraham to oure father. For I saye vnto you. God is able of these stones to reyse vp chyldren vnto Abraham.
Now also is the axe leyde vnto the rote of the trees: euery tree therfore which bryngeth not forth good frute, is hewen doune, Ꟶ cast into the fyre.
And the people asked him, sayinge: what shall we do then?
He answereth and sayeth, vnto them: He that hath two coates? lett him parte wyth hym that hath none, Ꟶ he that hath meate, let him do lyke wyse.
Then cam the publicans also to be baptised, Ꟶ sayde vnto him: Master, what shal we do?
And he sayde vnto them: requyre no more, then that which is appoynted vnto you.
The soudyoures lykewyse demaunded of him, sayinge: and what shall we do? And he sayde vnto them: hurt no man: nether trouble eny man wrongfully: and be content with youre wages.
As the people were in a doute, and all men musyd in their hertes of Iohn, whether he were very Christ,
Iohn answered Ꟶ sayde vn them all: I baptise you wyth water, but one stronger then I shall come after me, whose shoo latchet I am not worthy to vnlowse: he shall baptyse you with the holy goost, Ꟶ wt fyre:
which hath hys fanne in hys hande, Ꟶ wyll pourge his floore, and gather the corne into his barne: but the chaffe wyll he burne with fyre that neuer shalbe quenched.
And many other thinges in his exhortacion preached he vnto the people.
Then Herode the Tetrach when he was rebuked of hym for Herodias his brother Philippes wyfe, Ꟶ for all the euyls which Herode dyd:
added this aboue all, and layed Iohn in preson.
And it fortuned that whan all the people receaued baptime (Ꟶ when Iesus was baptised and dyd praye) the heauen was opened,
and the holy goost cam downe in a bodely shape lyke a doue vpon him, and a voyce came from heauen, which sayde: Thou arte my beloued sonne, in the do I delyte.
And Iesus him selfe beganne to be aboute thirty yere of age, so that he was supposed to be the sonne of Ioseph: whych was the sonne of Hely:
whych was the sonne of Mathat whych was the sonne of Leui: whych was the sonne of Melchi: whych was the sonne of Ianna: whych was the sonne of Ioseph:
whych was the sonne of Matatthias: which was the sonne of Amos: which was the sonne of Naum: whych was the sonne of Hesty: which was the sonne of Nagge.
which was the sonne of Maath: which was the sonne of Matathias: which was the sonne of Semei: which was the sonne of Ioseph: which was the sonne of Iuda:
which was the sonne of Ioanna: whych was the sonne of Rhesa: whych was the sonne of zorobabel: whych was the sonne of Salathiel: which was the sonne of Neri:
which was the sonne of Melchi: whych was the sonne of Addi: whych was the sonne of Coosam: which was the sonne of Helmadan: whych was the sonne of Her:
which was the sonne of Ieso: which was the sonne of Heliezer: which was the sonne of Iozam: which was the sonne of Mattha: which was the sonne of Leui:
which was the sonne of Simeon: which was the sonne of Iuda: which was the sonne of Ioseph: which was the sonne of Ionam: which was the sonne of Heliachim:
which was the sonne of Melcha: which was the sonne of Menan: which was the sonne of Mathatha: which was the sonne of Nathan: which was the sonne of Dauid:
which was the sonne of Iesse: which was the sonne of Obed: which was the sonne of Boos: which was the sonne of Salmon: which was the sonne of Naassan:
which was the sonne of Aminadab: which was the sonne of Aran: which was the sonne of Esron: which was the sonne of Phares: which was the sonne of Iuda:
which was the sonne of Iacob: which was the sonne of Isaac: which was the sonne of Abraham: which was the sonne of Tharra: which was the sonne of Nachor:
which was the sonne of Saruch: which was the sonne of Ragau: which was the sonne of Phalec: which was the sonne of Heber: which was the sonne of Sala:
which was the sonne of Cainam: which was the sonne of Arphaxat: which was the sonne of Sem: which was the sonne of Noe: which was the sonne of Lameth:
which was the sonne of Mathusala: which was the sonne of Enoch: which was the sonne of Iareth: which was the sonne of Malaleel: which was the sonne of Cainam:
which was the sonne of Enos. which was the sonne of Seth: which was the sonne of Adam: which was the sonne of God.
Iesus beynge full of the holy goost, returned from Iordan and was led by the sprete into wildernes,
and was .xl. dayes tempted of the deuyll. And in those dayes dyd he eate nothynge. And when they were ended, he afterwarde hongred.
And the deuyll sayde vnto him: yf thou be the sonne of God commaunde this stone that it be breed.
And Iesus answered hym, saying: It is written man shall not lyue by breed only, but by euery worde of God.
And the deuyll toke him into an hye mountayne, and shewed him all the kyngdoms of the worlde, euen in the twincklyng of an eye.
And the deuyll sayde vnto him: all this power will I geue the euery whit, Ꟶ the glory of them: for they are delyuered vnto me, and to whomsoeuer I wyll, I geue it.
If thou therfore wyll falt downe before me Ꟶ worshyp me, they shalbe all thyne.
Iesus answered and sayde vnto him: hence from me Satan. For it is wrytten Thou shalt worshyp the Lorde thy God, and him onely shalt thou serue.
And he caryed him to Ierusalem, and set him on a pynacle of the temple, and sayd vnto him: Yf thou be the sonne of God, cast thy selfe downe from hens.
For it is wrytten: he shall geue his Angels charge ouer the, to kepe the,
and in their handes they shall beare the vp, that thou dasshe not thy fote agaynst a stone.
And Iesus answered, and sayde vnto hym, it is sayd: thou shalt not tempte the Lorde thy God.
And as sone as all the tentacion was ended, the deuell departed from him for a season.
And Iesus returned by the power of the sprete, into Galile, and there went a fame of him thorow out all the region.
And he taught in theyr synagoges and was commended of all men.
And he came to Nazareth where he was noursed and (as hys custome was) he went into the synagoge on the Saboth daye, and stode vp for to reade.
And there was delyuered vnto hym the boke of the prophete Esayas. And when he had opened the boke, he founde the place, where it was wryten.
The sprete of the Lord vpon me, because he hath annoynted me: to preache the Gospell to the pore he hath sent me: to heale the broken harted, to preach delyueraunce to the captyue, Ꟶ syght to the blynde: frely to set at liberte them that are brosed,
and to preach the acceptable yeare of the Lorde.
And he closed the boke, and gaue it agayne to the minyster, and sate downe. And the eyes of all them that were in the synagoge, were fastened on him.
And he began to saye vnto them: Thys daye is thys scripture fulfylled in your eares.
And all bare hym wytnes and wondred at the gracious wordes, which proceaded out of of hys mouth, and they sayde: Is not thys Iosephs sonne?
And he sayd vnto them: Ye wyll vtterly saye vnto me this prouerbe: Phisicion, heale thy selfe. Whatsoeuer we haue heard done in Capernaum, do the same here lykewise in thyne awne countre.
And he sayde: Uerely I saye vnto you: No prophete is accepted in hys awne countre.
But I tell you of a treuth: many weddowes were in Israel in the daies of Helias when heauen was shut thre yeares and syxe monethes, when greate famyshment was throughout all the lande,
and vnto no one of them was Helias sent, saue into Sarepta besydes Sidon, vnto a woman that was a wedowe.
And many lepers were in Israell in the tyme of Helyseus the prophete: Ꟶ none of them was clensed, sauyng Naaman the Syrian.
And all they in the synagoge (when they herde these thinges) were filled with wrath:
and rose vp, and thrust him out of the cyte, Ꟶ ledd him euen vnto the edge of the hyll (where on theyr cytie was bylte) the they myght cast him downe headlyng.
But he departed, and went hys waye euen thorow the myddes of them.
And came downe to Capernaum, (a cytie of Galile) and there taught them on the saboth dayes.
And they were astonyed at his doctryne: for his preaching was with power.
And in the synagoge there was a man which had an vncleane sprete of a deuyll, and cryed with a loude voyce,
sayenge: let me alone, what hast thou to do with vs, thou Iesus of Nazareth? Art thou come to destroye vs? I knowe the what thou art, euen the holy of God.
And Iesus rebuked him, sayinge: holde thy peace, and come out of hym. And whan the deuyll had throwen hym in the myddes, he came out of him, and hurt him not.
And feare cam on them all, and they spake among them selues, sayinge: what maner a thing is thys? For with auctorite Ꟶ power he commaundeth the foules spretes, and they come oute?
And the fame of hym was spred abrode thorowe out euery place of the countre rounde aboute.
And whan he was rysen vp Ꟶ come out of the synagoge, he entred into Simons house. And Simons mother in lawe was taken with a great feuer, and they made intercession to hym for her.
And he stode ouer her, and rebuked the feuer, and the feuer left her. And immedyatly she arose, and mynistred vnto them.
When the sonne was downe, all they that had syck, taken with diuers diseases, brought them vnto hym: and he layde hys handes on euery one of them, and healed them.
And deuyls also came out of many, crying Ꟶ saieng: thou art Christ the sonne of God. And he rebuked them, and suffered them not to speake: for they knewe that he was Christ.
As sone as it was daye, he departed, and went into a desert place, Ꟶ the people sought him, and came to hym, and kept hym that he shulde not departe from them.
And he sayde vnto them: I must preach the kyngdome of God to other cyties also: for therfore am I sent.
And he preached in the synagoges of Galile
It came to passe that (whan the people preassed vpon him, to heare the word of God) he stode by the lake of Genezareth:
and sawe two shyppes stande by the lake syde, but the fishermen were gone oute of them, and were wasshyng their nettes
And he entred into one of the shyppes, (which perteyned to Simon) and prayed him that he wold thrust oute a lytell from the lande. And he sate downe, and taught the people out of the shyp.
When he had lefte speakynge, he sayde vnto Simon: Launche out into the depe, and let slyppe youre nettes to make a draught.
And Simon answered, and sayd vnto hym: Master, we haue laboured all night, and haue taken nothynge. Neuerthesse, at thy commaundement I wyll lose forth the net.
And when they had this done, they in closed a greate multitude of fysshes. But theyr net brake,
Ꟶ they beckened to theyr felowes (which were in the other shyp) that they shulde come, and helpe them. And they came: and fylled both the shyppes, that they soncke agayne.
When Simon Peter sawe thys, he fell downe at Iesus knees, saying: Lord, go from me, for I am a sinful man.
For he was astonnyed Ꟶ all that were with hym, at the draught of fysshes which they had taken:
and so was also Iames and Iohn the sonnes of zebede, which were parteners with Symon. And Iesus sayde vnto Symon: feare not, from hence forth thou shalt catche men.
And they brought the shyppes to lande, and forsoke all, and folowed hym.
And it fortuned that whan he was in a certen cytie: behold, ther was a man ful of leprosy, Ꟶ when he had spyed Iesus, he fell flat on hys face, and besought him, saieng: Lord, yf thou wylt, thou canst make me clene.
And he stretched forth his hand, and touched him saying: I will, be thou clene. And immediatly the leprosy departed from hym.
And he charged him, that he shuld tell no man: but go (saith he) and shewe thy selfe to the preste, Ꟶ offer for thy clensyng accordyng, as Moses commaunded, for a wytnes vnto them.
But so moch the more went there a fame abrode of hym, and moch people came together to heare, Ꟶ to be healed of hym from theyr infirmityes.
And he kepte hym oute of the waye in the wildernesses, and gaue him selfe to prayer.
And it happened on a certen daye: that he taught: and ther sate the Pharises and doctours of lawe, which were come out of all the townes of Galile and Iewrye, and Ierusalem. And the power of the Lord was present, to heale them.
And behold, men brought in a bed, a man which was taken with a palsie: and they sought meanes to bring him in, and to laye him before hym.
And when they coulde not fynde on what syde they myghte bring hym in (because of the prease) they went vp on the toppe of the house Ꟶ let him downe thorowe the tylyng, beed and all, euen in the myddes before Iesus.
When he sawe theyr fayth he sayd vnto him: man, thy synnes be forgeuen the,
And the scribes and the pharises began to thincke, saying: What felowe is this, which speaketh blasphemye? who can forgeue synnes but God only?
But when Iesus perceaued their thoughtes, he answered, and said vnto them: What thyncke ye in your hertes?
Whether is easier to saye thy synnes be forgeuen the, or to saye: ryse vp, and walke.
But that ye maye knowe that the sonne of man hath power to forgeue synne on earth, he sayd vnto the sycke of the palsye: I saye vnto the: aryse, take vp thy bed, and go vnto thy house.
And immediatly he rose vp before them, and toke vp hys bedd, (wher on he laye) and departed to hys awne house, praysing God.
And they were all amased, and they gaue the glory vnto God. And were fylled with feare, saying: We haue sene straunge thynges to daye.
And after this, he went forth, and sawe a publican named Leuy, syttynge at the receyte of custome, Ꟶ he sayd vnto him: folowe me.
And he left all, and rose vp, and folowed him:
And Leuy made hym a greate feaste in his awne house. And ther was a great companye of publicans and of other that sate at meate, with them.
And the scribes and pharises murmured against his disciples, saying: Why do ye eate and drincke with publicans and sinners?
And Iesus answered, and sayd vnto them: They that are whole, nede not the phisicion: but they that are sycke.
I came not to call the ryghtewes, but synners to repentaunce.
And they sayde vnto hym: Why do the disciples of Iohn fast often, and praye, Ꟶ the disciples of the pharises also: but thyne eate and dryncke?
He sayde vnto them: Can ye make the chyldren of the wedding fast, whyle the brydgrome is with them?
The dayes wyll come, when the brydgrome also shalbe taken awaye from them: then shall they fast in those dayes.
He spake also vnto them a similitude. No man putteth a pece of a newe garment, into an old vesture, for yf he do, then breaketh he the newe, and the pece that was taken out of the newe, agreeth not with the olde.
And no man powreth newe wyne into olde bottels. For yf he do, the newe wyne wyll burst the bottels, and runne out it self, and the bottels shall perysh.
But newe wyne must be put into newe bottels, and both are preserued.
No man also that dryncketh old wyne, straight waye can awaye with newe: for he sayeth the olde is better.
It happened on an after pryncipall Saboth, that he went thorow the corne felde, and hys discyples plucked the eares of corne, and dyd eate, and rubbed them in theyr handes:
And certayn of the pharises said vnto them: Why do ye that, which is not lawfull to do on the Saboth dayes?
And Iesus answered them, and sayde: Haue ye not redde what Dauid dyd, when he him selfe was an hungred, and they which were with hym:
howe he went into the house of God, and dyd take and eate the shew bread, and gaue also to them that were with hym: which are not lawfull to eate, but for the prestes only?
And he sayde vnto them: The sonne of man is Lorde also of the Saboth daye.
And it fortuned in another Sabboth also, that he entred into the synagoge, Ꟶ taught. And ther was a man, whose right hande was dryed vp.
And the scribes Ꟶ pharises watched hym whether he wolde heale on the sabboth daye, that they myght fynde how to accuse him.
But he knewe their thoughtes, and sayd to the man which had the wythred hand: Ryse vp, and stande forth in the myddes. And he arose Ꟶ stode forth.
Then sayd Iesus vnto them: I wyll aske you a question: Whether is it lawfull on the sabboth dayes to do good, or to do euil? to saue ones life, or to destroye it?
And he behelde them al in compasse, and sayd vnto the man: Stretch forth thy hand. And he dyd so: Ꟶ hys hande was restored agayne as whole as the other.
And they were fylled with madnes, and communed together amonge them selues, what they myght do to Iesu.
And it fortuned in those dayes that he went out into a mountayne for to praye, Ꟶ contynued all nyght in prayer to God.
And as sone at it was daye, he called hys disciples, Ꟶ of them he chose .xij. whom also he called apostles.
Symon whom he also named Peter, Ꟶ Andrew hys brother, Iames and Iohn, Philip Ꟶ Bartholomew,
Mathew Ꟶ Thomas, Iames the sonne of Alpheus, and Symon which is called zelotes,
and Iudas Iames sonne, and Iudas Iscarioth, the same that was the traytour.
And he came downe with them, Ꟶ stode in the playne felde, and the company of hys disciples and a greate multitude of people (out of all Iewrye and Ierusalem, Ꟶ from the see coast of Tyre and Sidon) which came to heare him, and to be healed of their dyseases
and they that were vexed with foule spretes and they were healed.
And al the people preased to touche him, for ther went vertue oute of hym, and healed them all.
And he lyft vp his eyes vpon the disciples and sayd: Blessed be ye pore, for yours is the kingdome of God.
Blessed are ye that honger now, for ye shalbe satisfyed. Blessed are ye that wepe now, for ye shall laugh.
Blessed shall ye be, when men hate you, Ꟶ thrust you out of their company, and rayle on you, and abhorre your names as an euyll thing, for the sonne of mannes sake.
Reioyse ye in that daye, and be glad: for beholde, your rewarde is greate in heauen. For thus dyd theyr fathers vnto the prophetes.
But wo vnto you that are ryche: for ye haue your consolacion.
Wo vnto you that are full: for ye shall honger. Wo vnto you that now laugh: for ye shall wayle Ꟶ wepe.
Wo vnto you when all men prayse you: for so dyd theyr fathers to the false prophetes.
But I saye vnto you which heare. Loue youre enemyes. Do good to them which hate you.
Besse them that curse you. And praye for them which wrongfullye trouble you.
And vnto hym that smyteth the on the one cheke, offer also the other. And him that taketh awaye thy gowne, forbyd not to take thy cote also.
Geue to euery man that asketh of the. And of him that taketh a waye thy goodes, aske them not agayne.
And as ye wolde that men shuld do to you, do ye also to them lykewyse.
And yf ye loue them which loue you, what thanke haue ye? For synners also loue theyr louers.
And yf ye do good for them which do good for you, what thanke haue ye? For synners also do euen the same.
And yf ye lende to them of whom ye hope to receaue: what thanke haue ye? for synners also lende to synners, to receaue soch lyke agayne.
But loue ye youre enemyes, and do good, and lende, lokynge for nothynge agayne: and your reward shalbe greate, and ye shalbe the chyldren of the hyest: for he is kynde vnto the vnkynde and to the euyll.
Be ye therfore mercyfull, as your father also is mercyfull.
Iudge not, and ye shall not be iudged: Condempne not, and ye shall not be condempned. Forgeue, and ye shalbe forgeuen.
Geue, and it shalbe geuen vnto you: good measure and pressed downe, and shaken together and runnyng ouer, shall men geue into youre bosomes. For with the same measure that ye mete withall, shall other men mete to you agayne.
And he put forth a similitude vnto them Can the blynde leade the blynde? Do they not both fall into the dyche?
The disciple is not aboue his master. Euery man shalbe perfecte, euen as hys master is.
Why seest thou a moate in thy brothers eye, but consyderest not the beame that is in thyne awne eye?
Ether howe cannest thou saye to thy brother. Brother, let me pull out the moate that is in thyne eye, when thou seest not the beame that is in thyne awne eye. Thou ypocrite cast out the beame out of thyne awne eye fyrst, Ꟶ then shalt thou se perfectly, to pull oute the moate that is in thy brothers eye.
For it is not a good tree, that bringeth forth euyll frute: nether is that an euyll tree, that bringeth forth good frute.
For euery tre is knowen by hys frute. For of thornes do not men gather fygges, nor of busshes gather they grapes.
A good man out of the good treasure of hys herte, bryngeth forth that which is good. And an euyll man, out of the euyll treasure of his hert, bringeth forth that which is euyll. For of the aboundance of the hert, hys mouth speaketh.
Why call ye me Lord Lord, and do not as I byd you:
whosouer commeth to me Ꟶ heareth my sayinges, and doth the same, I wyl shewe you to whom he is like.
He is lyke a man which bylt an house, and dygged depe, and layde the foundacion on a rock. When the waters arose, the flud bet vpon that house, Ꟶ coulde not moue it. For it was grounded vpon a rocke.
But he that heareth and doth not, is lyke a man that without foundacyon bylt an house vpon the earth, against which the floud dyd beat: and it fell immediatly. And the fal of that house was greate.
When he had ended all hys saienges in the audience of the people, he entred into Capernaum.
And a certen Centurions seruaunt which was deare vnto hym laye syck, and was in parell of death.
And whan he heard of Iesu, he sent vnto him the elders of the Iewes, besechinge him that he wold come, Ꟶ heale his seruaunte.
And whan they came to Iesus, they besought him instantly, saying: He is worthy that thou shuldest do this for hym.
For he loueth oure nacion, and hath buylt vs a synagoge.
And Iesus went with them. And whan he was now, not farre from the house, the Centurion sent frendes to hym, sayinge vnto hym: Lorde, trouble not thy self: for I am not worthy: that thou shuldest enter vnder my roffe.
Wherfore I thought not my self worthy to come vnto the: but saye thou the word, Ꟶ my seruaunt shalbe whole.
For I also am a man set vnder power, and haue vnder me soudiers, and I saye vnto one go, and he goeth, Ꟶ to another, come, Ꟶ he cometh: and to my seruaunt, do this, Ꟶ he doth it.
When Iesus heard thys, he meruayled at him, and turned hym about, and sayde to the people that folowed him: I saye vnto you, I haue not founde so great faith, no, not in Israel.
And they that were sent, turned backe home agayne and founde the seruaunt whole that had bene sycke.
And it fortuned after this, that he went into a cytie which is called Naim, Ꟶ many of his disciples went with him, and moch people.
When he came nye to the gate of the cytie: behold, ther was a deed man caryed out, which was the onely sonne of his mother, Ꟶ she was a wedowe, Ꟶ moch people of the cytie was with her.
And when the Lord sawe her, he had compassion on her, and sayde vnto her: wepe not.
And he came nye, Ꟶ touched the coffyn: and they that bare him stode styl. And he sayde: Yonge man, I saye vnto the, aryse.
And he that was deed, sat vp, Ꟶ began to speake. And he delyuered him to his mother.
And ther came a feare on them al. And they gaue the glory vnto God, sayinge: A great prophete is rysen vp among vs, Ꟶ God hath visited his people.
And thys rumor of him went forth throughout al Iury, and thorow out all the regions which lye rounde about.
And the disciples of Iohn shewed him of all these thinges.
And Iohn called vnto him two of his disciples, Ꟶ sent them to Iesus, saying: Art thou he that shuld come: or shall we looke for another?
When the men were come vnto him, they sayde: Iohn baptiste sent vs vnto the, saying: Art thou he that shulde come? or shall we wayte for another?
And in that same houre he cured many of their infyrmites and plages, and of euyll spretes, and vnto many that were blynd he gaue sight.
And he answered, Ꟶ sayd vnto them: Go your waye and bring worde agayne to Iohn, what thinges ye haue sene Ꟶ heard, how that the blynde se, the halt go, the lepers are clensed, the deaff heare, the dead ryse agayne: to the poore is the glad tydinges preached,
and happy is he that is not offended at me.
And when the messengers of Iohn were departed, he began to speake vnto the people concerninge Iohn. What went ye out into the wildernes for to se? a rede shaken wt the wind?
But what went ye out for to se? A man clothed in soft rayment? Behold, they which are gorgeously apparelled, and lyue delicatly, are in kynges courtes.
But what wente ye forth to se? A prophete? Yee, I saye to you, Ꟶ more then a prophet.
This is he, of whom it is writen: Beholde, I sende myne angell before thy face which shall prepare thy waye before the.
For I saye vnto you, amonge wemens children, is ther not a greater prophete then Iohn baptiste. Neuerthelesse, he tha is lesse, in the kingdom of God is greater then he.
And all the people, and the publicans that heard him, iustified God, and were baptised with the baptyme of Iohn.
But the pharises and lawers despised the councell of God agaynst them selues, and were not baptised of hym.
And the Lorde sayd: wherunto shall I lyken the men of this generacion: and what thing are they like?
They are like vnto children sytting in the market place, Ꟶ cryeng one to another, and saying: We haue pyped vnto you, Ꟶ ye haue not daunsed: we haue mourned to you, and ye haue not wepte.
For Iohn baptist came, nether eatyng bread, ner drinkynge wyne, and ye saye: he hath the deuyll.
The sonne of man is come, and eateth Ꟶ drincketh, Ꟶ ye saye: behold a gloutonous man, and an vnmeasurable dryncker of wyne, a frend of publicans and synners.
And wysdom is iustifyed of all her children.
And one of the pharises desired hym that he wolde eate with hym. And he went into the pharises house, and sat downe to meate.
And behold a woman in that cytie (which was a synner) as sone as she knewe that Iesus sat at meat in the pharises house, she brought an alablaster boxe of oyntment,
Ꟶ stode at his fete behinde him wepyng, Ꟶ beganne to wasshe hys fete wt teares, and dyd wype them with the heares of her head, Ꟶ kyssed his fete, Ꟶ anoynted them with the oyntment.
When the pharise (which had bidden him) sawe, he spake within hym selfe, sayinge: If thys man were a prophete, he wolde surely knowe who, and what maner of woman thys is that touched hym, for she is a synner.
And Iesus answered, and sayd vnto him: Simon, I haue some what to saye vnto the. And he sayd: master, saye on.
There was a certayne lender which had two detters, the one ought fyue hundred pence, and the other fyfty.
When they had nothynge to paye, he forgaue them both. Tell me therfore, which of them wyll loue hym most?
Simon answered and sayd: I suppose that he to whom he forgaue most. And he sayde vnto hym: Thou hast truly iudged.
And he turned to the woman, Ꟶ sayd vnto Simon: Seest thou this woman. I entred into thy house, thou gauest me no water for my fete: but she hath wesshed my fete with teares, and wyped them with the heares of her head.
Thou gauest me no kysse: but she, sence the tyme I came in, hath not ceased to kysse my fete.
Myne head wt oyle thou didest not anoynte: but she hath anoynted my fete with oyntment.
Wherfore, I saye vnto the: many synnes are forgeuen her, for she loued moch. To whom lesse is forgeuen, the same doeth lesse loue.
And he sayde vnto her: thy synnes are forgeuen the.
And they that sate at meat wt him, beganne to saye within them selues. Who is this which forgeueth synnes also?
And he sayd to the woman: Thy faith hath saued the. Go in peace.
And it fortuned afterwarde, that he hym selfe also wente through oute cyties and townes: preachinge, and shewynge the kyngdome of God, and the twelue with hym.
And also certayne women, which were healed of euell spretes, and infirmytes. Mary which is called Magdalen (oute of whom wente seuen deuyls)
and Ioanna the wyfe of Chusa. Herodes stewarde, and Susanna, and many other, which minystred vnto hym of theyr substaunce.
When moch people were gathered together, and were come to him out of all cytes, he spake by a similytude.
The sower wente out to sowe hys seede: and as he sowed, some fell by the waye syde, Ꟶ it was troden downe, and the foules of the ayre deuoured it vp.
And some fell on stone, and as sone as it was spronge vp, it withred awaye because it lacked moystnes.
And some fell amonge thornes, and the thornes sprange vp with it, and choked it.
And some fel on good grounde, and sprange vp, and bare frute, an hundred folde. And as he sayd these thinges, he cryed: He that hath eares to heare, let hym heare.
And his disciples asked hym sayenge: what maner of simylytude is thys?
And he sayd: vnto you is it geuen to knowe the secretes of the kingdome of God: but to other by parables, that when they se, they shuld not se: Ꟶ when they heare, they shuld not vnderstande.
The parable is this. The seed is the worde of God.
Those that are besyde the waye, are they that heare, then commeth the deuyll, and taketh a waye the worde out of their hertes, lest they shulde beleue and be saued.
They on the stones, are they which when they heare, receaue the word with ioye, and these haue no rotes: which for a whyle beleue, and in tyme of temptacyon go awaye.
And that which fell amonge thornes, are they which whan they haue heard, go forth, and are choked with cares and ryches, and volupteous lyuinge, and brynge forth no frute.
That which fell in the good grounde, are they, which with a pure and good herte heare the worde, and kepe it, and brynge forth frute thorow pacyence.
No man, whan he lyghteth a candell, couereth it with a vessel, or putteth it vnder a table, but setteth it on a candelsticke, that they which enter in, maye se the light.
Nothing is in secret, that shal not come abrode. Nether any thynge hydd, that shall not be knowen, and come to lyghte.
Take hede therfore, howe ye heare. For whosoeuer hath, to hym shalbe geuen: And whosoeuer hath not, from him shalbe taken: euen that same which he supposeth that he hath.
Then came to him his mother Ꟶ his brethren, and coulde not come at him for prease
And it was tolde hym, and sayde: Thy mother and thy brethren stande without, and wold se the.
He answered and said vnto them: my mother and my brethren are these, which heare the worde of God, and do it.
And it chaunsed on a certayne daye, that he went into a shyp, and his disciples also, Ꟶ he sayde vnto them: Let vs go ouer vnto the other side of the lake. And they launched forth
But as they sayled, he fell a slepe and there arose a storme of wynde in the lake, Ꟶ they were fylled wt water, and were in ieopardy.
And they came to hym, and awoke hym saying: Master master, we are loost. Then he arose, and rebuked the wynde and the tempest of water, and they ceased, and it wexed calme.
And he sayde vnto them: where is youre fayth? They feared, and wondred amonge them selues, saying: what (thynke ye) is thys? for he commaundeth both the windes Ꟶ water, and they obey hym?
And they sayled vnto the region of the Gederenites, which is ouer agaynst Galile.
And whan he went out to land, ther met him out of the cytie a certayne man, which had a deuyll longe tyme, and ware no clothes, nether abode in eny house: but in graues.
When he sawe Iesus Ꟶ had cryed, he fell downe before him, Ꟶ wt a loude voyce sayde. What haue I to do with the Iesus, thou sonne of the God moost hyest? I beseche the torment me not:
for he commaunded the foule sprete to come oute of the man. For ofte tymes he had caught hym, and he was bounde with chaynes, and kepte with fetters: and he brake the bondes, and was caryed of the fende into wyldernes.
And Iesus asked him saieng: What is thy name? And he sayde: Legion, because many deuyls were entred into hym.
And they besought hym that he wolde not commaunde them, to go out into the depe.
And there was there, an heard of many swyne, feding on an hyll: and they besought him, that he wold suffre them to enter into them. And he suffred them.
Then went the deuels out of the man, Ꟶ entred into the swyne. And the heard ranne heedlyng with violence into the lake, and were choked.
When the herdmen sawe what had chaunsed, they fled, and tolde it in the cytie Ꟶ in the villages.
And they came out to se what was done: and came to Iesus, Ꟶ founde the man (out of whom the deuyls were departed) sittyng at the fete of Iesus: clothed, Ꟶ in his right mynde, and they were afrayed.
They also which sawe it, tolde them by what meanes he (that was possessed of the deuyl) was healed.
And all the multitude of the Gederenites, besought him, that he wold departe from them: for they were taken with great feare. And he gate him vp into the shyp, and returned backe agayne.
Then the man (out of whom the deuyls were departed) besought hym that he myght be with hym. But Iesus sent him awaye, sayinge:
Go home agayne to thyne awne house, and shewe what thinges soeuer God hath done for the. And he went his waye, and preached thorow out all the cytie, what thinges soeuer Iesus had done vnto him.
And it fortuned that when Iesus was come agayne, the people receaued him. For they all wayted for him.
And beholde, there came a man named Iairus (Ꟶ he was a ruler of the synagoge) Ꟶ he fell downe at Iesus fete praying him, that he wold come into his house,
for he had but one daughter onely, vpon a .xij. yeare of age, and she laye a dying. But as he went, the people thronged hym.
And a woman, hauing an issue of bloud .xij. yeres (which had spent all her substaunce vpon phisicions, nether coulde be holpen of eny)
came behynd him, Ꟶ touched the hem of his rayment: Ꟶ immediatly her issue of bloud staunched.
And Iesus sayd: who is it that touched me? When euery man denyed, Peter (and they that were wt hym) sayd: Master, the people thrust the Ꟶ vexe the, Ꟶ sayest thou who touched me?
And Iesus sayd: Some body hath touched me. For I perceaue, that vertue is gone out of me.
When the woman sawe that she was not hyd, she came trymbling, and fell at hys fete, and tolde hym before all the people, for what cause she had touched him, and how she was healed immediatly.
And he sayd vnto her: Daughter, be of good comforte. Thy fayth hath saued the, go in peace.
Whyle he yet spake, ther came one from the rulers of the synagoges house, which sayd to hym: thy daughter is deed, desease not the Master.
But when Iesus hearde that worde, he answered the father of the damosell. Feare not, beleue onely, and she shalbe made whole.
And when he came to the house, he suffred no man to go in with hym, saue Peter, Iames, and Iohn, and the father and the mother of the mayden.
Euery body weept, and sorowed for her. And he said: Wepe not. The damosel is not deed, but slepeth.
And they laught hym to scorne, knowyng that she was deed.
And he thrust them all out, and caught her by the hand, and cryed, sayinge: Mayde, aryse.
And her sprete came agayne, and she rose straight waye. And he commaunded to geue her meat.
And the father Ꟶ the mother of her were astonyed. But he warned them, that they shuld tell no man what was done.
Iesus called the twelue together, and gaue them power, and auctorite ouer all deuyls, and that they might heale diseases.
And he sent them to preache the kyngdome of God, and to heale the syck.
And he sayd vnto them: Take nothing to your iourney: nether staffe, nor scrype, nether bread, nether money, nether haue two coates.
And whatsoeuer house ye enter into, there abyde, and thence departe.
And whosoeuer wyll not receaue you, when ye go out of the citie, shake of the very dust from youre fete, for a testimonye agaynst them.
And they departed and went thorow the tounes, preaching the gospell and healinge euery where.
And Herode the Tetrarch heard of al that was done by him, Ꟶ he douted, because that it was sayde of some, that Iohn was rysen agayne from death:
and of some, that Helias had appeared, and of some, that one of the olde prophetes was rysen agayne.
And Herode sayde: Iohn haue I beheaded: but who is this of whom I heare such thinges. And he desyred to se him.
And the apostles returned: Ꟶ tolde him all that they had done. And he toke them, Ꟶ went asyde into a solitary place nye vnto the cytie that is called Bethsaida.
Which whan the people knewe, they folowed him. And he receaued them, Ꟶ spake vnto them of the kyngdome of God, Ꟶ healed them that had nede to be healed.
And when the daye beganne to weare awaye, then came the .xij. and sayd vnto him: send the people awaye, that they maye go into the townes and next villages Ꟶ lodge, and get meate, for we are here in a place of wyldernes.
But he sayd vnto them: Geue ye them to eate. And they sayd: we haue no mo but .v. loaues and two fysshes, except we shulde go and bye meate for all this people.
And they were about a .v.M. men. And he sayd to his disciples: Cause them to sit downe by fyfties in a companye.
And they dyd so, and made them al to syt downe.
And he toke the fyue loaues and the two fisshes, and loked vp to heauen: and blessed them, and brake, and gaue to the disciples, to seet before the people.
And they all dyd eat, Ꟶ were satisfyed. And there was taken vp of that remayned to them, twelue baskettes full of broken meate.
And it fortuned as he was alone praying, his disciples were with him, and he asked them sayeng: who saye the people that I am?
They answered, and sayd: Iohn Baptist: Some saye Helias, and some saye that one of the olde prophetes is rysen.
He sayd vnto them: But who saye ye that I am? Simon Peter answered, Ꟶ sayde: thou art the Christ of God.
And he warned and commaunded them that they shuld tell no man that thing,
saying: the sonne of man must suffre many thinges, and be reproued of the elders, and of the hye prestes, and scribes, and be slayne, and ryse agayne the thyrd daye.
And he sayd to them all, yf eny man will come after me, let him denye him self, Ꟶ take vp his crosse dayly, Ꟶ folowe me.
For whosoeuer wyll saue hys lyfe shall lose it. But whosoeuer doth lose his lyfe for my sake, the same shall saue it.
For what auauntageth it a man, yf he wynne the whole worlde, and lose him selfe, or runne in dammmage of hym selfe?
For whoso is ashamed of me, and of my wordes, of him shall the sonne of man be ashamed, when he commeth in his maiestye, and in the maiestye of his father, and of the holy angels.
I tell you of a treuth: There be some standinge here, which shall not tast of death, tyll they se the kyngdome of God.
And it fortuned that about an .viij. dayes after these saienges, he toke Peter and Iohn and Iames, Ꟶ went vp into a mountayne to praye.
And as he prayed, the fassyon of hys countenaunce was chaunged, Ꟶ his garment was whyte, Ꟶ shone.
And behold, there talked with him two men which were Moses and Helias,
that appeared in the maiesty, Ꟶ spake of his departyng, which be shulde ende at Ierusalem.
But Peter and they that were with him, were heuy with slepe. And when they awoke, they sawe his maiesty, and two men standinge with him.
And it chaunsed as they departed from him, Peter sayde vnto Iesus: Master, it is good beynge here for vs. Let vs make also thre tabernacles, one for the, and one for Moses, and one for Helias (and wist not what he sayd.)
While he thus spake, there came a cloude and ouershadowed them, and they feared when they were come into the cloude.
And there came a voyce out of the cloude saying: This is my deare sonne, heare him.
And as soone as the voyce was past, Iesus was founde alone. And they kept it cloose: Ꟶ tolde no man in those dayes, any of those thinges which they had sene.
And it chaunsed that on the nexte daye (as they came downe from the hyll) moche people met him.
And beholde, a man of the company cried oute, sayenge: Master, I beseche the behold my sonne, for he is all that I haue:
and se, a sprete taketh him, and sodenly he cryeth, and tereth hym, that he fometh agayne, and with moch payne departeth from him, when he hath rent him,
and I besought thy disciples to cast him out, Ꟶ they coulde not,
Iesus answered and sayde: O faythles, and croked nacion, howe longe shall I be with you? Ꟶ shal suffre you? Bring thy sonne hither.
As he was yet a comming, the fende rent him, and tare him. And Iesus rebuked the vncleane sprete, and healed the chyld, and deliuered him to his father.
And they were all amased at the myghtye power of God. But whyle they wondered euery one at all thinges which he dyd, he sayde vnto hys disciples:
Lett these sayinges sinke downe into your eares. For it will come to passe: that the sonne of man shalbe deliuered into the handes of men.
But they wist not what the worde meant, and it was hyd from them, that they vnderstode it not. And they feared to aske him of that sayinge.
And there entred a thought among them which of them shulde be the greatest.
When Iesus perceaued the thought of their hertes he toke a chyld, and set him hard by hym,
Ꟶ sayd vnto them: Whosoeuer receaueth this child in my name, receaueth me. And whosoeuer receaueth me, receaueth him that sent me. For he that is lest among you all, the same shalbe greate.
And Iohn answered, and sayde: Master. we sawe one castinge oute deuyls in thy name, and we forbade him, because he foloweth not with vs.
And Iesus sayd vnto him: forbyd ye him not. For he that is not agaynst vs, is with vs.
And it fortuned when the tyme was come that he shulde be receaued vp, he set hys face to go to Ierusalem,
and sent messengers before him. And they went and entred into a cytie of the Samaritans, to make ready for him.
And they wold not receaue him, because his face was as though he wold go to Ierusalem.
When his disciples, Iames Ꟶ Iohn sawe this, they sayde: Lorde, wilt thou that we commaunde fyre to come downe from heauen and consume them, euen as Helias dyd?
Iesus turned about, and rebuked them, saying: ye wote not what maner spret ye are of.
For the sonne of man is not come to destroye mennes lyues, but to saue them. And they went to another towne.
And it chaunsed that as they were walking in the waye, a certayne man sayd vnto him. I wyll folowe the whithersoeuer thou goo.
Iesus sayde vnto him: foxes haue holes, and byrdes of the ayer haue nestes: but the sonne of man hath not where to laye his head.
And he sayde vnto another: folowe me. And the same sayde: Lorde, suffre me first to go and bury my father.
Iesus sayde vnto him: Let the deed bury their deed: but go thou, and preach the kyngdome of God.
And an other sayde: Lorde, I wyll folowe the: but let me first go byd them fare well, which are at home at my house.
Iesus sayde vnto hym: No man that putteth hys handes to the plowe, and loketh backe, is apte to the kyngdome of God.
After these thynges, the Lorde appoynted other .lxx. also, and sent them two and two before hym into euery cytie Ꟶ place, whyther he him selfe wolde come.
Therfore sayd he vnto them: the haruest is great, but the labourers are fewe. Praye ye therfore the lord of the haruest, to sende forth labourers into his haruest.
Go your wayes: behold, I sende you forth as lambes among wolues.
Beare no wallet, nether scryp, nor shoes, Ꟶ salute no man by the waye.
Into whatsoeuer house ye enter, fyrst saye: Peace be to thys house.
And yf the sonne of peace be there, your peace shall rest vpon him: yf not, it shall turne to you agayne.
And in the same house tary styll, eatyng and drinckyng soch as they geue: For the labourer is worthy of hys rewarde. Go not from house to house,
Ꟶ into whatsoeuer cytie ye entre, Ꟶ they receaue you, eate soch thynges as are set before you,
and heale the sicke that are therin, and saye vnto them: the kingdome of God is come nye vpon yo
But into whatsoeuer citie ye enter, Ꟶ they receaue you not, go your wayes out into the stretes of the same, Ꟶ saye:
euen the very dust of youre cytie (which cleaueth on vs) do we wype of agaynst you: Not withstanding, be ye sure of thys, that the kyngdome of God was come nye vpon you.
I saye vnto you: that it shalbe easier in that daye for zodome, then for that cytie.
Wo vnto the Chorazin: wo vnto the Bethsaida. For yf the miracles had bene done in Tyre and Sidon, which haue bene done in you, they had (a greate whyle ago) repented of theyr synnes, syttyng in heercloth and asshes.
Neuerthelesse, it shalbe easier for Tyre and Sidon, at the iudgement, then for you.
And thou Capernaum (which art exalted to heauen) shalt be thrust downe to hell.
He that heareth you, heareth me: and he that despyseth you, despyseth me: and he that despyseth me; despyseth him that sent me.
And the .lxx. turned agayne wt ioye, sayeng: Lorde, euen the very deuels are subdued to vs thorow thy name.
And he sayd vnto them: I sawe Satan (as it had bene lightening) falling downe from heauen.
Behold, I geue vnto you power, to treade on serpentes, and scorpions, and ouer all maner power of the enemy, and nothing shull hurte you.
Neuertheles, in this reioyse not, that the spretes are subdued vnto you: but reioyse, that youre names are wryten in heauen.
That same houre reioysed Iesus in ghost, and sayd: I thanke the, O father. Lorde of heauen and earth, that thou hast hyd these thinges from the wyse and prudent, and hast opened them vnto babes. Euen so father, for so pleased it the.
All thinges are geuen me of my father. No man knoweth who the sonne is, but the father: and who the father is, but the sonne, Ꟶ he to whom the sonne wyll shewe hym.
And he turned to his disciples, and sayde secretly: Happy are the eyes, which se the thinges that ye se.
For I tell you, that many prophetes and kinges haue desired to se those thinges which ye se, and haue not sene them: and to heare those thynges which ye heare, and haue not hearde them.
And behold a certayne lawyer stode vp, Ꟶ tempted him, saying. Master, what shall I do, to inheret eternall lyfe?
He sayde vnto him: What is written in the lawe? How redest thou?
And he answered and sayde: loue the Lorde thy God, with all thy hert, Ꟶ with all thy soule, Ꟶ with all thy strength, Ꟶ with all thy mynde: and thy neyghbour as thy selfe.
And he sayde vnto him: Thou hast answered right. This do, and thou shalt lyue.
But he wyllinge to iustifie him selfe, sayde vnto Iesus: And who is my neyghbour?
Iesus answered, Ꟶ sayde, A certayne man descended from Hierusalem to Hierico, Ꟶ fell among theues, which robbed him of his rayment Ꟶ wounded him, and departed, leuynge him halfe deed.
And it chaunced, that ther came downe a certayne Preste that same waye, Ꟶ when he sawe him, he passed by.
And lyke wyse a Leuite, when he went nye to the place, came and loked on him, Ꟶ passed by.
But a certayne Samaritane, as he iorneyed, came vnto hym: and when he sawe him, he had compassion on him
Ꟶ went to, and bounde vp his woundes, Ꟶ poured in oyle Ꟶ wyne, and set him on his awne beaste, and brought him to a commen ynne, and made prouision for him.
And on the morow, when he departed, he toke out .ij. pence, Ꟶ gaue them to the host, Ꟶ sayd vnto him. Take cure of him Ꟶ whatsoeuer thou spendest moare, when I come agayne I will recompence the.
Which now of these thre thynkest thou, was neyghbour vnto him that fell among the theues?
And he sayd: he that shewed mercy on him. Then sayde Iesus vnto him: Go, and do thou lyke wyse.
It fortuned that as they went, he entred into a certayne towne. And a certayne woman named Martha receaued him into her house.
And this woman had a syster called Mary, which also sate at Iesus fete, Ꟶ heard his worde.
But Martha was combred aboute moch seruynge, Ꟶ stode Ꟶ sayde: lorde, doest thou not care, that my syster hath left me to serue alone? Byd her therfore, that she helpe me.
And Iesus answered, Ꟶ sayde vnto her: Martha, Martha, thou art carefull, Ꟶ troubled about many thinges:
verely one is nedefull. Mary hath chosen the good parte, which shall not be taken awaye from her.
And it fortuned as he was prayinge in a certayne place: when he ceased, one of his disciples sayde vnto hym: Lorde, teache vs to praye, as Iohn also taught hys disciples.
And he sayde vnto them: when ye praye, saye. O oure father which art in heauen, halowed be thy name. Thy kyngdome come. Thy will be fulfilled, euen in erth also as it is in heauen.
Oure dayly breed geue vs this daye.
And forgeue vs our synnes: For euen we forgeue euery man that treapaseth vs. And Leade vs not into temptacion But deliuer vs from euyll.
And he sayd vnto them: yf any of you shall haue a frend, Ꟶ shall go to him at mydnight, and saye vnto him, frende: lende me thre loaues,
for a frende of myne is come out of the waye to me, and I haue nothynge to set before him,
and he within answere, and saye: trouble me not, the dore is now shut, and my chyldren are with me in the chamber, I cannot ryse and geue the.
I saye vnto you, though he wyll not arise and geue him, because he is his frende: yet because of his importunite he will rise, and geue him as many as he nedeth.
And I saye vnto you: aske, and it shalbe geuen you. Seke, and ye shall fynde: Knocke, and it shalbe opened vnto you.
For euery one that asketh, receaueth: and he that seketh, fyndeth: Ꟶ to him that knocketh, shall it be opened.
Yf the sonne shall aske breed of eny of you that is a father, wyll he geue him a stone? Or yf he aske fishe, wyll he for fysshe geue him a serpent?
Or yf he aske an egge, will he offer him a scorpion?
Yf ye then beyng euyll, can geue good giftes vnto youre children, how moch moare shall your father of heauen geue the holy sprete to them, that desyre it of him?
And he was castinge out a deuyll, and the same was domme. And when he had cast out the deuill, the domme spake, Ꟶ the people wondred.
But some of them sayde: he casteth out deuyls thorowe Beelzebub the chefe of the deuyls.
And other tempted him and requyred of him a signe from heauen.
But he knowing their thoughtes, sayd vnto them: Euery kyngdome deuided agaynst it selfe, is desolate: and one house doth fall vpon another.
Yf Satan also, be deuyded agaynst him selfe, how shall his kyngdome endure? Because ye saye, that I cast out deuyls thorow Beelzebub.
If I, by the helpe of Beelzebub cast out deuyls, by whose helpe do youre chyldren cast them out. Therfore shall they be your iudges.
But yf I, with the fynger of God cast out deuyls, no doute the kyngdome of God is come vpon you.
When a stronge man armed watcheth his house: the thinges that he possesseth are in peace.
But when a stronger then he commeth vpon him, and ouercommeth him, he taketh from him all his harnes (wherin he trusted) and deuideth his goodes.
He that is not with me, is against me. And he that gathereth not with me, scattereth abrode.
When the vnclene spryte is gone out of a man, he walketh through drie places, sekynge reest. And when he fyndeth none, he sayeth: I will returne agayne vnto my houses, whence I came out.
And when he commeth, he fyndeth it swept and garnisshed.
Then goeth he and taketh to him seuen other spretes worse then him selfe: and they enter in, Ꟶ dwell there. And the ende of that man, is worse then the begynnynge.
And it fortuned that as he spake these thynges, a certayne woman of the company lyfte vp her voyce, and sayd vnto him. Happy is the wombe that bare the, and the pappes which gaue the sucke.
But he sayde: Yee, happy are they that heare the worde of God and kepe it.
When the people were gathered thicke together, he began to saye. This is an euyll nacion. they seke a sygne, and ther shall no sygne be geuen them, but the sygne of Ionas the prophet.
For as Ionas was a sygne to the Niniuytes, so shall also the sonne of man be to thys nacion.
The quene of the south shall ryse at the iudgement, with the men of this nacion, and condempne them: for she came from the vttemost partes of the erth, to heare the wisdome of Salomon. And beholde a greater then Salomon is here.
The men of Niniue shall ryse at the iudgement with this nacyon: and shall condempne them: for they were brought to repentaunce by the preachynge of Ionas. And beholde, a greater then Ionas is here.
No man lyghteth a candell, and putteth it in a preuy place, nether vnder a busshell: but on a candelstycke, that they which come in, maye se the light.
The lyght of the body is the eye. Therfore, when thyne eye is syngle, all thy body also shalbe full of lyght. But yf thyne eye be euill, thy body also shalbe full of darknes,
Take hede therfore, that the lyght which is in the, be not darcknes.
Yf all thy body therfore be cleare, hauynge no parte darcke: then shal it all be full of light, euen as when a candell doeth lyght the with bryghtnes.
And as he spake, a certayne Pharyse besought him, to dyne with him, and Iesus went in, and sate doune to meate.
When the Pharyse sawe it, he marueyled, that he had not fyrst wesshed before dyner.
And the Lorde sayde vnto him: Now do ye Pharises, make clene the out syde of the cup, and the platter: but youre inwarde parte is full of rauenynge and wyckednes.
Ye fooles, dyd not he (that made that which is without) make that which is within also?
Neuerthelesse, geue almose of that ye haue, and behold, all thinges are cleane vnto you.
But wo vnto you Pharises, for ye tythe mynt and rewe, and all manner erbes, and passe ouer iudgement and the loue of God. These ought ye to haue done, and yet not to leaue the other vndone.
Wo vnto you Pharises: for ye loue the vppermost seates in the sinagoges, and gretinges in the market.
Wo vnto you scrybes and Pharises, ye ypocrites, for ye are as graues which appeare not, and the men that walke ouer them, are not ware of them.
Then answered one of the lawears, and sayde vnto him: Master, thus saying thou puttest vs to rebuke also.
And he sayde: wo vnto you also ye lawers: for ye lade men with burthens which they be not not able to beare: and ye youre selues touche not the packes with one of youre fyngers.
Wo vnto you: ye buylde the sepulchres of the Prophetes, and youre fathers kylled them,
truly ye beare witnes, that ye alowe the dedes of youre fathers: for they kylled them, and ye buylde their sepulchres.
Therfore sayde the wisdome of God, I will send them Prophetes and Apostles and some of them they shall slaye and persecute:
that the bloude of all Prophetes (which is shed from the begynninge of the worlde) maye be required of this generacion,
from the bloude of Abell, vnto the bloud of zachary, which perished betwene the aulter and the temple. Uerely I saye vnto you: it shalbe required of this nacion.
Wo vnto you lawears: for ye haue taken awaye the keye of knowledge, ye entred not in youre selues, and them that came in, ye forbad.
When he thus spake vnto them, the lawears and the Pharises began to wexe busye aboute him, and capciously to aske him many thinges,
layinge wayte for him, and sekynge to catche some thinge of his mouth, wherby they might accuse him.
As ther gathered together an innumerable multitude of people (in so moche that they trood one another) he began to saye vnto his disciples: fyrst of all be warre of the leuen of the Pharises which is ypocrisy.
For ther is nothynge couered, that shall not be vncouered: nether hyd, that shall not be knowen.
For what thinges ye haue spoken in darknes, shalbe hearde in the light. And that which ye haue spoken into the eare, euen in secrete places, shalbe preached on the toppe of the houses.
I saye vnto you my frendes: be not afrayde of them that kyll the body, and after that haue no moare, that they can do.
But I will shewe you, whom ye shall feare. Feare him, which after he hath kylled, hath power to cast into hell. Yee, I saye vnto you: feare him.
Are not fyue sparowes bought for two farthinges? And not one of them is forgoten of God.
Also, euen the very heeres of youre heed are all nombred. Feare not therfore: ye are moare of value then many sparowes.
I saye vnto you euery one: whosoeuer confesseth me before men, him shal the sonne of man knowledge also before the angels of God
And he that denyeth me before men, shalbe denied before the angels of God.
And whosoeuer speaketh a worde agaynst the sonne of man, it shalbe forgeuen him. But vnto him that blasphemeth the holy goost, it shall not be forgeuen.
When they bringe you vnto the sinagoges, and vnto the rulers and officers, take ye no thought, how or what thinge ye shall answer, or what ye shall speake.
For the holy goost shall teache you in the same houre, what ye ought to saye.
One of the company sayde vnto him: Master, speake to my brother, that he deuide the enheritaunce with me.
And he sayde vnto him: Man, who made me a iudge or a deuider, ouer you?
And he sayde vnto them: take hede, and be warre of couetousnes. For no mannes lyfe standeth in the aboundance of the thinges which he possesseth.
And he put forth a simylytude vnto them sayinge: The grounde of a certaine riche man brought forth plentifull frutes,
and he thought within him selfe sayinge: what shall I do? because I haue no roume where to bestowe my frutes?
And he sayd: This will I do. I will destroye my barnes, and bylde greater, and therin will I gather all my goodes that are growen vnto me:
and I will saye to my soule: Soule thou hast moche goodes layd vp in stoore for many yeares, take thyne ease: eate, drincke, be mery.
But God sayd vnto him. Thou fole, this nyght will they fetche awaye thy soule agayne from the. Then whose shall those thynges be, which thou hast prouided?
So is it with him that gathereth riches to him selfe, and is not riche towarde God.
And he spake vnto his disciples: Therfore I saye vnto you. Take no thought for youre lyfe, what ye shall eate: nether for the body, what ye shall put on.
The life is moare then meate, and the body is moare then rayment.
Consider the rauens, for they nether sowe nor repe, which nether haue stoore house ner barne, and God fedeth them. How moche are ye better then fethered foules?
Which of you (with his takinge thought) can adde to his stature one cubit?
If ye then be not able to do that thinge which is least: why take ye thought for the remnaunt?
Consider the lylies how they growe: They laboure not: they spyn not: and yet I saye vnto you, that Salomon in all his royalte, was not clothed lyke one of these.
If God so clothe the grasse (which is to daye in the felde, and to morow is cast into the fornace) how moche more wyll he cloth you, O ye of lytle fayth?
And aske not ye what ye shall eate, or what ye shall drincke, nether clime ye vp an hye:
for all soche thinges do the hethen people of the worlde seke for.
Youre father knoweth, that ye haue neade of soche thinges. Wherfore, seke ye after the kyngdome of God, and all these thinges shalbe ministred vnto you.
Feare not lytell flocke, for it is youre fathers pleasure, to geue you the kyngdome.
Sell that ye haue, and geue almes. And prepare you bagges, which wexe not olde, euen a treasure that fayleth not in heauen, where no thefe commeth, nether moth corrupteth.
For where youre treasure is, there will youre herte be also.
Let youre loynes be gerd about, Ꟶ your lightes brenning
and ye youre selues lyke vnto men that wayte for theyr Lorde, when he will returne from the weddinge: that whan he commeth and knocketh they maye open vnto him immediatly.
Happy are those seruauntes, whom the Lorde (when he commeth) shall fynde wakynge. Uerely I saye vnto you, that he shall gyrde hym selfe and make them to syt downe to meate, and walke by, and minister vnto them.
And yf he come in the seconde watch, yee, yf he come in the thirde watch, and fynde them so, happy are those seruauntes.
This vnderstond, that yf the good man of the house knewe, what houre the thefe wolde come, he wolde suerly watch, and not suffer hys housse to be broken vp.
Be ye therfore ready also: for the sonne of man will come at an houre when ye thincke not.
Peter sayde vnto him: Master, tellest thou this similitude vnto vs, or to all men?
And the Lorde sayde: who is a faythfull and wise stewarde, whom his Lorde shall make ruler ouer his housholde, to geue them their duetie of meat in due season:
happy is that seruaunt, whom his Lorde when he commeth; shall fynde so doing.
Of a trueth I saye vnto you, that he will make him ruler ouer all that he hath.
But and yf the seruaunt saye in his herte. My Lorde will deferre his comminge (and shall beginne to smite seruauntes and maydens, and to eate and drincke, and to be droncken)
the Lorde of that seruaunt will come in a daye when he thinketh not, and at an houre when he is not ware, and will hewe him in peces, and geue him his rewarde with the vnbeleuers.
The seruaunt that knewe his masters will and prepared not him selfe, nether dyd accordinge to hys wyll, shalbe beaten with many strypes.
But he that knewe not, and dyd commytte thynges worthy of strypes, shalbe beaten with fewe strypes. For vnto whomsoeuer moch is geuen, of him shalbe moche requyred. And to whom men haue committed moch: of him wyll they aske the more.
I am come to sende fyer on erth: Ꟶ what is my desier, but that it were all readye kindled?
Not withstandynge I must be baptysed wt a baptime: and how am I payned, tyll it be ended?
Suppose ye, that I am come to sende peace on erth? I tell you naye, but rather dyuysyon.
For from hence forth ther shalbe fyue in one housse deuided, thre against two, and two agaynst thre.
The father shalbe deuided agaynst the sonne, and the sonne agaynst the father. The mother agaynst the daughter, and the daughter agaynst the mother. The mother in lawe agaynst hyr daughter in lawe, and the daughter in lawe, agaynst hyr mother in lawe.
He sayde also to the people: when ye se a cloude ryse out of the west, strayght waye ye saye: ther commeth a shower, and so it is.
And when ye se the south wynde blowe, ye saye: it will be hote, and it commeth to passe.
Ye ypocrytes, ye can discerne the outwarde appearaunce of the skye and of the erthe: but how happeneth it, that ye cannot skyll of this tyme?
Yee, and why iudge ye not of youre selues what is ryght.
Whan thou goest with thyne aduersary to the ruler, as thou arte in the waye, geue diligence that thou mayst be deliuered from him, least he brynge the to the iudge, and the iudge delyuer the to the iaylar, and the iaylar cast the into preson.
I tell the, thou shalt not departe thence, tyll thou haue made good the vtmost myte.
Ther were present at the same season, certayne men that shewed him of the Galyleans, whose bloude Pylate had myngled with theyr awne sacryfyce.
And Iesus answered, and sayde vnto them: Suppose ye that these. Galyleans were greater synners then all the other Galyleans, because they suffred suche punysshment?
I tell you naye: but except ye repent: ye shall all lyke wyse perysshe.
Or those .xviij. vpon which the toure in Syloe fell, and slewe them, thynke ye, that they were synners aboue all men that dwelt in Ierusalem?
I tell you naye: But excepte ye repent, ye all shall lyke wyse perysshe.
He tolde also this similitude: a certayne man had a fygge tree planted in his vineyarde Ꟶ he came and sought frute theron, and founde none.
Then sayde he to the dresser of his vineyarde: beholde, this thre yeare haue I come and sought frute in this fygge tree, and fynde none: cut it doune: why combreth it the ground?
and he answered Ꟶ sayd vnto him: Lorde, let it alone this yeare also, tyll I dygge rounde aboute it, and donge it,
to se whether it will beare frute: and yf it beare not then, after that shalt thou cut it doune.
And he taught in one of their synagoges on the Saboth dayes.
And beholde, ther was a woman, which had a sprete of infirmite .xviij. yeares: and was bowed together, and coulde in no wyse lifte vp her heade.
When Iesus sawe her, he called her to him, and sayde vnto her woman, thou art deliuered from thy disease.
And he layde his handes on her, and immediatly, she was made strayght, and glorified God.
And the ruler of the synagoge answered with indignacion (because that Iesus had healed on the Saboth daye) and sayde vnto the people. Ther are syxe dayes in which men ought to worke, in them come, that ye maye be healed, and not on the Saboth daye.
But the Lorde answered him and sayde: Thou ypocryte, doth not each one of you on the Saboth daye lowse his oxe or his asse from the stall, and leade him to the water?
And ought not this daughter of Abraham, whom Satan hath bounde (lo .xviij. yeares) be lowsed from this bonde on the Saboth daye?
And when he thus sayde, all hys aduersaries were ashamed, and all the people reioysed on all the excellent dedes, that were done by him.
Then sayde he: what is the kyngdome of God like? or wherto shall I compare it?
It is like a grayne of mustarde seede, which a man toke, and sowed in his garden: and it grewe and wexed a greate tree, and the foules of the ayer made nestes in the braunches of it.
And agayne he sayde: wher vnto shall I lyken the kyngdome of God?
it is like leuen, which a woman toke, and hyd in thre peckes of meele, tyll all was leuened.
And he went thorow all cities and townes, teachynge, and iorneyinge towardes Ierusalem.
Then sayde one vnto him: Lorde, are ther feaw that be saued? And he sayde vnto him:
stryue to enter in at the strayte gate; for many (I saye vnto you) will seke to enter in, and shall not be able.
When the good man of the house is rysen vp, and hath shutt to the dore, and ye beginne to stonde without, and to knocke at the dore sayinge: Lorde, Lord, open vnto vs, and he answer and saye vnto you. (I knowe you not whence ye are)
Then shall ye begyn to saye: we haue eaten Ꟶ dronken in thy presence, Ꟶ thou hast taught in oure stretes.
And he shall saye: I tell you, I knowe you not whence ye are: departe from me all ye that worke iniquite.
There shalbe wepinge Ꟶ gnasihinge of teth, when ye shall se Abraham and Isaac and Iacob, and all the Prophetes in the kyngdome of God, and ye youre selues thrust out.
And they shall come from the east and from the west, and from the north and from the south, and shall syt downe in the kyngdome of God.
And beholde, there are last, which shalbe fyrst. And ther are fyrst, which shalbe last.
The same daye came there certayne of the Pharises, and sayde vnto him. get the out of the waye, and departe hence: for Herode will kyl the.
And he sayde vnto them: Go ye, and tell that foxe, beholde, I cast out deuyls and heale the people to daye and to morowe, and the thyrde daye I make an ende.
Neuerthelesse, I must walke to daye and to morow, and the daye folowyng: for it cannot be that a Prophet perisshe eny other where, saue at Ierusalem.
O Ierusalem, Ierusalem, which killest Prophetes, and stonest them that are sent vnto the: how ofte wolde I haue gathered thy children together, as a byrde doth gather her yonge vnder her wynges, and ye wolde not?
youre habitacion is left vnto you desolate. I tell you, ye shall not se me, vntyll the tyme come that ye shall saye blessed is he that commeth in the name of the Lorde.
And it chaunsed, that he went into the house of one of the chefe Pharyses to eate breed on a Saboth daye: and they watched hym.
And beholde, ther was a certayne man before him which had the dropsye.
And Iesus answered and spake vnto the lawers and Pharyses, sayinge: is it laufull to heale on the Saboth daye?
And they helde theyr peace. And he toke him and healed him, and let him go:
and answered them, sayinge, which of you shall haue an asse or an oxe fallen into a pytt and wyll not strayght waye pull him out on the Saboth daye?
And they coulde not answere him agayne to these thinges.
He put forth also a symilitude to the gestes, when he marked how they preased to the hyest roumes, and sayde vnto them:
When thou art bydden of anye man to a weddynge, syt not downe in the hyest rowme, lest a more honorable man then thou be bydden of him,
and he (that bade him and the) come, and saye to the: geue this man rowme, and thou then beginne wt shame to take the lowest rowme.
But rather when thou art bydden, go and syt in the lowest rowme: that when he that bade the, commeth, he maye saye vnto the: frende syt vp hyer. Then shalt thou haue worshipp in the presence of them that syt at meate with the.
For whosoeuer exalteth him self, shalbe brought lowe. And he that humbleth hym selfe, shalbe exalted.
Then sayde he also to hym, that had desired him to dyner: When thou makest a diner or a supper, call not thy frendes, nor thy brethren, nether thy kynsmen ner thy ryche neyghbours: lest they also bydde the agayne, and a recompence be made the.
But when thou makest a feast, call the poore, the feble, the lame, and the blynde,
Ꟶ thou shalt be happy, for they can not recompence the But thou shalt be recompensed at the resurreccyon of the iuste men.
When one of them (that sat at meate also) hearde these thynges, he sayd vnto him: happy is he that eateth bread in the kyngdome of God.
Then sayde he vnto him. A certayne man ordened a greate supper, and bade many,
and sent his seruaunt at supper tyme, to saye to them that were bydden, come: for all thinges are now ready.
And they all atonce beganne to make excuse. The fyrst sayde vnto him: I haue bought a farme, and I must nedes go, Ꟶ se it, I praye the haue me excused.
And another sayde: I haue bought fyue yooke of oxen, and I go to proue them, I praye the, haue me excused.
And another sayde: I haue maried a wyfe, and therfore I cannot come.
And the seruaunt returned and brought his master worde agayne therof. Then was the good man of the house displeased, and sayde to his seruaunt: Goo out quickly into the stretes and quarters of the cytie, and bring in hyther the poore, and the feble, and the halt and the blynde.
And the seruaunt sayd: Lorde, it is done as thou hast commaunded, and yet there is rowme.
And the Lorde sayd to the seruaunt: Go out vnto the hye wayes and hedges, and compell them to come in, that my house maye be fylled,
For I saye vnto you, that none of those men which were bydden, shall tast of my supper.
Ther went a greate company with hym, and he turned, and sayd vnto them:
If a man come to me, and hate not hys father and mother, and wyfe and chyldren, and brethren, and systers, yee, and his awne lyfe also, he cannot be my disciple.
And whosoeuer doth not beare his crosse, and come after me, cannot be my disciple.
Which of you disposed to buylde a toure, sytteth not downe before, and counteth the cost, whether he haue sufficient to performe it?
lest after he hath layde the foundacyon, and is not able to performe it, all that beholde it, begynne to mocke hym,
sayinge: this man beganne to buylde, Ꟶ was not able to make an ende?
Or what kyng goinge to make batayle agaynst another kinge, sytteth not downe fyrst, and casteth in his mynde, whether he be able with ten thousande, to mete him, that commeth agaynst him with .xx. thousande?
Or els while the other is yet a greate waye of he sendeth ambassatoures, and desireth peace.
So lykewyse, whosoeuer he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple.
Salt is good, but yf salt haue loste the saltnes, what shal be seasoned ther with?
It is nether good for the lande, nor yet for the donge hill, but men cast it out at the dores. He that hath eares to heare, let him heare.
Then resorted vnto him all the publicans and synners, for to heare him.
And the Pharises and Scribes murmured, sayinge. He receaueth synners, and eateth with them.
But he put forth this parable vnto them, saieng.
What man of you hauynge an hundred shepe (yf he lose one of them) doth not leaue nynty and nyne in the wildernes, and go after that which is lost, vntill he fynde it?
And when he hath founde it, he laieth it on his shulders with ioye.
And assone as he cometh home, he calleth together his louers and neyghbours, saying vnto them: Reioyse with me for I haue founde my shepe, which was loost.
I say vnto you, that like wyse ioye shalbe in heauen ouer one synner that repenteth, more then ouer nynty and nyne iuste persons, which nede no repentaunce.
Ether what woman (hauynge ten grotes, yf she loose one) doth not light a candell, and swepe the housse, and seke diligently tyll she fynde it?
And when she hath founde it, she calleth her louers and her neyghbours together, sayinge: Reioyce with me, for I haue founde the grote which I had lost.
Likewyse I saye vnto you, shall ther be ioye in the presence of the angels of God, ouer one synner that repenteth.
And he sayd: A certayne man had two sonnes,
and the yonger of them sayde vnto the father: father, geue me the porcion of the goodes, that to me belongeth. And he deuided vnto them his substance.
And not longe after, whan the yonger sonne had gathered all that he had together, he toke his iorney into a far countreye, and there he wasted his goodes with ryotous liuing.
And when he had spent all, ther arose a greate derth in all that land, and he began to lacke,
and went, and came to a citesyn of the same countre: and he sent him to his farme, to kepe swyne.
And he wolde fayne haue fylled his bely with the coddes that the swyne dyd eate: Ꟶ no man gaue vnto him.
Then he came to him selfe, and sayd: how many hyred seruauntes at my fathers haue breed ynough? and I perishe with honger.
I wyll aryse, and go to my father, and will saye vnto him: father, I haue synned agaynst heauen, and before the,
Ꟶ am no more worthy to be called thy sonne, make me as one of thy hyred seruauntes.
And he arose, Ꟶ came to his father. But when he was yet a greate waye of, his father sawe him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kyssed him.
And the sonne sayde vnto him: father, I haue synned agaynst heauen, and in thy syght, Ꟶ am nomore worthy to be called thy sonne.
But the father sayd to his seruauntes: brynge forth the best garment, and put it on him, and put a rynge on his hande, and shoes on his fete.
And brynge hyther that fatt caulfe, and kyll it, and let vs eate and be mery:
for this my sonne was deed, and is alyue agayne, he was loste, and is founde. And they began to be merye.
The elder brother was in the felde: and when he came and drewe nye to the housse, he herde mynstrelsy Ꟶ daunsynge,
and called one of his seruauntes, and asked, what those thynges meante.
And he sayd vnto him: thy brother is come, and thy father hath kylled the fatt caulfe, because he hath receaued him safe and sounde.
And he was angry, and wolde not go in. Then came hys father out, and entreated him.
He answered and sayde to his father: Lo, these many yeares haue I done the seruice, nether brake at any tyme thy commaundement, and yet gauest thou me neuer a kid, to make mery with my frendes:
but assone as this thy sonne was come (which hath deuoured thy goodes with harlotes) thou haste for his pleasure kylled the fatt caulfe.
And he sayde vnto him: Sonne, thou art euer with me, and all that I haue is thyne:
it was mete that we shulde make mery and be glad: for this thy brother was deed, and is alyue agayne: and was loste, and is founde.
And he sayde also vnto his disciples. Ther was a certayn ryche man, whichhad a stewarde, and the same was accused vnto hym, that he had wasted hys goodes.
And he called him, and sayde vnto him: How is it, that I heare thys of the? Geue acomptes of thy stewardshype: For thou mayste be no longer steward.
The stewarde sayde with in him selfe: what shall I do? for my Master taketh awaye from me the stewardeshypp. I cannot dygge, and to begge I am ashamed.
I wote what to do, that when I am put out of the stewardship, they maye receaue me into their houses.
So whan he had called all hys masters detters together, he sayde vnto the fyrst: how moch owest thou vnto my master?
And he sayd: an hundred tonnes of oyle. And he sayde vnto him: take thy byll, Ꟶ syt doune quyckly and wryte fyftye.
Then sayd he to another: how moch owest thou? And he sayde: an hondred quarters of wheate. He sayde vnto him. Take thy byll, and wryte foure scoore.
And the Lorde commended the vniust stewarde, because he had done wysly. For the chyldren of this worlde are in theyr nacion, wyser then the chyldren of lyght.
And I saye vnto you: make you frendes of the vnryghteous mammon, that when ye shall haue nede they may receaue you into euerlastyng habitacyons.
He that is faythfull in that which is least, is faythfull also in moch. And he that is vnryghteous in the least: is vnryghteous also in moch.
So then, yf ye haue not ben faythfull in the vnryghteous mammon, who wyll beleue you in that which is true?
And yf ye haue not bene faythfull in another mannes busynes, who shal geue you that which is your awne?
No seruaunt can serue two masters: for ether he shall hate the one, and loue the other: or els he shall leane to the one, Ꟶ despyse the other. Ye cannot serue God Ꟶ mammon.
All these thynges herde the Pharyses also, which were couetous, and they mocked him.
And he sayd vnto them: Ye are they which iustifye youre selues before men: but God knoweth youre hertes. For that which is hyghlye estemed amonge men, is abhominable in the syght of God.
The lawe and the Prophetes raygned vntyll Iohn: and sence that tyme, the kyngdome of God is preached, and euery man stryueth to go in.
Easyer is it for heauen and erth to peryshe, then one tytle of the lawe to fayll.
Whosoeuer forsaketh hys wyfe, and marieth another, committeth aduoutrye. And he which marieth her that is deuorsed from her husbande, committeth aduoutry also.
Ther was a certayne ryche man, which was clothed in purple and fyne whyte, and fared deliciously euery dyae:
And there was a certayne begger named Lazarus, which laye at his gate full of sores,
desyrynge to be refresshed with the cromes, which fell from the ryche mannes borde. The dogges came also, and lycked his sores,
And it fortuned, that the begger died, and was caryed by the angelles into Abrahams bosome. The riche man also dyed, and was buryed.
And beynge in hell in tormentes, he lyfte vp hys eyes and sawe Abraham a farre of and Lazarus in hys bosome,
and he cryed and sayde: father Abraham: haue mercy on me, and sende Lazarus, that he maye dyppe the typpe of hys fynger in water, and cole my tonge: for I am tormented in this flame.
But Abraham sayde: Sonne remember that thou in thy lyfe tyme, receauedst thy pleasure, Ꟶ contrary wyse, Lazarus receaued payne. But now is he conforted, and thou art punisshed.
Beyonde all this, betwene vs and you ther is a greate space set, so that they which wolde go from hence to you, cannot: nether maye come from thence to vs.
Then he sayd: I praye the therfore father, sende him to my fathers house.
(For I haue fyue brethren) for to warne them, lest they also come into this place of tourment.
Abraham sayde vnto him: they haue Moses and the Prophetes, let them heare them.
And he sayde: naye father Abraham, but yf one come vnto them from the deed, they wyll repent.
He sayde vnto him: If they heare not Moses and the Prophetes, nether wyll they beleue, though one rose from deeth agayne.
He sayde vnto the disciples: it cannot be: but offences wyll come. Neuerthelesse wo vnto hym thorow whom they come.
It were better for him that a mylstone were hanged aboute his neck, and he cast into the see, then that he shulde offende one of these lytleons.
Take hede to youre selues. If thy brother trespas agaynst the, rebuke hym:
and yf he repent, forgeue hym. And though he synne agaynst the seuen tymes in a daye, and seuen tymes in a daye tourne agayne to the, sayinge: it repenteth me, thou shalt forgeue hym.
And the Apostles sayde vnto the Lorde: increase oure fayth.
And the Lorde sayde: yf ye had fayth lyke a grayne of mustarde sede, Ꟶ shuld saye vnto this Sycamyne tree, plucke thy selfe vp by the rootes, and plant thy selfe in the see: it shulde obey you.
Who is it of you; yf he had a seruaunte plowynge or fedynge catell, that wyll saye vnto hym when he commeth from the felde: Go quyckly, and syt downe to meat,
Ꟶ sayth not rather vnto him, dresse, wherwt I maye supp, Ꟶ gyrde vp thy selfe, and serue me, tyll I haue eaten and droncken: and afterward, eate thou, and drincke thou?
Doeth he thanke that seruaunt, because he dyd the thynges that were commaunded vnto him? I trowe not.
So lyke wyse ye, when ye haue done all those thynges which are commaunded you, saye: we are vnprofitable seruauntes. We haue done that, which was oure duety to do.
And it chaunsed as he went to Ierusalem, that he passed thorow Samaria and Galile,
And as he entred into a certayne towne, ther met him ten men that were lepers. Which stode a farre of,
and put forth theyr voyces and sayde: Iesu master, haue mercy on vs.
When he sawe them he sayd vnto them: Go, shewe youre selues vnto the Prestes. And it came to passe, that as they went, they were clensed
And one of them, when he sawe that he was clensed, turned backe agayne, Ꟶ with a loude voyce praysed God,
and fell doune on hys face at hys fete, and gaue hym thankes. And the same was a Samaritane.
And Iesus answered, Ꟶ sayde: are ther not ten clensed? But where are those nyne?
Ther are not founde that returned agayne, to geue God prayse, saue only this straunger.
And he sayd vnto him: aryse, go thy waye, thy fayth hath made the whoale.
When he was demaunded of the Pharises, when the kyngdome of God shulde come, he answered them and sayd: The kyngdome of God shall not come with wayting for,
nether shal they saye. Lo here, Or lo there: For beholde the kyngdome of God is within you.
And he sayde vnto the disciples: the dayes wyll come, when ye shall desyre to se one daye of the sonne of man, and ye shall not se it.
And they shall saye to you: Se here, Se there. Go not after them, nor folowe them:
for as the lyghtenynge that apereth out of the one parte that is vnder heauen, Ꟶ shyneth vnto the other parte which is vnder heauen, so shall the sonne of man be in hys dayes.
But fyrst must he suffre many thynges Ꟶ be refused of this nacion.
And as it happened in the dayes of Noe: so shall it be also in the dayes of the sonne of man.
They dyd eate Ꟶ dryncke, they maryed wyues and were maried, euen vnto that same daye that Noe went into the Arke: and the floude cam, and destroyed them all.
Lykewyse also as it chaunced in the dayes of Lot. They dyd eate, they drancke, they bought, they solde they planted, they buylded:
But euen the same daye that Lot went out of zodom, it rayned with fyre and brymstone from heauen, Ꟶ destroyed them all.
Euen thus, shall it be in the daye, when the sonne of man shall appere.
At that daye he that is on the house topp, and his stuffe in the house: let him not come downe to take it out. And let not him that is in the felde, turne backe agayne to the thinges that he lefte behinde.
Remember Lottes wyfe.
Whosoeuer wyll go aboute to saue his lyfe, shal lose it: and whosoeuer shall lose his lyfe, shall saue it.
I tell you: in that night ther shalbe two in one bed, the one shalbe receaued, the other shalbe forsaken:
Two shalbe agryndynge together: the one shalbe receaued, and the other forsaken.
n/a
And they answered, and sayd to him, where Lorde. He sayde vnto them: whersoeuer the body shalbe, thyther wyll also that Egles be gathered together.
And he put forth a parable vnto them, signifying that men ought all wayes to praye and not to be wery,
sayinge: Ther was in a certayne cytie a iudge, which feared not God, nether regarded man.
And ther was a certayne wedowe in the same cytye, and she came vnto hym, sayinge: auenge me of myne aduersary.
And he wolde not for a whyle. But after warde he sayd within him selfe: though I feare not God, nor care for man,
yet because thys wedowe is importune vpon me, I wyll auenge her, lest she come at the last and rayle on me.
And the Lorde sayde, heare what the vnryghtewes Iudge sayeth.
And shal not God auenge his electe, which crye daye and nyght vnto him, yee, though he deferre them?
I tell you that he will auenge them, Ꟶ that quickly. Neuerthelesse, when the sonne of man commeth, shall he fynde fayth on the erth?
And he tolde this parable, vnto certayne which trusted in them selues that they were perfecte, and despysed other
Two men went vp into the temple to praye: the one a Pharise, and the other a publican.
The Pharyse stode and prayed thus with hym selfe: God, I thancke the, that I am not as other men are, extorsioners, vniuste, aduoutrers, or as this publycan.
I fast twyse in the weke. I geuetythe of all that I possesse.
And the publican stondyng a farre of, wolde not lyfte vp his eyes to heauen, but smote vpon hys brest, saying: God be mercyfull to me a synner:
I tell you: thys man departed home to hys house iustyfyed, more then the other. For euery one that exalteth him self, shalbe brought lowe: And he that humbleth him selfe, shalbe exalted.
They brought vnto him also yong children, that he shulde touche them. When hys dysciples sawe it, they rebuked them.
But Iesus (whan he had called them vnto hym) sayde: Suffre children to come vnto me, and forbyd them not. For of soch is the kyngdome of God.
Uerely I saye vnto you: whosoeuer receaueth not the kyngdome of God as a chylde, shall not enter therin.
And a certayne ruler asked him, sayinge: good master, what ought I to do, to obtaine eternall lyfe?
Iesus sayd vnto him: Why callest thou me good? None is good, saue God onely.
Thou knowest the commaundementes: Thou shalt not commit aduoutry: thou shalt not kyll: thou shalt not steale, thou shalt not beare false wytnes: honoure thy father Ꟶ thy mother.
And he sayde: all these haue I kept from my youth vp.
When Iesus hearde that, he sayd vnto hym: Yet lackest thou one thynge. Sell all that thou hast, and distrybute vnto the poore, and thou shalt haue treasure in heauen, and come, folowe me.
When he hearde thys, he was sory: for he was very ryche.
When Iesus sawe that he was sory, he sayde wyth what difficulte shall they that haue mony, enter into the kingdome of God?
it is easyer for a camell to go thorow a nedles eye, then for a ryche man to enter into the kyngdome of God.
And they that hearde it: sayd. And who can then be saued?
And he sayde: The thynges which are vnpossyble wt men, are possyble wyth God.
Then Peter sayde. Lo, we haue forsaken all, and folowed the.
He sayde vnto them: Uerely I saye vnto you: ther is no man that hath forsaken house, ether father or mother, ether brethren, or wyfe, or chyldren (for the kyngdome of Goddes sake)
whych shall not receaue moch more in this worlde, and in the worlde to come, lyfe euerlastynge.
Iesus toke vnto him the twelue, Ꟶ sayd vnto them: Beholde, we go vp to Ierusalem, and all shalbe fulfylled, that are wrytten by the Prophetes, of the sonne of man.
For he shalbe delyuered vnto the gentyls, Ꟶ shalbe mocked, and despytfully entreated, Ꟶ spytted on:
Ꟶ when they haue scourged him, they wyll put hym to deeth, and the thyrd daye he shall aryse agayne.
And they vnderstode none of these thynges. And this saying was hyd from them, so that they perceaued not the thynges which were spoken.
And it came to passe, that as he was come nye vnto Hierico, a certayne blynde man sate by the waye syde, beggynge.
And when he hearde the people passe by, he asked what it meant.
And they sayde vnto hym, that Iesus of Nazareth passed by.
And he cryed, sayinge: Iesu thou sonne of Dauid, haue mercy on me.
And they whych went before, rebuked hym, that he shulde holde his peace. But he cryed so moch the more: thou sonne of Dauid, haue mercy on me.
And Iesus stode styll, and commaunded hym to be brought vnto hym. And when he was come neare, he asked hym,
sayinge: what wilt thou that I do vnto the? And he sayde: Lorde, that I maye receaue my syght.
And Iesus sayd vnto hym: receaue thy syght: thy fayth, hath saued the.
And immediatly he receaued his syght, and folowed hym, praysynge God. And all the people, when they sawe it, gaue prayse vnto God.
And he entred in, Ꟶ went thorow Hierico.
And behold, ther was a man named zacheus, whych was a ruler amonge the Publicans, and was ryche also.
And he sought meanes to se Iesus, what he shuld be: and coulde not for the preace, because he was lytle of stature.
And he ran before, and clymed vp into a wylde fygge tree, to se him: for he was to come that waye.
And when Iesus cam to the place, he looked vp, and sawe hym, and sayd vnto him: zache, come downe atonce, for to daye I must abyde at thy house.
And he came downe hastelye, and receaued hym ioyfully.
And when they sawe it, they all grudged, sayinge: He is gone in to tary with a man that is a synner.
And zache stode forth, and sayd vnto the Lorde: beholde Lorde, the halfe of my goodes I geue to the poore: and yf I haue done eny man wronge, I restore him foure folde.
Iesus sayde vnto him: this daye is health happened vnto thys house, because that he also is become the chylde of Abraham:
For the sonne of man is come to seke, and to saue that whych was loste.
As they hearde these thynges, he added therto a parable, because he was nye to Ierusalem, and because they thought, that the kyngdome of God shulde shortly appeare.
He sayde therfore: a certayne noble man went into a farre countre, to receaue hym a kyngdome, and to come agayne.
And he called hys ten seruauntes, and delyuered them ten pounde, sayinge vnto them: Occupye, tyll I come.
But hys cytesens hated hym, Ꟶ sent a message after him, sayinge: we will not haue thys man to raygne ouer vs.
And it came to passe, that when he had receaued his kingdome, he returned, Ꟶ commaunded these seruauntes to be called vnto hym (to whom he had geuen the money) to wete how moch euery man had done.
Then came the fyrst, saying: Lorde, thy pounde hath gayned ten pounde.
And he sayd vnto hym: Well thou good seruaunt: because thou hast bene faythfull in a very lytell thynge, haue thou auctoryte ouer ten cyties.
And another came, sayinge: Lorde, thy pounde hath made fyue pounde.
And to the same he sayde: be thou also ruler ouer fyue cyties.
And another came, saying: Lorde, beholde here is thy pounde, whych I haue kepte in a napkyn:
for I feared the, because thou art a strayte man: thou takest vp that thou laydest not downe, and reapest that thou dyddest not sowe.
He sayeth vnto hym: Of thyne awne mouth, wyll I iugde the, thou euyll seruaunt. Knewest thou that I am a strayte man, takynge vp that I layde not downe, Ꟶ reapynge that I dyd not sowe?
And wherfore gauest not thou my money into the banke, and at my commynge I myght haue required myne awne wyth vauntage?
And he sayd vnto them that stode by, take from hym that pounde, and geue it hym that hath ten pounde.
And they sayde vnto hym: Lorde, he hath ten pounde.
For I saye vnto you, that vnto euery one which hath, shalbe geuen Ꟶ from him that hath not shalbe taken awaye, euen that whych he hath.
Moreouer, those myne enemyes, (whych wolde not that I shuld raygne ouer them) brynge hyther, and slee them before me.
And when he had thus spoken, he proceaded forth, takynge hys iourney, to go vp to Ierusalem.
And it fortuned, when he was come nye to Bethphage Ꟶ Bethany, besydes the mounte whych is called Olyuete, he sent two of hys discyples
sayinge: go ye into the towne, which is ouer agaynst you: Into the whych assone as ye are come, ye shall fynde an asses coltetyed, wheron yet neuer man sate. Loose him, and bringe hym hyther.
And yf eny man aske you, why do ye loose him? thus shall ye saye vnto hym: the Lorde hath nede therof.
They that were sent, went their waye, and founde, euen as he had sayd vnto them.
And as they were a lossynge the colte, the owners therof sayd vnto them, why loose ye the colte?
And they sayde: for the Lorde hath nede of hym.
And they brought him to Iesus, and cast their rayment on the colte, and sett Iesus theron.
And as he went, they spredde theyr clothes in the waye.
And when he was now come nye to hye goyng downe of the mounte Olyuete, the whole multitude of the discyples began to reioyce, Ꟶ to prayse God with a loude voyce, for all the myracles that they had sene,
sayinge: blessed be the kynge that commeth in the name of the Lorde: peace in heauen, and glory in the hyest:
And some of the Pharyses of the company sayd vnto hym: Master, rebuke the disciples.
He sayd vnto them: I tell you, that yf these holde theyr peace, then shall the stones crye.
And when he was come neare, he behelde the cytie, and wept on it,
sayinge: If thou haddest knowen those thynges whych belonge vnto thy peace, euen in thys thy daye, thou woldst take hede. But now are they hydde from thyne eyes.
For the dayes shall come vpon the, that thy enemyes also shall cast a banke aboute the, and compasse the rounde, and kepe the in on euery syde,
and make the euen wyth the grounde, and thy chyldren which are in the. And they shall not leaue in the one stone vpon another, because thou knowest not the tyme of thy visitacyon.
And he went into the temple, and beganne to cast out them that solde therin, and them that bought,
sayinge vnto them: It is written: my house is the house of prayer: but ye haue made it a den of theues:
And he taught dayly in the temple. But the hye Prestes Ꟶ the scrybes and the chefe of the people went aboute to destroye hym:
Ꟶ coulde not fynde what to do. For all the people stacke by hym, whan they hearde hym.
And it fortuned in one of those dayes (as he taught the people in the temple and preached the gospell) the hye Prestes and the Sribes came together wyth the elders,
Ꟶ spake vnto him sayinge: Tell vs: by what auctorite doest thou these thynges? Ether who is he, that gaue the thys auctorite?
Iesus answered Ꟶ sayd vnto them: I also will aske you one thyng, Ꟶ answer me.
The baptyme of Iohn: was it from heauen or of men?
And they thought wyth in them selues sayinge: yf we saye from heauen, he will saye: why then beleued ye hym not?
But Ꟶ yf we saye: of men, all the people wyll stone vs. For they be perswaded, that Iohn is a Prophete.
And they answered, that they coulde not tell whence it was.
And Iesus sayd vnto them: nether tell I you, by what auctoryte I do these thynges.
Then beganne he to put forth to the people thys parable: A certayne man planted a vyneyarde, and let it forth to husband men, and went hym selfe into a straunge countre for a greate season.
And when the tyme was come, he sent a seruaunt to the husband men, that they shulde geue hym of the frute of the vineyarde. And they bet hym, and sent hym, awaye emptye.
And agayne, he sent yet another seruaunt. And hym they dyd beat, and entreated hym shamefully, and sent hym awaye emptye.
Agayne, he sent the thyrde also, and hym they wounded, and cast hym out.
Then sayd the Lord of the vineyarde: what shall I do? I wyll sende my deare sonne: peraduenture they will stande in awe of him, when they se hym.
But when the husbandmen sawe hym, they thought within them selues, sayinge: this is the heyre, come, let vs kyll hym, that the enheritaunce maye be oures.
And they cast him out of the vineyarde, Ꟶ kylled him. What shall the Lord of the vineiarde therfore do vnto them?
He shall come, Ꟶ destroye these husbandmen, Ꟶ shall let out hys vineyarde to other. When they hearde thys, they sayde: God forbyd.
And he behelde them, and sayde: what is thys then that is wrytten: the stone that the buylders refused, the same is become the heed of the corner?
Whosoeuer doth stomble vpon the stone, shalbe broken: but on whosoeuer it falleth, it wyll grynde him to powder.
And the hye prestes and the Scrybes the same houre went about to laye handes on hym, and they feared the people. For they perceaued that he had spoken thys symilitude agaynst them.
And they watched hym, Ꟶ sent forth spies, which shuld fayne them selues ryghteous men, to take him in hys wordes, and to delyuer him vnto the power Ꟶ auctorite of the debyte.
And they asked hym, saying: Master, we knowe that thou sayest and teachest ryght, nether consyderest thou the outward appearaunce of eny man, but teachest the waye of God truly.
Is it laufull for vs to geue trybute vnto Cesar, or no?
He perceaued theyr craftines, and sayde vnto them: why tempt ye me?
Shewe me a peny. Whose ymage Ꟶ superscripcion hath it? They answered and sayde: Cesars.
And he sayde vnto them: geue then vnto Cesar, the thynges whych belonge vnto Cesar: Ꟶ to God the thynges that pertayne vnto God.
And they coulde not reproue his sayinge before the people: Ꟶ they maruayled at his answer, and helde their peace.
Then came to hym certayne of the Saduces, which denye that ther is eny resurreccion. And they asked him
sayinge: Master, Moses wrote vnto vs, yf eny mannes brother dye hauing a wyfe, Ꟶ he dye without chyldren, that then hys brother shulde take hys wyfe, and rayse vp seede vnto hys brother.
Ther were therfore seuen brethren, and the fyrste toke a wyfe, Ꟶ dyed without chyldren.
And the seconde toke her, and he dyed chyldelesse.
And the thyrde toke her: and in lykewise the residue of the seuen, and left no chyldren behynde them, and dyed.
Last of all the woman dyed also.
Now in the resurreccion, whose wyfe of them shall she be? For seuen had her to wyfe.
Iesus answered and sayd vnto them. The chyldren of this worlde mary wyues, and are maryed:
but they whych shalbe counted worthy of that worlde and the resurreccion from the deed, do not mary wyues, nether are maryed,
nor yet can dye eny more, For they are equall vnto the angels, and are the sonnes of God, in as moch as they are chyldren of the resurreccion.
And that the deed shall ryse agayne: Moses also sheweth besides the busshe, when he calleth: the Lord, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob.
For he is not a God of deed, but of lyuynge. For all lyue vnto him.
Then certayne of the Pharises answered, annd sayd: Master, thou hast wel sayd.
And after that durst they not aske him eny question at all.
And he sayde vnto them: how saye they that Chryst is Dauids sonne?
And Dauid him selfe sayeth in the boke of the Psalmes: The Lorde sayde vnto my Lorde: syt thou on my ryght hande,
tyll I make thyne enemyes thy fote stole.
Dauid therfore calleth hym Lord: and how is he then hys sonne?
Then in the audyence of all the people, he sayde vnto his disciples:
beware of the Scribes, whych wyll go in longe clothynge: Ꟶ loue gretynges in the markets, and the hyest seates in the synagoges, and the chefe rowmes at feastes,
whych deuoure wyddowes houses, faynyng longe prayers: the same shall receaue greater dampnacyon.
As he behelde, he sawe the ryche men, whych cast in their offeringes into the treasury.
He sawe also a certyane poore wyddowe, whych cast in thyther two mytes.
And he sayde: of a trueth I saye vnto you, that thys poore wyddow hath put in moare then they all.
For they all haue of theyr superfluyte added vnto the offerynges of God: but she, of her penury hath cast in all the substaunce that she had.
And vnto some that spake of the temple, how it was garnysshed with goodly stones and Iewels, he sayde.
The dayes wyll come, in the which (of these thynges which ye se) there shall not be lefte one stone vpon another, that shall not be thorowen doune.
And they asked hym sayinge: Master, when shall these thynges be, and what sygne wyll ther be when soch thynges come to passe?
And he sayde: take hede, that ye be not deceaued. For many shall come in my name, and saye that they are Chryst: and the tyme draweth neare. Folowe ye not them therfore.
But when ye heare of warres and sedicions, be not afrayed. For these thynges must first come to passe, but the ende foloweth not by and by.
Then sayde he vnto them: Nacion shall ryse agaynst nacion, Ꟶ kyngdome agaynst kyngdome,
and greate erthquakes shalbe in all places, and honger, and pestilence, Ꟶ fearfull thinges. And greate sygnes shall ther be from heauen.
But before all these, they shall laye handes on you, and persecute you, delyuerynge you vp to the Synagoges Ꟶ into presons, Ꟶ shall bringe you vnto kynges Ꟶ rulers for my names sake.
And thys shall chaunce you for a testimoniall.
Be at a sure point therfore in your hertes, not to study before, what ye shal answere:
for I wyll geue you a mouth Ꟶ wysdome, where agaynste, all your aduersaries shall not be able to speake nor resist.
Moreouer ye shalbe betrayd of your fathers and mothers Ꟶ brethren, Ꟶ kynsfolke Ꟶ frendes, and some of you shall they put to deeth.
And hated shall ye be of all men for my names sake,
Ꟶ ther shall not one herre of youre head perysshe.
Possesse ye youre soule by pacience.
And when ye se Ierusalem beseged wyth an hoste, then be sure that the desolacyon, of the same is nye.
Then let them which are in Iewrye, flye to the mountaynes. And let them whych are in the myddes of it, departe out. And let not them that are in other countreyes, enter therin.
For these be the dayes of vengeaunce, that all thynges which are wrytten, maye be fulfylled.
But wo vnto them that be with chylde, Ꟶ to them that geue sucke in those dayes: for there shalbe greate trouble in the lande, and wrath ouer all this people.
And they shall fall thorow the edge of the swearde, and shalbe ledd awaye captyue into all nacions. And Ierusalem shalbe troden downe of the gentyls, vntyll the tyme of the gentyls be fulfylled.
And ther shalbe sygnes in the Sonne, and in the Moone, and in the starres: and in the erth the people shalbe at their wyttes ende, thorow dispayre. The see and the water shall roare,
and mennes hertes shall fayle them for feare, and for lokynge after those thynges which shall come on the erth. For the powers of heauen shall moue.
And then shall they se the sonne of man come in a cloude with power and greate glory.
When these thynges begynne to come to passe: then loke vp, and lyfte vp youre heades, for youre redempcyon draweth nye.
And he shewed them a symilitude: beholde the fygge tree, and all the trees,
when they shoot forth their buddes, ye se and knowe of youre awne selues, that sommer is then nye at hand.
So lykewyse ye also (when ye se these thynges come to passe) be sure, that the kyngdome of God is nye.
Uerely I saye vnto you: this generacion shall not passe, tyll all be fulfylled.
Heauen and erth shall passe: but my wordes shall not passe.
Take hede to your selues, lest at anye tyme youre hertes be ouercome with surfettynge and dronkennes and cares of thys lyfe, and so the daye come vpon you vnwares.
For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole erth.
Watch ye therfore contynually, and praye, that ye maye escape all these thynges that shall come, and that ye maye stande before the sonne of man.
In the daye tyme, he taught in the temple: and at nyght, he went out, and abode in the mount that is called Olyuete.
And all the people came in the mornynge to hym in the temple, for to heare hym.
The feast of swete breed drue nye, which is called Easter,
and the hye Prestes, and Scrybes sought how they myght kyll him, for they feared the people.
Then entred Satan into Iudas, whose syr name was Iscarioth (which was of the nombre of the twelue)
and he went his waye and communed with the hye prestes and officers, how he myght betraye him to them.
And they were glad Ꟶ promysed to geue hym money.
And he consented, and sought oportunyte to betraye hym vnto them, when the people were awaye.
Then came the daye of swete breed, when of necessyte Passeouer must be offered.
And he sent Peter Ꟶ Iohn, sayinge: go Ꟶ prepare vs the Passeouer, that we maye eate.
They sayde vnto him. Where wilt thou, that we prepare?
And he sayd vnto them: Beholde, when ye entre into the cytie, ther shall a man mete you, bearynge a pytcher of water, him folowe into the same house that he entreth in,
and ye shall saye vnto the good man of the house: The master sayeth vnto the: where is the gest chamber, where I shall eate Passeouer wt my disciples?
And he shall shewe you a greate parloure paued. Ther make ready.
And they went and founde as he had sayd vnto them, and they made ready the Passeouer.
And when the houre was come, he sate downe, Ꟶ the .xij. Apostles wyth hym.
And he sayde vnto them: I haue inwardly desyred to eate thys Passeouer wyth you, before that I suffre.
For I saye vnto you: hence forth I wyll not eate of it eny more, vntyll it be fulfilled in the kyngdome of God.
And he toke the cup, and gaue thankes, and sayd: Take thys, and deuyde it amonge you.
For I saye vnto you: I wyll not dryncke of the frute of the vyne, vntyll the kyngdome of God come.
And he toke breed, and whan he had geuen thankes, he brake it, and gaue vnto them, sayinge: Thys is my body, whych is geuen for you. Thys do, in the remembraunce of me.
Lykewyse also, when he had supped, he toke the cup, sayinge: Thys cup is the new testament in my bloude, whych is shedd for you.
Yet beholde, the hande of hym that betrayeth me, is wyth me on the table.
And trulye the sonne of man goeth, as it is apoynted: But wo vnto that man, by whom he is betrayed.
And they began to enquyre amonge them selues, whych of them it was, that shulde do it.
And ther was a stryfe amonge them, whych of them shuld seme to be the greatest.
And he sayde vnto them: the kynges of nacyons raygne ouer them: and they that haue auctoryte vpon them, are called gracious lordes.
But ye shall not be so. But he that is greatest amonge you, shalbe as the younger: and he that is chefe, shalbe as he that doth mynister.
For whether is greater, he that sytteth at meate, or he that serueth? Is not he that sytteth at meate? But I am amonge you, as he that mynistreth.
Ye are they, whych haue bydden wyth me in my temptacyons.
And I apoynt vnto you a kyngdom, as my father hath apoynted to me:
that ye maye eate and dryncke at my table in my kyngdome, Ꟶ syt on seates, iudgynge the twelue trybes of Israell.
And the Lord sayde: Symon, Simon, beholde, Satan hath desyred to syfte you, as it were wheate:
but I haue prayed for the, that thy fayth fayle not. And when thou arte conuerted, strength thy brethren.
And he sayde vnto hym: Lorde, I am ready to go wyth the into preson, and to deeth.
And he sayd: I tell the Peter, the cocke shall not crowe thys daye, tyll thou haue thryse denyed that thou knewest me.
And he sayde vnto them: when I sent you wythout wallet and scryppe and shoes lacked ye eny thynge? And they sayde, no.
Then he sayde vnto them: but now he that hath a wallet, let hym take it vp, and lykewyse hys scrippe. And he that hath no swearde, let hym sell hys coate, and bye one.
For I saye vnto you, that yet the same whych is wrytten, must be performed in me: euen among the wycked was he reputed. For those thynges whych are wrytten of me, haue an ende.
And they sayde: Lorde, beholde, here are two sweardes. And he sayde vnto them: it is ynough.
And he came out, and went (as he was wonte) to mounte Olyuete. And the discyples folowed hym.
And when he came to the place, he sayd vnto them: praye, lest ye fall into temptacyon.
And he gate hym selfe from them, about a stones cast, and kneled downe, and prayed,
saying: Father, yf thou wylt, remoue thys cup from me. Neuerthelesse, not my wyll, but thyne be fulfylled.
And ther appeared an angell vnto hym from heauen, confortynge hym.
And he was in an agoyne, and prayed the longer. And hys sweate was lyke droppes of bloud, trycklynge downe to the grounde.
And whan he rose vp from prayer and was come to hys discyples, he founde them slepynge for heuynesse,
and sayde vnto them: why slepe ye? Ryse, and praye, lest ye fall into temptacyon.
Whyll he yet spake: beholde, ther came a company, and he that was called Iudas one of the twelue, went before them, and preased nye vnto Iesus, to kysse hym.
But Iesus sayde vnto hym: Iudas, betrayest thou the sonne of man wyth a kysse?
When they which were about hym, sawe what wolde folow, they sayde vnto him: Lorde, shall we smyte with swearde.
And one of them smote a seruaunt of the hye preste, Ꟶ stroke of his ryght eare.
Iesus answered Ꟶ sayde: suffre ye thus farre forth. And whan he touched hys eare he healed hym.
Then Iesus sayde vnto the hye prestes and rulers of the temple and the elders, whych were come to hym. Ye be come out, as vnto a thefe, wyth sweardes and staues.
When I was dayly wyth you in the temple, ye stretched forth no handes agaynst me. But thys is euen youre very houre, and the power of darcknes.
Then toke they hym, and ledde hym, and brought hym to the hye Preastes house. But Peter folowed a farre of
And when they had kyndled a fyre in the myddes of the palace, and were set downe together. Peter also sate downe amonge them.
But whan one of the wenches behelde hym, as he sate by the fyer (and loked vp on hym) she sayde: thys same felow was also wyth hym.
And he denyed hym, saying: woman: I knowe hym not.
And after a lytell whyle, another sawe hym, and sayd, thou art also of them. And Peter sayd: man I am not.
And about the space of an houre after, another affyrmed, sayinge: verely thys felowe was wyth hym also, for he is of Galile.
And Peter sayde: man I wote not what thou sayest. And immediatly whyll he yet spake, the cocke crew.
And the Lorde tourned backe, and loked vpon Peter. And Peter remembred the worde of the Lord, how he had sayd vnto hym: before the cocke crowe, thou shalt deuye me thryse.
And Peter went out, and wepte byttrely.
And the men that toke Iesus, mocked him, and smote him:
and whan they had blyndfolded him, they stroke hym on the face, Ꟶ asked hym, saying: arede, who is it that smote the?
And many other thynges despytfullye sayd they agaynst hym.
And assone as it was daye, the elders of the people and the hye Prestes and Scrybes, came together, and ledde hym into their councell, sayinge:
art thou very Chryst? tell vs. And he sayde vnto them: yf I tell you, ye wyll not beleue.
And yf I aske you, ye wyll not answere me, nor let me go:
Her after shall the sonne of man syt on the ryght hand of the power of God.
Then sayde they all: art thou then the sonne of God? He sayd: ye saye that I am.
And they sayde: what nede we eny further wytnes? For we oure selues haue herde of hys awne mouth.
And the whole multitude of them arose, and led hym vnto Pylate.
And they beganne to accuse him, sayinge: we founde thys felowe peruertinge the people, and forbyddynge to paye tribute to Cesar: sayinge, that he is Chryst a kynge.
And Pylate apposed him, sayinge: art thou the kynge of the Iewes? He answered hym, and sayde: thou sayest it.
Then sayde Pylate to the hye Prestes, and to the people: I fynde no faute in this man.
And they were the more fearce, sayinge: He moueth the people, teachyng thorow out all Iewry, and beganne at Galile, euen to thys place.
When Pylate hearde mencyon of Galile, he asked, whether the man were of Galile.
And assone as he knewe that he belonged vnto Herodes iurisdiccyon, he sent him to Herode, whych was also at Ierusalem at that tyme.
And when Herode sawe Iesus, he was exceadyng glad, For he was desyrous to se hym of a longe season, because he had hearde many thynges of hym, and he trusted to haue sene some myracle done by hym.
Then he questyoned with him many wordes. But he answered hym nothyng.
The hye Prestes Ꟶ Scrybes, stode forth, accused hym straytly.
And Herod wyth hys men of warre, despysed hym: and whan he had mocked hym, he arayed hym in whyte clothyng, and sent hym agayne to Pylate.
And the same daye Pylate and Herod were made frendes together. For before, they were a variaunce.
And Pylate called together the hye Prestes and the rulers, and the people,
and sayde vnto them: ye haue brought thys man vnto me, as one that peruerteth the people. And beholde, I examyn hym before you, and fynde no faute in thys man, of those thynges where of ye accuse hym:
No nor yet Herode. For I sent you to hym: and lo, nothynge worthy of deeth is done to hym.
I wyll therfore chasten hym, and let hym losse.
For of necessyte, he must haue let one losse vnto them at the feast.
And all the people cryed at once, sayinge: awaye wyth hym, and delyuer to vs Barrabas:
(whych for a certayne insurreccyon made in the cytie and for morther, was cast in preson)
Pylate spake agayne to them wyllynge to let Iesus losse,
But they cryed, sayinge: Crucifye hym, Crucifye hym.
He sayde vnto them the thyrde tyme: What euyll hath he done? I fynde no cause of deeth in him. I wyll therfore chasten him, Ꟶ let him go.
And they cryed wyth loude voyces, requiryng that he myght be crucyfyed. And the voyces: of them and of the hye Prestes preuayled.
And Pylate gaue sentence, that it shuld be as they requyred
and he let losse vnto them, hym that (for insurreccyon Ꟶ morther) was cast into preson, whom they had desyred, and he delyuered vnto them Iesus, to do wt hym what they wolde.
And as they ledde hym awaye, they caught one Symon of Syren, commynge out of the felde: and on hym layde they the crosse, that he myght beare it after Iesus.
And there folowed hym a greate company of people, and of wemen whych bewayled and lamented hym.
But Iesus turned backe vnto them, and sayd: Ye daughters of Ierusalem, wepe not for me: but wepe for youre selues, and for youre chyldren.
For beholde, the dayes wyl come, in the which they shall saye: happy are the baren and the wombes that neuer bare, and the pappes which neuer gaue sucke.
Then shall they begynne to saye to the mountaynes: fall on vs: and to the hylles, couer vs.
For yf they do thys in a grene tree, what shalbe done in the drye?
And ther were two euyll doers ledde wt hym to be slayne.
And after that they were come to the place (which is called Caluary) ther they crucifyed him, Ꟶ the euyl doers, one on the ryght hande, and the other on the lefte.
Then sayd Iesus: father forgeue them, for they wote not what they do. And they parted his rayment, and cast lottes.
And the people stode, and behelde. And the rulers mocked him wyth them, saying: he saued other men, let him saue him selfe, yf he be very Christ, the chosen of God.
The soudyers also mocked hym, and came, and offred hym veneger,
and sayd: yf thou be the kynge of the Iewes, saue thy selfe.
And a superscripcyon was wrytten ouer hym, wt lettres of Greke, Ꟶ Latin, and Hebrew: This is the kynge of the Iewes.
And one of the euyll doers whych were hanged, rayled on him, sayinge: If thou be Chryst, saue thy selfe and vs.
But the other answered Ꟶ rebuked him, sayinge: Fearest thou not God, seynge thou art in the same dampnacyon?
We are ryghteously punysshed, for we receaue accordynge to oure dedes: But thys man hath done nothynge amysse.
And he sayde vnto Iesus. Lorde, remember me, when thou commest into thy kyngdome.
And Iesus sayde vnto hym: Uerely I saye vnto the: to daye shalt thou be wyth me in Paradyse.
And it was about the syxte houre. And ther was darcknes ouer all the earth, vntyll the nynth houre,
and the sonne was darckned. And the vayle of the temple dyd rent, euen thorow the myddes.
And whan Iesus had cryed with a loude voyce, he sayd: Father, into thy handes I commende my sprete. And when he thus had sayd, he gaue vp the goost.
When the Centuryon sawe what had happened, he gloryfyed God sayinge. Uerely, this was a righteous man.
And all the people that came together to that syght, Ꟶ sawe the thynges whych had happened, smote theyr brestes, and returned.
And all hys acquayntaunce and the wemen that folowed hym from Galile, stode a farre of, beholdynge these thynges.
And beholde ther was a man (named Ioseph) a councellour, and he was a good man and a iuste:
the same had not consented to the counsell Ꟶ dede of them, whych was of Aramathia, a cytie of the Iewes, whych same also wayted for the kyngdome of God:
he went vnto Pylate, and begged the boddy of Iesus,
and toke it downe and wrapped it in a lynnen clooth, and layed it in a sepulchre that was hewen in stone, wherin neuer man before was layed.
And that daye was the preparyng of the Sabboth, and the Sabboth drue on.
The wemen that folowed after, whych had come wyth hym from Galile, behelde the sepulcre, and how his body was layed.
And they returned and prepared swete odoures and oyntmentes: but rested the Sabboth daye, accordynge to the commaundement.
But vpon the fyrst daye of the Sabbothes, very early in the mornynge, they came vnto the sepulcre, and brought the swete odoures whych they had prepared, and other wemen wyth them.
And they founde the stone rowled awaye from the sepulcre,
and they went in: but founde not the body of the Lorde Iesu.
And it happened, as they were amased therat, Beholde, two men stode by them in shynynge garmentes.
And as they were afrayde, and bowed doune theyr faces to the erth, they sayde vnto them: why seke ye the lyuynge amonge the deed?
He is not here: but is rysen. Remember, how he spake vnto you, when he was yet in Galile,
sayinge: that the sonne of man must be delyuered into the handes of synfull men, and be crucyfyed, and the thyrde daye ryse agayne.
And they remembred hys wordes,
Ꟶ returned from the sepulcre, Ꟶ tolde all these thynges vnto those eleuen, Ꟶ to all the remnaunt.
It was Mary Magdalen, Ꟶ Ioanna, and Mary Iacobi, and other that were wyth them, whych tolde these thynges vnto the Apostles.
And theyr wordes semed vnto them fayned thynges, nether beleued they them.
Then arose Peter and ran vnto the sepulchre, and loked in, and sawe the lynnen clothes layde by them selfe, and departed, wondrynge in hym selfe at that whych had happened.
And beholde, two of them went that same daye to a towne (called Emaus) which was from Ierusalem about thre skore forlonges,
and they talked together of all these thynges that had happened.
And it chaunsed, that whyle they communed together and reasoned, Iesus hym selfe drue neare, and went wyth them.
But theyr eyes were holden, that they shulde not knowe hym.
And he sayde vnto them: What maner of communycacyons are these that ye haue one to another, as ye walke, and are sadd?
And the one of them (whose named was Cleophas) answered, and sayde to hym: art thou onely a straunger in Ierusalem, and hast not knowen the thynges whych haue chaunsed there, in these dayes?
He sayde vnto them: what thynges? And they sayd vnto hym: of Iesus of Nazareth, whych was a Prophet, myghtye in dede and worde before God and all the people:
and how the hye Prestes, and oure rulers delyuered hym to be condempned to deeth: Ꟶ haue crucyfyed hym.
But we trusted that it had bene he whych shuld haue redemed Israel. And as touchynge all these thynges, to daye is euen the thyrd daye, that they were done.
Yee, and certayne wemen also of oure company made vs astonnyed, which came early vnto the sepulchre,
and founde not hys body: and came, sayinge, that they had sene a visyon of angels, whych sayd that he was alyue.
And certayne of them whych were wyth vs, went to the sepulchre, and founde it euen so as the wemen had sayde: but hym they sawe not.
And he sayde vnto them: O fooles Ꟶ slowe of herte, to beleue all that the Prophetes haue spoken.
Ought not Chryst to haue suffred these thynges, and to enter into hys glory?
And he began at Moses, and all the Prophetes, Ꟶ interpreted vnto them in all scriptures whych were wrytten of hym.
And they drue nye vnto the towne, whych they went vnto. And he made, as though he wold haue gone further.
And they constrayned hym sayinge: abyde wyth vs, for it draweth towardes nyght, and the daye is farre passed. And he went into tary wyth them.
And it came to passe, as he sate at meate wyth them, he toke bread, and blessed it, and brake, and gaue to them.
And their eyes were opened, and they knewe hym: and he vanysshed out of their syght.
And they sayd betwene them selues: dyd not oure hertes burne wyth in vs, whyll he talked wyth vs by the waye, and opened to vs the scryptures?
And they rose vp, the same houre, and returned agayne to Ierusalem, and founde the eleuen gathered together, and them that were wyth them,
saying: the Lorde is rysen in dede, Ꟶ hath apered to Symon.
And they tolde, what thynges were done in the waye, and how they knewe hym, in breakynge of bread.
As they thus spake Iesus hym selfe stode in the myddes of them, and sayeth vnto them: peace be vnto you.
But they were abasshed and afrayde, Ꟶ supposyd that they had sene a sprete.
And he sayde vnto them: why are ye troubled, and why do thoughtes aryse in youre hertes?
Beholde my handes and my fete, that it is euen I my selfe. Handle me and se: for a sprete hath not flesshe and bones, as ye se me haue.
And when he had thus spoken, he shewed them hys handes and hys fete.
And whyll they yet beleued not for ioye, and wondred, he sayd vnto them: Haue ye here eny meate?
And they offred hym a pece of a broyled fysshe, and of an hony combe.
And he toke it, and dyd eate before them.
And he sayde vnto them. These are the wordes whych I spake vnto you, whyll I was yet with you: that all must nedes be fulfylled, whych were wrytten of me in the lawe of Moses and in the Prophetes, and in the Psalmes.
Then opened he theyr wyttes, that they myght vnderstand the scryptures,
and sayde vnto them: Thus is it wrytten, and thus it behoued Christ to suffre, and to ryse agayne from deeth the thyrde daye,
Ꟶ that repentaunce and remyssyon of synnes shulde be preached in hys name amonge all nacyons, and must begynne at Ierusalem.
And ye are wytnesses of these thynges.
And beholde, I will sende the promes of my father vpon you. But tary ye in the cytie of Ierusalem, vntyll ye be endewed wyth power from an hye.
And he led them out into Bethany, and lyfte vp hys handes, and blessed them.
And it cam to passe, as he blessed them, he departed from them, and was caryed vp into heauen.
And they worshypped hym, and returned to Ierusalem wyth greate ioye,
and were contynually in the temple praysynge Ꟶ laudynge God, Amen.
In the begynnynge was the worde, and the worde was wyth God: and God was the worde.
The same was in the begynnyng wyth God.
All thinges were made by it, Ꟶ wythout it, was made nothynge that was made.
In it was lyfe, and the lyfe was the lyght of men,
and the lyght shyneth in darcknes, and the darcknes comprehended it not.
There was sent from God a man, whose name was Iohn.
The same cam as a wytnes to beare wytnes of the lyght, that all men through hym myght beleue.
He was not the lyght: but was sent to beare wytnes of the lyght.
That lyght was the true lyght, whych lyghteth euery man that cometh into the worlde.
He was in the worlde, and the worlde was made by hym: and the worlde knewe hym not.
He cam amonge hys awne, and hys awne receaued him not.
But as many as receaued hym to them gaue he power to be the sonnes of God: euen them that beleued on hys name:
whych were borne, not of bloude nor of the wyll of the flesshe, nor yet of the wyll of man: but of God.
And the same worde became flesshe, and dwelt amonge vs: and we sawe the glory of it, as the glory of the onely begotten sonne of the father, full of grace and trueth.
Iohn beareth wytnes of hym, and cryeth sayinge: Thys was he of whom I spake: which though he came after me, went before me, for he was before me.
And of hys fulnes haue all we receaued, euen grace for grace.
For the lawe was geuen by Moses, but grace Ꟶ trueth came by Iesus Christ.
No man hath sene God at eny tyme. The onely begotten sonne, whych is in the bosome of the father, he hath declared hym.
And thys is the recorde of Iohn: when the Iewes sent Prestes and Leuites from Ierusalem, to aske hym, what art thou?
And he confessed Ꟶ denyed not, Ꟶ sayde playnly. I am not Chryst.
And they asked him: what then? art thou Helyas? And he sayeth: I am not. Arte thou that Prophete? And he answered no.
Then sayde they vnto hym: what art thou, that we maye geue an answer to them that sent vs. What sayest thou of thy selfe?
He sayde I am the voyce of a criar in the wildernes, make strayght the waye of the Lorde, as sayde the Prophete Esaias.
And they whych were sent, were of the Pharyses:
And they asked him, Ꟶ sayde vnto him: why baptisest thou then, yf thou be not Christ, nor Helias, nether that Prophet?
Iohn answered them sayinge I baptise with water: but there stondeth one amonge you, whom ye knowe not,
he it is which though he came after me, was before me, whose sho latchet I am not worthy to vnlose.
These thynges were done in Bethabara beyonde Iordan where Iohn dyd baptise.
The nexte daye, Iohn seeth Iesus comminge vnto hym, and sayeth beholde the lambe of God, whych taketh awaye the synne of the worlde.
Thys is he of whom I sayd: After me cometh a man, whych went before me, for he was before me,
and I knewe him not: but that he shuld be declared to Israell, therfore am I come baptysinge with water.
And Iohn bare recorde, sayinge: I sawe the sprete descende from heauen, lyke vnto a doue, Ꟶ abode vpon him,
and I knewe hym not. But he that sent me to baptise in water, the same sayde vnto me: vpon whom thou shalt se the sprete descende, and tary styll on hym, the same is he whych baptiseth wyth the holy goost.
And I sawe, and bare recorde, that he is the sonne of God.
The nexte daye after, Iohn stode agayne, Ꟶ two of his disciples,
and he behelde Iesus as he walked by, Ꟶ sayeth: beholde the lambe of God.
And the two disciples hearde hym speake, and they folowed Iesus.
And Iesus turned about, and sawe them folowe hym, Ꟶ sayeth vnto them: what seke ye? They sayd vnto hym: Rabbi (whych is to saye yf one interprete it Master) where dwellest thou?
He sayeth vnto them: come Ꟶ se. They came, Ꟶ sawe where he dwelt: Ꟶ abode with hym that daye. For it was about the tenth houre.
One of the two which hearde Iohn speake, and folowed him, was Andrew Simon Peters brother.
The same founde hys brother Simon fyrst, and sayeth vnto him: we haue founde Messias (whych is by interpretacion, annoynted)
and brought him to Iesus. And Iesus behelde hym, and sayde: thou art Simon the sonne of Ionas, thou shalt be called Cephas: which is by interpretacion a stone.
The daye folowyng. Iesus wolde go into Galile, and founde Philip, and sayeth vnto him: folowe me
Philip was of Bethsaida the citie of Andrew and Peter.
Philip founde Nathanael, and sayeth vnto him: We haue founde hym, of whome Moses in the lawe and the Prophetes dyd wryte, Iesus the sonne of Ioseph of Nazareth.
And Nathanael sayd vnto him can there eny good thynge come out of Nazareth? Philip sayeth vnto him come and se.
Iesus sawe Nathanael comynge to him, Ꟶ sayeth of him: Beholde a ryght Israelyte, in whom is no gyle.
Nathanael sayeth vnto him: whence knowest thou me? Iesus answered, and sayde vnto him. Before that Philip called the, when thou wast vnder the fygge tree, I sawe the.
Nathanael answered and sayd vnto him: Rabbi, thou art euen the very sonne of God, thou art the kyng of Israel.
Iesus answered, and sayde vnto him: Because I sayde vnto the, I sawe the vnder the fygge tree, thou beleuest. Thou shalt se greater thynges then these.
And he sayeth vnto him: Uerely, verely, I saye vnto you: herafter shall ye se heauen open, Ꟶ the angels of God ascendynge Ꟶ descendynge ouer the sonne of man.
And the thyrd daye, was ther a mariage in Cana a cytie of Galile, Ꟶ the mother of Iesus was there.
And Iesus was called (Ꟶ his disciples) vnto the mariage
And when the wyne fayled, the mother of Iesus sayeth vnto him: they haue no wyne.
Iesus sayeth vnto her: woman what haue I to do wyth the, myne houre is not yet come.
His mother sayeth vnto the ministres: whatsoeuer he sayeth vnto you, do it.
And ther were standynge there, syxe waterpottes of stone after the maner of the purifyenge of the Iewes, contaynynge two or thre fyrkins a pece.
Iesus sayeth vnto them: fyll the water pottes with water. And they fylled them vp to the brym.
And he sayeth vnto them: drawe out now, Ꟶ beare vnto the gouerner of the feaste And they bare it.
When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was turned vnto wyne, and knewe not whence it was (but the mynistres whych drue the water knewe) He calleth the brygdegome,
and sayeth vnto hym: Euery man at the begynninge doth sett forth good wyne, and when men be droncke, then that whych is worse. But thou hast kept the good wyne, vntyll now.
Thys begynninge of myracles dyd Iesus in Cana of Galile, and shewed hys glory, Ꟶ his disciples beleued on him.
After this he wente downe to Capernaum, he Ꟶ his mother, and his brethren, and his disciples, and there continued not manye dayes.
And the Iewes ester was euen at hande, and Iesus went vp to Ierusalem,
Ꟶ founde syttynge in the temple, those that solde oxen and shepe and doues, Ꟶ chaungers of money.
And when he had made (as it were) a scourge of smal coardes, he droue them all out of the temple, with the shepe Ꟶ oxen, and powred out the chaungers money, and ouerthrue the tables,
Ꟶ sayde vnto them that solde doues: Haue these thinges hence, Ꟶ make not my fathers house an house of marchaundyse.
And his disciples remembred it that is wrytten: the zele of thyne house hath euen eaten me.
Then answered the Iewes and sayde vnto him: what token shewest thou vnto vs, seinge that thou dost these thynges?
Iesus answered Ꟶ sayde vnto them: destroye thys temple, and in thre dayes I wyll reare it vp.
Then sayde the Iewes .xlvj. yeres was thys temple a byldynge: Ꟶ wylt thou reare it vp in thre dayes?
But he spake of the temple of his body.
Assone therfore as he was rysen from deeth agayne, his disciples remembred that he thus had sayde. And they beleued the scripture, Ꟶ the wordes which Iesus had sayde
When he was in Ierusalem at Easter in the feast daye, many beleued on his name, when they sawe his myracles whych he dyd.
But Iesus dyd not commit him selfe vnto them, because he knewe all men,
and neded not, that eny man shuld testifye of him. For he knewe what was in man.
Ther was a man of the Pharises named Nycodemus, a ruler of the Iewes.
The same cam to Iesus by nyght, and sayde vnto him: Rabbi, we knowe that thou arte a teacher come from God: for no man coulde do suche myracles as thou doest, except God were wt him.
Iesus answered Ꟶ sayd vnto him: Uerely, verely, I saye vnto the, except a man be borne from aboue, he cannot se the kyngdom of God.
Nicodemus sayeth vnto hym how can a man be borne when he is olde? can he enter into hys mothers wombe and be borne agayne?
Iesus answered verely, verely, I saye vnto the: except a man be borne of water Ꟶ of the sprete, he cannot enter into the kyngdom of God,
That whych is borne of the flesshe, is flesshe, and that which is borne of the sprete, is sprete.
Maruayle not thou that I sayd to the, ye must be borne from aboue.
The wynde bloweth where it lysteth, Ꟶ thou hearest the sounde therof but canst not tell whence it commeth Ꟶ whether it goeth. So is euery one that is borne of the sprete.
Nicodemus answered and sayde vnto hym how can these thynges be?
Iesus answered Ꟶ sayde vnto hym: art thou a master in Israel, Ꟶ knowest not these thinges?
Uerely, verely I saye vnto the: we speake that we do knowe, Ꟶ testify that we haue sene: and ye receaue not oure wytnes.
If I haue tolde you earthly thinges, and ye beleue not: how shall ye beleue, yf I tell you of heauenly thynges.
And no man ascendeth vp to heauen, but he that came doune from heauen, euen the sonne of man whych is in heauen:
And as Moses lyfte vp the serpent in the wyldernes, euen so must the sonne of man be lyfte vp,
that whosoeuer beleueth in him, perysshe not, but haue eternall lyfe.
For God so loue the worlde, that, he gaue is only begotten sonne, that whosoeuer beleueth in him, shulde not perisshe, but haue euerlastyng lyfe.
For God sent not his sonne into the worlde, to condempne the worlde but that the world through him myght be saued.
He that beleueth on him, is not condemned. But he that beleueth not, is condemned all ready, because he hath not beleued in the name of the onely begotten sonne of God,
And thys is the condemnacion: that lyght is come into the world, and men loued darcknes more then light, because their dedes were euyll.
For euery one that euyll doeth, hateth the lyght: nether commeth to the lyght, lest his dedes shuld be reproued.
But he that doth trueth, commeth to the lyght, that hys dedes maye be knowen, how that they are wrought in God.
After these thinges cam Iesus Ꟶ his disciples into the land of Iewry Ꟶ ther he taried with them. and baptysed,
And Iohn also baptised in Enon besydes Salim, because ther was moch water there, Ꟶ they came Ꟶ were baptised.
For Iohn was not yet cast into preson.
And ther arose a question betwene Iohns disciples and the Iewes, aboute purifyinge.
And they came vnto Iohn, Ꟶ sayde vnto him: Rabbi, he that was wyth the beyonde Iordan (to whom thou barest wytnes) beholde the same baptiseth Ꟶ all men come to hym.
Iohn answered, Ꟶ sayde: a man can receaue nothinge, except it be geuen him from heauen.
Ye youre selues are witnesses how that I sayd: I am not Christ, but am sent before him:
He that hath the bryde, is the brydegrome. But the frende of the brydegrome, whych standeth and heareth hym, reioyseth greatly because of the brydegromes voyce. This my ioye therfore is fulfilled.
He must increace: but I must decreace.
He that commeth from an hye, is aboue all: He that is of the erth, is earthly, and speaketh of the erth. He that commeth from heauen, is aboue all,
Ꟶ what he hath sene and hearde: that he testifieth: and no man receaueth hys testimonye.
He that hath receaued hys testimonie hath set to hys seale, that God is true.
For he whom God hath sent, speaketh the wordes of God: For God geueth not the sprete by measure vnto him.
The father loueth the sonne Ꟶ hath geuen all thynges into hys hande
He that beleueth on the sonne hath euerlastinge lyfe: He that beleueth not the sonne, shall not se lyfe, but the wrath of God abydeth on him.
As sone as the Lord knewe, how the Pharises had hearde, that Iesus made and baptised moo disciples then Iohn
(though that Iesus him selfe baptised not: but his disciples)
he lefte Iewry, and departed agayne into Galile.
For it was so that he must nedes goo thorowe Samaria
Then came he to a cytie of Samaria (which is called Sichar) Besydes the possessyon that Iacob gaue to his sonne Ioseph,
And there was Iacobs well. Iesus then beyng werye of hys iorney, sate thus on the well. And it was about the syxte houre:
and there came a woman of Samaria to drawe water. Iesus sayeth vnto her: geue me drinke.
For his disciples were gone awaye vnto the towne, to bye meate.
Then sayeth the woman of Samaria vnto him: howe is it, that thou beinge a Iewe, askest drincke of me, which am a Samaritane? For the Iewes medle not with the Samaritans.
Iesus answered and sayde vnto hyr: yf thou knewest the gyfte of God, and who it is that sayeth to the geue me drincke, thou woldest haue asked of him, Ꟶ he wolde haue geuen the water of lyfe.
The woman sayeth vnto him: Syr, thou hast nothynge to drawe wyth, Ꟶ the well is depe: from whence then hast thou that water of lyfe?
Art thou greater then oure father Iacob which gaue vs the well, and he him selfe, drancke therof, and his children, and his catell?
Iesus answered, and sayde vnto hyr: whosoeuer drincketh of thys water, shall thyrst agayne.
But whosoeuer drincketh of the water that I shall geue him, shall neuer bemore a thyrst: but the water that I shall geue him, shalbe in him a well of water, spryngynge vp into euerlastinge lyfe.
The woman sayeth vnto him: Syr, geue me of that water, that I thyrst not, nether come hyther to drawe.
Iesus sayeth vnto her: Go, call thy husband, and come hyther.
The woman answered and sayde vnto him: I haue no husband.
Iesus sayde vnto her: Thou hast well sayd, I haue no husband. For thou hast had fyue husbandes, Ꟶ he whom thou now hast, is not thy husband. In that saydest thou truely.
The woman sayeth vnto hym: Syr, I perceaue that thou art a prophet.
Oure fathers worshypped in thys mountayne Ꟶ ye saye that in Ierusalem is the place, where men ought to worshyppe.
Iesus sayeth vnto her: woman beleue me, the houre commeth, when ye shall (nether in this mountayne, nor yet at Ierusalem) worshyppe the fathers:
Ye worsshyp ye wote not what: we knowe what we worshyppe. For saluaciom commeth of the Iewes.
But the houre commeth Ꟶ now is, when the true worshyppers shall worshyppe the father in sprete, Ꟶ in the treuth. For such the father also requyreth to worshyppe hym.
God is a sprete: and they that worshyppe hym, must worshyppe hym in sprete and in the treuth.
The woman sayeth vnto him: I wote, that Messias shall come, whych is called Chryst. When he is come, he wyll tell vs all thynges Iesus sayeth vnto hyr.
I that speake vnto the am he.
And immediatly came hys disciples, Ꟶ marueyled that he talked with the woman. Yet no man sayd: what meanest thou or why talkest thou with her?
The woman then lefte her waterpot, and went her waye into the cytie, Ꟶ sayeth to the men:
Come, se a man whych tolde me all thynges that euer I dyd. Is not he Christ?
Then they went out of the cytie, and came vnto him.
In the meane whyle his disciples prayed him, saying: Master, eate.
He sayde vnto them: I haue meate to eate, that ye knowe not of.
Therfore sayde the disciples amonge them selues: hath eny man brought him ought to eate?
Iesus sayeth vnto them: my meate is to do the will of him that sent me, Ꟶ to fynisshe his worcke.
Saye not ye: there are yet foure monethes, Ꟶ then commeth haruest? Beholde I saye vnto you: lyfte vp youre eyes, and loke on the regions: for they are whyte all ready vnto haruest.
And he that reapeth, receaueth rewarde, and gathereth frute vnto lyfe eternall: that both he that soweth, Ꟶ he that reapeth, myght reioyse together.
And herin is the saying true, that one soweth Ꟶ another reapeth.
I sent you to reape that wheron ye bestowed no laboure. Other men laboured, Ꟶ ye are entred into their labours.
Many of the Samaritans of that cytie beleued on him, for the saying of the woman, which testified that he tolde her all that euer she dyd.
So, when the Samaritans were come vnto him, they besought him, that he wolde tary with them. And he abode there two dayes.
And many moo beleued because of his awne wordes,
and sayde vnto the woman. Now we beleue, not because of thy sayinge: for we haue herde him oure selues, and knowe that thys is euen Christ, the sauioure of the worlde.
After two dayes he departed thence, and went awaye into Galile.
For Iesus hym selfe testified, that a Prophete hath none honoure in his awne countre.
Then, as sone as he was come into Galile, the Galileans receaued him: whan they had sene all the thynges that he dyd at Ierusalem at the daye of the feast. For they went also vnto the feast daye
So Iesus cam agayne into Cana of Galile wher he turned the water into wyne. And ther was a certayne ruler, whose sonne was sycke at Capernaum.
As sone as the same herde that Iesus was come out of Iewry into Galile, he went vnto him, Ꟶ besought him, that he wolde come downe, and heale his sonne. For he was euen at the poynt of death.
Then sayde Iesus vnto him: excepte ye se signes Ꟶ wondres, ye wyll not beleue.
The ruler sayeth vnto him: Syr, come downe, or euer that my sonne dye.
Iesus sayeth vnto hym: Go thy waye, thy sonne lyueth. The man beleued the worde that Iesus had spoken vnto him. And he went his waye.
And as he was now going downe, the seruauntes mett him, Ꟶ tolde him, sayinge: thy sonne lyueth.
Then enquyred he of them the houre, when he beganne to amende. And they sayd vnto him: Yester daye at the seuenth houre, the feuer lefte him.
So the father knewe, that it was the same houre, in the which Iesus sayde vnto him: Thy sonne lyueth. And he beleued, and all his housholde.
This is agayne the seconde myracle, that Iesus dyd, whan he was come out of Iewry into Galile.
After thys was there a feast daye of the Iewes, and Iesus went vp to Ierusalem.
And ther is at Ierusalem, by the slaughterhouse, a pole (which is called in the Ebrue tonge, Bethseda) hauing fyue porches,
in whych laye a greate multitude of sycke folcke, of blinde, halt, and wythered, waytinge for the mouinge of the water.
For an angell went doune at a certayne ceason into the pole, and stered the water. Whosoeuer then fyrst (after the steringe of the water) stepped in, was made whoale of whatsoeuer disease he had.
And a certayne man was there, whych had bene dyseased .xxxviij. yeres.
When Iesus sawe him lye, and knewe that he now longe tyme had bene dyseased, he sayeth vnto him: Wylt thou be made whole?
The sycke man answered hym: Syr, I haue no man when the water is troubled, to put me into the pole. But in the meane time, whyle I am aboute to come, another steppeth downe before me.
Iesus sayeth vnto hym ryse, take vp thy bed, Ꟶ walke.
And immediatly the man was made whole, and toke vp hys bed, and walked. And the same daye was the Saboth.
The Iewes therfore sayde vnto hym that was made whole: It is the Saboth daye, it is not laufull for the to cary thy bed.
He answered them: he that made me whole, sayde vnto me: take vp thy bed, and walke.
Then asked they hym: what man is that, whych sayd vnto the, take vp thy bed Ꟶ walke?
And he that was healed, wist not who it was. For Iesus had gotten him selfe awaye, because that ther was preace of people in that place.
Afterwarde, Iesus founde him in the temple, and sayde vnto him: beholde, thou art made whole, synne nomore, lest a worsse thinge happen vnto the.
The man departed Ꟶ tolde the Iewes, that it was Iesus, which had made hym whole.
And therfore the Iewes dyd persecute Iesus, and sought the meanes to slee him, because he had done these thynges on the Sabboth daye.
And Iesus answered them. My father worketh hitherto, and I worke.
Therfore, the Iewes sought the more to kyll him, not onely because he had broken the Sabboth: but sayde also that God was hys father and made hym selfe equall with God.
Then answered Iesus, Ꟶ sayde vnto them: verely, verely. I saye vnto you the sonne can do nothinge of him selfe, but that he seeth the father do. For whatsoeuer he doeth, that doeth the sonne also.
For the father loueth the sonne, and sheweth hym all thinges that he hym selfe doeth. And he will shewe him greater workes then these, because ye shuld maruayle.
For lykewyse as the father rayseth vp the deed, and quyckeneth them, euen so the sonne quyckeneth whom he wyll
Nether iudgeth the father eny man: but hath commytted all iudgement vnto the sonne,
because that all men shuld honoure the sonne euen as they honoure the father. He that honoureth not the sonne, the same honoureth not the father which hath sent hym.
Uerely, verely I saye vnto you. He that heareth my worde, Ꟶ beleueth on him that sent me, hath euerlasting lyfe, and shall not come into damnacyon: but is scaped from deeth vnto lyfe.
Uerely, verely, I saye vnto you the houre shall come, Ꟶ nowe it is, when the deed shall heare the voyce of the sonne of God. And they that heare, shall lyue.
For as the father hath lyfe in hym selfe, so lykewyse hath he geuen to the sonne to haue lyfe in hym selfe:
and hath geuen him power also to iudge, because he is the sonne of man.
Maruayle not at this: for the houre shal come, in that which, all that are in the graues, shall heare hys voyce,
and shall come forth: they that haue done good, vnto the resurreccion of lyfe: and they that haue done euyll, vnto the resurreccion of damnacion.
I can of myne awne selfe do nothing. As I heare, I iudge, and my iudgment is iust, because I seke not myne awne wyll, but the wyll of the father whych hath sent me
If I shulde beare wytnes of my selfe, my wytnes were not true.
Ther is another that beareth witnes of me: Ꟶ I am sure, that the wytnes which he beareth of me, is true.
Ye sent vnto Iohn, Ꟶ he bare wytnes vnto the trueth.
But I receaue not the recorde of man. Neuerthelesse, these thinges I saye that ye myght be safe.
He was a burnynge, Ꟶ a shyninge lyght, Ꟶ ye wolde for a season haue reioysed in hys lyght
But I haue greater wytnes, then the wytnes of Iohn For the worckes which the father hath geuen me to finyshe, the same workes that I do, beare wytnes of me, that the father hath sent me.
And the father him selfe which hath sent me hath borne witnes of me. Ye haue not hearde hys voyce at eny tyme nor sene hys shape,
hys word haue ye not abydinge in you. For whom he hath sent, him ye beleue not.
Search the scriptures, for in them ye thinke ye haue eternall lyfe Ꟶ they are they which testify of me.
And yet wyll ye not come to me, that ye myght haue lyfe.
I receaue not prayse of men.
But I knowe you, that ye haue not the loue of God in you.
I am come in my fathers name and ye receaue me not. If another come in hys awne name, hym wyll ye receaue:
How can ye beleue, which receaue honoure one of another, Ꟶ seke not the honoure that commeth of God onely?
Do not thyncke that I wyll accuse you to my father. Ther is one that accuseth you: euen Moses in whom ye trust.
For had ye beleued Moses, ye wolde haue beleued me for he wrote of me.
But yf ye beleue not hys wrytinges: how shall ye beleue my wordes?
After these thinges Iesus went hys waye ouer the see of Galile whych is the see of Tiberias
Ꟶ a great multitude folowed him, because they sawe his myracles whych he dyd on them that were diseased.
And Iesus went vp into a mountayne, Ꟶ there he sate wyth hys disciples.
And easter, a feast of the Iewes was nye.
When Iesus then lyfte vp his eyes, and sawe a great company come vnto him, he sayeth vnto Philip: whence shall we bye breed, that these maye eate?
This he sayd to proue hym: for he him selfe knewe, what he wolde do.
Philip answered him two hundred peny worthe of breed are not sufficient for them, that euery man maye take a lytell.
One of his disciples (Andrew, Simon Peters brother) sayeth vnto him:
There is a lad here, whych hath fyue barly loues and two fysshes: but what are they amonge so many?
And Iesus sayde. Make the people syt downe. Ther was moch grasse in that place. So the men sate downe in nombre, about fyue thousand.
And Iesus toke the breed: And whan he had geuen thanckes, he gaue to the disciples, and the disciples to them that were set downe: And lykewyse of the fysshes as moch as they wolde:
When they had eaten ynough, he sayeth vnto his disciples: gather vp the broken meate whych remayneth: that nothynge be lost.
And they gathered it together, and fylled twelue baskettes with the broken meate of the fyue barly loaues: whych broken meate remayned vnto them that had eaten.
Then those men (when they had sene the myracle that Iesus dyd) sayd: this is of a trueth the same Prophete, that shulde come into the worlde.
When Iesus therfore perceaued, that they wolde come, Ꟶ take hym vp to make hym kyng, he departed agayne into a mountayne him selfe alone.
And when euen was now come, hys disciples went downe vnto the see,
Ꟶ gat vp into a shippe, and came ouer the see vnto Capernaum. And it was now darcke, and Iesus was not come to them.
And the see arose with a greate wynde that blewe.
So when they had rowen about a .xxv. or .xxx. furlonges, they sawe Iesus walkyng in the see, Ꟶ drawing nye vnto the shippe, Ꟶ they were afrayed.
But he sayeth vnto them: It is I, be not afrayde.
Then wold they haue receaued him into the shyp, Ꟶ immediatly the shyp was at the lande whyther they went.
The daye folowynge whan the people (whych stode on the other syde of the see) sawe, that ther was none other shyp there, saue that one wher into his disciples were entred, Ꟶ that Iesus went not in wyth his disciples into the shyp: but that his disciples were gone awaye alone
(Howbeit, ther cam other shyppes from Tiberias nye vnto the place, where they dyd eate bred, after that the Lord had geuen thankes)
when the people therfore sawe that Iesus was not there, nether hys disciples, they also toke shypping, Ꟶ came to Capernaum, sekynge for Iesus.
And when they had founde hym on the other syde of the see, they sayde vnto hym: Rabbi, when camest thou hyther?
Iesus answered them, and sayde: verely, verely I saye vnto you: ye seke me, not because ye sawe the myracles but because ye dyd eate of the loaues, and were fylled.
Laboure not for the meate whych perissheth, but for that whych endureth vnto euerlastinge lyfe, whych meate the sonne of man shall geue vnto you. For hym hath God the father sealed.
Then sayde they vnto him: what shal we do, that we myght worcke the worckes of God?
Iesus answered Ꟶ sayde vnto them: This is the worcke of God, that ye beleue on him, whom he hath sent,
They sayde therfore vnto him what sygne shewest thou then, that we maye se, and beleue the? What doest thou worcke?
Oure fathers dyd eate Manna in the desert as it is wrytten: He gaue them breed from heauen to eate.
Then Iesus sayde vnto them: verely, verely I saye vnto you: Moses gaue you not that breed from heauen: but my father geueth you the true breed from heauen.
For the breed of God is he, whych commeth downe from heauen, and geueth lyfe vnto the worlde.
Then sayd they vnto him: Lord, euermore geue vs this breed.
And Iesus sayd vnto them. I am the breed of lyfe. He that commeth to me shall not honger: and he that beleueth on me shall neuer thurst.
But I sayde vnto you: that ye also haue sene me, and yet ye beleue not.
All that the father geueth me shall come to me: and he that commeth to me, I cast not awaye?
For I came downe from heauen: not to do that I will, but that he will, whych hath sent me.
And this is the fathers wyll whych hath sent me, that of all whych he hath geuen me, I shall loose nothinge: but rayse them vp agayne at the last daye.
And thys is the will of him that sent me: that euery one whych seeth the sonne and beleueth on him, haue euerlasting lyfe. And I wyll rayse him vp at the last daye.
The Iewes then murmured at him, because he sayd: I am the breed whych came downe from heauen.
And they sayde: Is not this Iesus the sonne of Ioseph, whose father Ꟶ mother we knowe? How is it then that he sayeth, I came downe from heauen?
Iesus answered Ꟶ sayd vnto them. Murmur not amonge youre selues.
No man can come to me, except the father which hath sent me, drawe hym: And I wyll rayse hym vp at the last daye.
It is written in the Prophetes: and they shalbe all taught of God. Euery man therfore that hath hearde, and hath learned of the father, commeth vnto me.
Not that eny man hath sene the father, saue he which is of God: the same hath sene the father.
Uerely, verely, I saye vnto you: he that putteth his trust in me, hath euerlastinge lyfe.
I am that breed of lyfe.
Youre fathers dyd eate Manna in the wyldernes, Ꟶ are deed?
Thys is that breed, whych commeth downe from heauen, that a man maye eate therof, Ꟶ not dye.
I am that lyuinge bread, whych came downe from heauen. If eny man eate of this bread, he shall liue for euer And the breed that I will geue, is my flesshe, whych I will geue for the lyfe of the worlde.
The Iewes therfore stroue amonge them selues, saying: How can this felowe geue vs the flessh of his, to eate?
Then Iesus sayde vnto them: Uerely, verely, I saye vnto you, except ye eate the flesshe of the sonne of man, and drinke his bloude: ye haue no lyfe in you.
Whoso eateth my flesshe Ꟶ dryncketh my bloude, hath eternall lyfe, Ꟶ I wyll rayse him vp at the last daye.
For my fleshe is meate in dede: and my bloude is drincke in dede.
He that eateth my flesshe Ꟶ drinketh my bloude, dwelleth in me and I in him.
As the lyuinge father hath sent me, and I liue for the father: Euen so he that eateth me, shall lyue by the meanes of me.
This is the breed, which cam downe from heauen: not as youre fathers dyd eate Manna, Ꟶ are deed: He that eateth of this breed, shall lyue euer.
These thinges sayd he in the synagoge, as he taught in Capernaum.
Many therfore of his disciples (when they had herde this) sayde: this is an harde sayinge: who can abyde the bearinge of it?
Iesus knewe in him selfe, that his disciples murmured at it, Ꟶ he sayd vnto them: Doth this offende you?
What and yf ye shall se the sonne of man ascende vp thither where he was before?
It is the sprete that quyckeneth, the flesh proffyteth nothinge. The wordes that I speake vnto you, are sprete and lyfe.
But there are some of you that beleue not. For Iesus knewe from the begynninge, which they were, that beleued not, Ꟶ who shulde betraye him:
And he sayd: therfore sayde I vnto you: that noman can come vnto me, except it were geuen vnto hym of my father.
From that tyme many of his disciples went backe, and forsoke him, and walked nomore with hym.
Then sayde Iesus to the twelue: wyll ye also goo awaye?
Then Simon Peter answered him: Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou haste the wordes of eternall lyfe
and we beleue and are sure that thou art Chryst the sonne of the lyuinge God.
Iesus answereth them: Haue not I chosen you twelue, and one of you is a deuyll?
He spake of Iudas Iscarioth the sonne of Simon. For he it was, that shuld betraye hym, beynge one of the twelue.
After these thinges, Iesus went about in Galile: for he wolde not go aboute in Iewry because that the Iewes sought to kyll hym.
The Iewes feast of tabernacles was at hande.
Hys brethren therfore sayde vnto him: get the hence, and go into Iewry, that thy disciples also maye se thy worckes that thou doest.
For ther is no man that doeth eny thynge in secret, and he hym selfe seketh to be knowne openlye. If thou do soch thinges, shewe thy selfe to the world.
For his brethren beleued not in him.
Then Iesus sayde vnto them: My tyme is not yet come: but youre tyme is all waye ready.
The worlde cannot hate you. But me it hateth: because I testify of it, that the workes therof are euill.
Go ye vp vnto this feast, I will not go vp yet vnto this feast, for my tyme is not yet full come.
whan he had sayde these wordes vnto them he abode styll in Galile.
But as sone as his brethren were come, then went he also vp vnto the feast not openly: but as it were preuely.
Then sought him the Iewes at the feast, Ꟶ sayde: where is he?
And moch murmuringe was ther of him amonge the people. For some sayde: He is good, other sayde naye, but he deceaueth the people.
How be it no man spake openly of him, for feare of the Iewes.
Now whan halfe of the feast was done, Iesus went vp into the temple, and taught.
And the Iewes marueyled, saying: How knoweth he the scriptures, seynge that he neuer learned?
Iesus answered them, Ꟶ sayde: My doctryne hys not myne: but his that sent me.
If eny man wyll be obedient vnto his wyll, he shall knowe of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speake of my selfe.
He that speaketh of him selfe, seketh his awne prayse. But he that seketh hys prayse that sent him, the same is true, Ꟶ no vnryghtewesnes is in him.
Dyd not Moses geue you a lawe, Ꟶ yet none of you kepeth the lawe? Why go ye about to kyll me?
The people answered and sayde: thou hast the deuyll: who goeth aboute to kyll the?
Iesus answered, and sayde vnto them: I haue done one worcke, and ye all maruayle.
Moses therfore gaue vnto you the circuncisyon: not because it is of Moses, but of the fathers: And yet ye on the Saboth daye, circuncyse a man.
If a man on the Saboth daye receaue circumcysion without breakynge of the lawe of Moses: disdayne ye at me, because I haue made a man euery whit whoale on the Saboth daye?
Iudge not after the vtter aperaunce, but iudge with a ryghtewes iudgement.
Then sayde some of them of Ierusalem: is not this he, whom they go about to kyll?
But lo, he speaketh boldly, and they saye nothing to him. Do the rulers knowe in dede, that this is very Christ?
Howbeit we knowe this man whence he is: but when Christ cometh, no man knoweth whence he is.
Then cryed Iesus in the temple (as he taught) saying: ye both knowe me, and whence I am ye knowe. And I am not come of my selfe: but he that sent me is true, whom ye knowe not.
But I knowe him for I am of him, Ꟶ he hath sent me.
Then they sought to take him: but no man layde handes on him, because his houre was not yet come
Many of the people beleued on hym Ꟶ sayde: when Christ commeth, will he do moo myracles then these, that this man hath done?
The Pharises hearde that the people murmured suche thinges concernyng him And the pharises and hye prestes sent ministres to take him.
Then sayde Iesus vnto them: Yet am I a lytell whyle with you, and then go I vnto him that sent me.
Ye shall seke me, and shall not fynde me: Ꟶ where I am, thyther can ye not come.
Then sayde the Iewes among them selues: whither wyll he go, that we shall not fynde him? Wyll he go amonge the gentyls (whych are scattered abroade) and teach the gentyls:
What maner of saying is this that he sayd: ye shall seke me, Ꟶ shall not finde me: and where I am, thyther can ye not come?
In the last daye, that great daye of the feast Iesus stode, and cryed, sayinge: If eny man thyrst, lett him come vnto me, Ꟶ drincke.
He that beleueth on me (as sayeth the scripture) out of his belly shall flowe ryuers of water of lyfe.
But this spake he of the sprete, whych they that beleue on him, shulde receaue. For the holy goost was not yet there, because Iesus was not yet glorifyed.
Many of the people therfore (when they hearde this saying) sayd of a trueth this is a prophet:
but other sayde this is Christ. But some sayde: shal Christ come out of Galile:
Sayeth not the scripture, that Christ shall come of the seed of Dauid: and out of the towne of Bethleem where Dauid was?
So was ther dissencion amonge the people because of him.
And some of them wolde haue taken him but no man layed handes of him.
Then came the mynisters to the hye prestes and Pharises. And they sayed vnto them: why haue ye not brought him?
The mynisters answered: neuer man spake as this man doeth,
Then answered them the Pharises: are ye also disceaued?
Doth eny of the rulers or of the Pharises beleue on him?
But this comen people whych knowe not the lawe, are cursed,
Nicodemus sayeth vnto them (he that came to Iesus by nyght, Ꟶ was one of them)
Doth oure lawe iudge eny man, before it heare him, and knowe what he hath done?
They answered, and sayd vnto him: art thou also of Galile? Search Ꟶ loke, For out of Galile aryseth no Prophete.
And euery man went vnto his awne house.
Iesus went vnto mount olyuete,
and early in the mornynge he came agayne into the temple, and all the people cam vnto hym, Ꟶ he sate downe, Ꟶ taught them.
And the Scribes Ꟶ Pharises brought vnto hym a woman taken in aduoutry: Ꟶ whan they had set hir in the myddes,
they saye vnto hym: Master, thys woman was taken in aduoutry, euen as the dede was a doing.
Moses in the lawe commaunded vs, that suche shulde be stoned. But what sayest thou?
This they sayde to tempt him that they myght accuse him. But Iesus stouped downe, and with his fynger wrote on the grounde.
So, whan they contynued askynge him, he lyfte him selfe vp, and sayde vnto them: let him that is amonge you without synne, cast the fyrst stone at her.
And agayne he stowped downe, Ꟶ wrote on the grounde.
And assone as they hearde this, they went out one by one, begynning at the eldest. And Iesus was lefte alone, Ꟶ the woman standynge in the myddes.
When Iesus had lyfte vp him selfe, and sawe no man, but the woman, he sayde vnto hir: woman, where are those thyne accusars? Hath no man condempned the?
She sayde: No man, Lorde. And Iesus sayde. Nether do I condempne the. Go and synne nomore.
Then spake Iesus agayne vnto them, saying: I am the lyght of the worlde. He that foloweth me, doth not walke in darcknes but shall haue the light of lyfe.
The Pharises therfore sayde vnto him: thou hearest recorde of thy selfe, thy recorde is not true.
Iesus answered, Ꟶ sayde vnto them: though I beare recorde of my selfe, yet my recorde is true: for I knowe whence I cam, and whither I go. But ye cannot tell whence I come, and whither I go.
Ye iudge after the flesshe I iudge no man.
And yf I iudge, my iudgement is true. For I am not alone: but I Ꟶ the father that sent me.
It is also wrytten in youre lawe, that the testimony of two men is true.
I am one that beareth wytnes of my selfe, Ꟶ the father that sent me, beareth wytnes of me.
Then sayde they vnto him: where is thy father? Iesus answered: ye nether knowe me, nor yet my father: If ye had knowen me, ye shulde haue knowen my father also.
These wordes spake Iesus in the tresury as he taught in the temple, and no man layde handes on hym for his houre was not yet come.
Then sayde Iesus agayne vnto them: I go my waye, Ꟶ ye shall seke me, Ꟶ shall dye in youre synnes. Whyther I go, thyther can ye not come.
Then sayde the Iewes: will he kyll him selfe, because he sayth: whyther I go, thyther can ye not come?
And he sayde vnto them: ye are from beneth, I am from aboue. Ye are of this world, I am not of this world,
I sayd therfore vnto you, that ye shal dye in youre synnes. For yf ye beleue not that I am he, ye shall dye in youre synnes.
Then sayd they vnto him. who arte thou? And Iesus sayeth vnto them: Euen the very same thing that I speake vnto you.
I haue many thinges to saye, and to iudge of you: Yee, Ꟶ he that sent me, is true. And I speake in the world, those thinges, which I haue hearde of hym.
Howebeit they vnderstode not that he spake of his father.
Then sayd Iesus vnto them: when ye haue lyft vp an hye the sonne of man, then shall ye knowe, that I am he, and that I do nothinge of my selfe: but as my father hath taught me, euen so I speake these thinges:
and he that sent me, is wt me. The father hath not lefte me alone, for I do all wayes those thinges that please him.
As he spake these wordes, many beleued on him. Then sayde Iesus to those Iewes, which beleued on him:
If ye continue in my worde, then are ye my very disciples,
and ye shall knowe the trueth: and the trueth shall make you free.
They answered him: We be Abrahams seed, and were neuer bonde to eny man: how sayest thou then: ye shalbe made fre?
Iesus answered them: verely, verely I saye vnto you, that whosoeuer committeth sinne,
is the seruaunte of sinne. And the seruaunt abydeth not in the house for euer.
But the sonne abydeth euer. If the sonne therfore shal make you fre, then are ye fre in dede.
I knowe that ye are Abrahams seed: but ye seke meanes to kill me, because my word hath no place in you.
I speake that which I haue sene with my father: and ye do that, which ye haue sene with youre father.
They answered and sayde vnto him: Abraham is oure father. Iesus sayeth vnto them: If ye were Abrahams children, ye wolde do the dedes of Abraham.
But now ye go aboute to kyll me, a man that hath tolde you the trueth whych I haue heard of God: this dyd not Abraham.
Ye do the dedes of youre father. Then sayde they to him: we were not borne of fornicacion. We haue one father, euen God.
Iesus sayd vnto them: yf God were youre father, truly ye wolde loue me. For I proceaded forth, and came from God. Nether came I of my selfe, but he sent me:
Why do ye not knowe my speache? Euen because ye can not abyde the hearing of my worde.
Ye are of youre father that deuyll, and the lustes of youre father will ye serue. He was a murtherer from the beginninge and abode not in the trueth, because there is no trueth in him. When he speaketh a lye, he speaketh of his awne. For he is a lyar, and the father of the same thing:
And because I tell you the trueth, therfore ye beleue me not.
Which of you rebuketh me of synne? If I saye the trueth, why do not ye beleue me?
He that is of God, heareth Goddes wordes. Ye therfore beare them not, because ye are not of God.
Then answered the the Iewes, and sayd vnto him: Saye we not well, that thou art a Samaritan, and hast the deuyll?
Iesus answered: I haue not the deuyll: but I honoure my father, and ye haue dishonored me.
I seke not myne awne prayse: ther is one that seketh, and iudgeth.
Uerely verely, I saye vnto you: yf a man kepe my saieng, he shall neuer se deeth.
Then sayd the Iewes vnto him: Now knowe we that thou hast the deuyll. Abraham is deed, and the prophetes, and thou sayest: yf a man kepe my saying, he shal neuer taste of death.
Art thou greater then our father Abraham, which is deed? and the prophetes are deed. Whom makest thou thy selfe?
Iesus answered: If I honoure my selfe, myne honour is nothinge. It is my father that honoureth me, which ye saye, is your God,
Ꟶ yet ye haue not knowen hym: but I knowe him. And yf I saye, I knowe him not, I shalbe a lyar lyke vnto you. But I knowe him, and kepe his sayinge.
Your father Abraham was glad to se my daye: and he sawe it, Ꟶ reioysed.
Then sayd the Iewes vnto him: thou art not yet .l. yere olde, and hast thou sene Abraham?
Iesus sayd vnto them: Uerely verely, I saye vnto you: yer Abraham was borne, I am.
Then toke they vp stones, to cast at hym: But Iesus hyd him selfe, and went out of the temple.
And as Iesus passed by, he sawe a man, which was blynde from hys byrth.
And his discyples asked him sayinge: Master, who dyd synne, this man, or hys father and mother, that he was borne blynd?
Iesus answered: Nether hath this man sinned, nor yet his father and mother: but that the worckes of God shulde be shewed in hym.
I must, worcke the worckes of hym that sent me, whyle it is daye. The nyght commeth, when no man can worcke.
As longe as I am in the worlde. I am the lyght of the worlde.
Assone as he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made claye of the spetle, and rubbed the claye on the eyes of the blynde,
Ꟶ sayd vnto him: Go, wesshe the in the pole of Siloe, which (by interpretacion) is asmoche to saye as, sent. He went his waye therfore, and wasshed, Ꟶ came agayne, seinge:
So the neyghboures and they that had sene him before (how that he was a begger) said: is not this he that sat and begged?
Some sayd: this is he. Agayne, other sayd he is lyke hym. He hym selfe sayde: I am euen he.
Therfore sayde they vnto hym: Howe are thyne eyes opened?
He answered and sayde: The man that is called Iesus, made claye, and anoynted myne eyes, and sayd vnto me: Go to the pole Siloe, and wasshe. And whan I went Ꟶ wesshed, I receaued my syght.
Then sayd they vnto him: where is he? He sayde: I cannot tell.
They brought to the pharises, hym that a lytell before was blynde:
and it was the Sabboth daye, when Iesus made the claye, and opened hys eyes.
Then agayne the pharises also asked hym, howe he had receaued his syght. He sayd vnto them: he put claye vpon myne eyes, and I wasshed, and do se.
Therfore sayd some of the pharises: thys man is not of God, because he kepeth not the Saboth daye. Other sayde: howe can a man that is a synner, do such myracles? And ther was a stryfe amonge them.
They spake vnto the blynde man agayne: What sayst thou of him, because he hath opened thyne eyes? He sayd: He is a prophete.
But the Iewes dyd not beleue of the man (how that he had bene blynde, and receaued hys syght) vntyll they called the father and mother of him that had receaued hys syght.
And they asked them, saying: Is thys youre sonne, whom ye saye was borne blynde? How doth he now se then?
His father and mother answered them, and sayde: we knowe, that thys is oure sonne, and that he was borne blynde:
but by what meanes he nowe seeth, we cannot tell. Or who hath opened his eyes, cannot we tell He is olde ynough, aske him, let hym answere for hym selfe.
Suche wordes spake hys father and mother, because they feared the Iewes. For the Iewes had conspyred all ready, that yf eny man dyd confesse that he was Christ, he shulde be excommunicat out of the synagoge.
Therfore sayd hys father and mother: he is olde ynough, aske him.
Then agayne called they the man that was blynde, and sayd vnto hym: Geue God the prayse: we knowe that thys man is a synner.
He answered therfore, and sayde: Whyther he be a synner or no, I cannot tell. One thynge I am sure of: that where as I was blynde, nowe I se.
Then sayde they to hym agayne: What dyd he to the? How opened he thyne eyes?
He answered them: I tolde you yer whyle, and ye dyd not heare. Wherfore wold ye heare it agayne? Wyll ye also be his disciples?
Then rated they hym, Ꟶ sayd: Be thou hys disciple. We are Moses disciples.
We are sure, that God spake vnto Moses. As for this felowe, we knowe not from whence he is.
The man answered, and sayde vnto them: this is a maruelous thing, that ye wote not from whence he is, and yet he hath opened myne eyes.
For we be sure, that God heareth not synners. But yf eny man be a worshipper of God, and obedient vnto his wyl, him heareth he.
Sence the world began was it not hearde, that eny man opened the eyes of one that was borne blynde.
If thys man were not of God, he coulde haue done nothing.
They answered, and sayd vnto hym: thou art al together borne in synne, and dost thou teach vs? And they cast him out.
Iesus heard that they had excommunicate hym: and when he had founde hym, he sayde vnto hym: doest thou beleue on the sonne of God?
He answered and sayd: Who is it Lord that I myght beleue on him?
And Iesus said vnto him: Thou hast sene him, and he it is that talketh with the.
And he sayd: Lord, I beleue, and he worshipped hym.
And Iesus sayd vnto him: I am come vnto iudgement into this worlde: that they which se not, myght se: and that they which se, might be made blynde.
And some of the pharises which were with him, hearde these wordes, and sayd vnto him: are we blynde also?
Iesus sayd vnto them: If ye were blynde, ye shulde haue no synne. But now ye saye: we se, therfore your synne remayneth.
Uerely verely, I saye vnto you: he that entreth not in by the dore into the shepefolde, but clymeth vp some other waye, the same is a thefe and a murthurer.
But he that entreth in by the dore, is the shepherde of the shepe:
to hym the porter openeth, Ꟶ the shepe heare hys voyce, and he calleth his awne shepe by name, and leadeth them out.
And when he hath sent forth his awne shepe, he goeth before them, and the shepe folow him: for they knowe his voyce.
A straunger will they not folowe, but wyll flye from him: for they knowe not the voyce of straungers.
Thys prouerbe spake Iesus vnto them. But they vnderstode not what thinges they were, which he spake vnto them.
Then sayd Iesus vnto them agayne: Uerely verely, I saye vnto you: I am the dore of the shepe.
All (euen as many as came before me) are theues Ꟶ murthurers: but the shepe dyd not heare them.
I am the dore: by me yf any man entre in, he shalbe safe, and shall go in and out, and fynde pasture.
A thefe commeth not but for to steale, kyll, and to destroye. I am come, that they might haue life, and that they myght haue it more aboundantly.
I am the good shepeherd. A good shepherde geueth hys lyfe for the shepe.
An hyred seruaunt, and he which is not the shepeherd (nether the shepe are his awne) seeth the wolfe comminge, and leaueth the shepe, and flieth, and the wolfe catcheth, and scattereth the shepe.
The hyred seruaunt flyeth, because he is an hired seruaunt, and careth not for the shepe.
I am the good shepheard, and knowe my shepe, and am knowen of myne.
As my father knoweth me, euen so knowe I also my father. And I geue my lyfe for the shepe:
Ꟶ other shepe I haue, which are not of thys fold. Them also must I bring, and they shall heare my voyce, and ther shalbe one fold and one shephearde.
Therfore doth my father loue me, because I put my lyfe from me, that I myght take it agayne.
No man taketh it from me: but I put it awaye of my self. I haue power to put it from me, and I haue power to take it agayne. Thys commaundement haue I receaued of my father.
There was a dissencyon therfore agayne amonge the Iewes for these sayinges,
and many of them sayd: He hath the deuel, and is madd: why heare ye him?
Other sayde: these are not the wordes of him that hath the deuyll. Can the deuyll open the eyes of the blynde?
And it was at Ierusalem the feaste of the dedicacyon, and it was winter:
and Iesus walked in the temple, euen in Salomons porche.
Then cam the Iewes rounde about him, and sayd vnto him: Howe longe dost thou make vs doute? If thou be Christ, tell vs playnely.
Iesus answered them: I tolde you, and ye beleue not. The worckes that I do in my fathers name, they beare witnesse of me.
But ye beleue not, because ye are not of my shepe. As I sayd vnto you:
my shepe heare my voyce: and I knowe them, Ꟶ they folowe me,
and I geue vnto them eternall lyfe, and they shall neuer perissh, nether shall eny man plucke them oute of my hande.
My father which gaue them me, is greater then all, and no man is able to take them oute of my fathers hand.
I and my father are one.
Then the Iewes agayne toke vp stones, to stone hym with all.
Iesus answered them: many good worckes haue I shewed you from my father: for which of them do ye stone me?
The Iewes answered him, sayeng: For thy good worckes sake we stone thou not, but for thy blasphemy, and because that thou beynge a man, makest thy selfe God:
Iesus answered them: Is it not wrytten in youre lawe I sayde, ye are goddes?
If he called them goddes, vnto whom the word of God was spoken (and the scripture cannot be broken
concernynge hym whom the father hath sanctifyed, and sent into the worlde) Do ye saye that I blaspheme because I sayde, I am the sonne of God?
If I do not the worckes of my father, beleue me not.
But yf I do, and yf ye beleue not me, beleue the worckes: that ye maye knowe and beleue, that the father is in me, and I in him.
Agayne they went about to take hym: Ꟶ he escaped out of their hande,
Ꟶ went awaye agayne beyonde Iordan, into the place wher Iohn before had baptysed, and there he abode.
And many resorted vnto him, and sayd: Iohn dyd no myracle, but all thynges that Iohn spake of this man were true.
And many beleued on him there.
A certen man was syck, named Lazarus of Bethania the towne of Mary, and her syster Martha.
It was that Mary which anoynted Iesus with oyntment, and wyped his fete wt her hear, whose brother Lazarus was sick.
Therfore, his syster sent vnto him, saying: Lord, beholde, he whom thou louest, is sicke.
Whan Iesus herd that, he sayde: this infirmitie is not vnto death: but for the prayse of God, that the sonne of God myght be praysed by the reason of it.
Iesus loued Martha and her sister and Lazarus.
Whan he had heard therfore, that he was sycke, he abode two dayes styll in the same place where he was.
Then after that, sayd he to his disciples: let vs go into Iewry agayne.
Hys disciples sayde vnto hym: Master, the Iewes lately sought to stone the, and wylt thou go thyther agayne?
Iesus answered: are there not .xij. houres of the daye? If a man walke in the daye, he stombleth not, because he seeth the light of this worlde.
But yf a man walke in the nyght, he stombleth, because there is no lyght in him.
This sayd he, and after that he sayd vnto them: our frende Lazarus slepeth: but I go to wake him out of slep.
Then said his disciples: Lord, yf he slepe, he shal do wel ynough.
Howbeit, Iesus spake of his death: but they thought, that he had spoken of the naturall slepe.
Then sayde Iesus vnto them playnely. Lazarus is deed,
and I am glad for your sakes, that I was not there, because ye maye beleue. Neuertheles, let vs go vnto him.
Then sayd Thomas (which is called Dydimus) vnto the disciples: lett vs also go, that we maye dye with hym.
Then went Iesus, and founde that he had lyen in hys graue foure dayes allready.
Bethanie was nye vnto Ierusalem, about fyftene furlonges of,
and many of the Iewes came to Martha Ꟶ Mary to comforte them ouer their brother.
Martha assone as she heard that Iesus was commynge, went and met hym: but Mary sate styll in the house.
Then sayd Martha vnto Iesus: Lord, yf thou haddest bene here, my brother had not dyed:
neuerthelesse, nowe I knowe that whatsoeuer thou askest of God, God wyll geue it the.
Iesus sayth vnto her: Thy brother shall ryse agayne.
Martha sayeth vnto hym: I knowe that he shall ryse agayne in the resurreccyon at the last daye.
Iesus sayth vnto her: I am the resurreccyon and the lyfe: He that beleueth on me, ye though he were deed, yet shall he lyue.
And whosoeuer lyueth and beleueth on me, shall neuer dye: Beleuest thou this?
She sayd vnto him: yee Lorde, I beleue that thou art Christ the sonne of God, which shuld come into the world.
And assone as he had so sayde, she wente her waye, Ꟶ called Mary her syster secretly, saying: The master is come, and calleth for the.
Assone as she heard that, she arose quyckly, and came vnto him.
Iesus was not yet come into the towne: but was in that place where Martha met hym.
The Iewes then which were with her in the house and comforted her, (when they sawe Mary that she rose vp hastely, and went out) folowed her, saieng: She goeth vnto the graue, to wepe there.
Then when Mary was come wher Iesus was, and sawe hym, she cometh nye vnto his fete, and sayth vnto him: Lorde, yf thou haddest bene here, my brother had not bene deed.
When Iesus therfore sawe her wepe (and the Iewes also weping which came wt her) he groned in the sprete, and was troubled in him selfe,
and sayde: Where haue ye layed him? They saye vnto him: Lorde, come, and se.
And Iesus wept.
Then sayd the Iewes Behold, howe he loued hym.
And som of them sayde: coulde not he which opened the eyes of the blynde, haue made also, that this man shulde not haue dyed?
Iesus therfore agayne groned in him self, and came to the graue. It was a caue, and a stone layde on it.
Iesus sayd: take ye awaye the stone. Martha the sister of him that was deed, sayd vnhym: Lorde, by this tyme he styncketh. For he hath bene deed foure dayes.
Iesus sayeth vnto her: Sayd I not vnto the, that yf thou dydest beleue, thou shuldest se the glorye of God?
Then they toke awaye the stone from the place where he that had bene deed, was layde. And Iesus lyft vp his eyes, and sayd: Father, I thanke the, that thou hast hearde me.
Howbeit, I knewe, that thou hearest me allwayes: but because of the people which stande by. I sayde it, that they maye beleue, that thou hast sent me.
And when he thus had spoken, he cryed wt a loud voyce: Lazarus, come forth.
And he that was deed, came forth, bounde hande Ꟶ fote wt graue clothes, Ꟶ his face was bound with a napkin. Iesus sayd vnto them: loose him, Ꟶ let him go.
Then many of the Iewes which came to Mary (and had sene the thynges which Iesus dyd) beleued on hym.
But some of them went theyr wayes to the pharises, Ꟶ tolde them what Iesus had done.
Then gathered the hye prestes Ꟶ the pharises a councel, Ꟶ sayd: what do we? For this man doth many miracles.
If we lett hym scape thus, al men will beleue on him, and the Romayns shall come, and take awaye both our rowme and the people.
And one of them named Caiphas (being the hye preste that same yere) sayd vnto them: Ye perceaue nothynge at all, nor consyder,
that it is expedient for vs, that one man dye for the people, and not that all the people perysshe.
Thys spake he not of him selfe, but beynge hye preste that same yere, he prophesied that Iesus shulde dye for the people,
and not for the people onely, but that he shuld gather together in one, the children of God, that were scatered abrode.
Then from that daye forth they toke councel together, for to put him to death.
Iesus therfore walked nomore openly among the Iewes: but went his waye thence vnto a countre nye to a wildernes, into a cytie which is called Ephraim, and there contynued wt his disciples.
And the Iewes Easter was nye at hand, Ꟶ many went out of the countre vp to Ierusalem before the Easter, to purify them selues.
Then sought they for Iesus, Ꟶ spake among them selues, as they stode in the temple: What thinke ye, seyng he commeth not to the feaste daye?
The hye prestes and pharises had geuen a commaundement, that yf eny man knewe wher he were, he shuld shewe it, that they myght take him.
Then Iesus (syxe dayes before Easter) came to Bethany, wher Lazarus had ben deed, whome he raysed from death.
Ther they made hym a supper, and Martha serued, but Lazarus was one of them that sate at the table wt him.
Then toke Mary a pound of oyntment (called Nardus, perfecte and precious) and anoynted Iesus fete, and wyped his fete with her hear, Ꟶ the house was fylled with the odoure of the oyntment.
Then sayd one of his disciples: (euen Iudas Iscarioth Simons sonne, which afterward betrayed him)
why was not this oyntement solde for thre hundred pence, and geuen to the poore?
This he sayd, not that he cared for the pore but because he was a thefe, and had the bagge, Ꟶ bare that which was geuen.
Then sayd Iesus: Let her alone, against the daye of my buryinge hath she kept this.
For the poore allwayes shall ye haue with you, but me haue ye not allwaye.
Moche people of the Iewes therfore had knowledge that he was ther. And they came not for Iesus sake onely, but that they myghte se Lazarus also whom he raysed from death.
But the hye prestes helde a councell, that they myght put Lazarus to death also,
because that for his sake many of the Iewes went awaye and beleued on Iesus.
On the next daye moch people that were come to the feaste, when they hearde that Iesus shuld come to Ierusalem,
toke braunches of palme trees, and went forth to mete hym, and cryed: Hosanna, blessed is he that in the name of the Lorde, commeth Kyng of Israell.
And Iesus got a yonge asse, and sate theron, as it is wryten:
feare not daughter of Syon, beholde, thy Kynge commeth, sytting on an asses colte.
These thinges vnderstode not his disciples at the fyrst: but when Iesus was glorifyed, then remembred they that soch thinges were wryten of him, and that soche thynges they had done vnto hym.
The people that was with hym (when he called Lazarus out of his graue, and raysed hym from death) bare recorde.
Therfore mete hym the people also, because they hearde that he had done soche a miracle.
The pharises therfore sayd among them selues: perceaue ye, howe we preuayle nothing? behold, worlde goeth after him.
Ther were certen Grekes amonge them, that came to worshyp at the feaste:
the same cam therfore to Philip (which was of Bethsaida a cytie in Galile) and desyred hym, saying: Syr, we wolde fayne se Iesus.
Philip came and tolde Andrew. And agayne Andrew and Philip told Iesus.
And Iesus answered them, sayinge: the houre is come, that the sonne of man must be glorifyed.
Uerely verely, I saye vnto you except the wheat corne fall into the ground, Ꟶ dye, it bydeth alone. If it dye, it bryngeth forth moch frute.
He that loueth hys lyfe, shall destroye it: and he that hateth hys lyfe in thys world, shal kepe it vnto lyfe eternall.
If eny man mynister vnto me, lett him folowe me: and Where I am, there shall also my minister be. Yf any man mynister vnto me, hym will my father honoure.
Nowe is my soule troubled, and what shall I saye? Father, delyuer me from this houre: but therfore came I vnto thys houre.
Father, glorify thy name. Then cam ther a voyce from heauen, saying: I haue both glorifyed it, Ꟶ will glorify it agayne.
The people therfore that stode by and heard it, sayde, that it thoundred. Other sayde: an angell spake to hym.
Iesus answered and sayde: this voyce came not because of me but for your sakes.
Now is the iudgment of this worlde: now shall the prince of thys worlde be cast out.
And I (yf I were lyft vp from the erth) will drawe all men vnto me.
Thys he sayde signifyinge, what death he shulde dye.
The people answered hym: We haue heard out of the lawe, that Christ bydeth euer, and how sayst thou: the sonne of man must be lyft vp? who is that sonne of man?
Then Iesus sayd vnto them: yet a lytell whyle is the lyght with you. Walke whyle ye haue lyght, lest the darcknes come on you. He that walketh also in the darck, woteth not whyther he goet
Whyle ye haue lyght, beleue on the lyght, that ye maye be the children of the lyght. These thynges spake Iesus, and departed, and hid him self from them.
But though he had done so many miracles before them, yet beleued not they on hym,
that the sayinge of Esaias the prophet myght be fulfylled, which he spake: Lord, who shal beleue our saying? And to whom is the arme of the Lorde declared?
Therfore could they not beleue, because that Esaias saith agayne:
he hath blynded their eyes, and hardened their hert, that they shuld not se with their eyes, Ꟶ lest they shuld vnderstand with their hert, and shuld be conuerted, and I shulde heale them.
Soch thynges sayd Esaias, when he sawe his glorye, Ꟶ spake of him.
Neuertheles, amonge the chefe rulers also, many beleued on hym. But (because of the pharises) they wold not be a knowen of it, lest they shulde be excommunicat.
For they loued the prayse of men, more then the prayse of God.
Iesus cryed, and sayd: he that beleueth on me, beleueth not on me, but on hym that sent me.
And he that seeth me, seeth him that sent me.
I am come a lyght into the worlde: that whosoeuer beleueth on me, shulde not byde in darcknes.
And yf any man heare my wordes, and beleue not, I iudge him not. For I came not to iudge the world: but to saue the worlde.
He that refuseth me, Ꟶ receaueth not my wordes, hath one that iudgeth hym. The worde that I haue spoken, the same shal iudge hym in the last daye.
For I haue not spoken of my selfe: but the father which sent me: he gaue me a commaundment, what I shuld saye, Ꟶ what I shulde speake.
And I knowe that his commaundement is lyfe euerlastinge. Whatsoeuer I speake therfore, euen as the father bade me, so I speake.
Before the feaste of Easter, when Iesus knewe that hys houre was come, that he shuld depart out of this world vnto the father. When he loued his which were in the worlde, vnto the ende he loued them.
And when supper was ended, after that the deuyll had put in the herte of Iudas Iscarioth Simons sonne, to be traye hym.
Iesus knowynge that the father had geuen all thinges into hys handes, and that he was come from God, and went to God:
he rose from supper, and layde asyde his vpper garmentes: and whan he had taken a towell, he gyrded him self.
After that, he powred water into a basyn, and beganne to wash the disciples fete, and to wype them with the towell, wherwith he was gyrded.
Then came he to Symon Peter. And Peter sayde vnto hym: Lord, dost thou wasshe my fete?
Iesus answered, and sayd vnto him: what I do, thou wotest not nowe, but thou shalt know herafter.
Peter sayeth vnto him: thou shalt neuer wasshe my fete. Iesus answered hym: yf I wasshe the not, thou hast no parte with me.
Symon Peter sayeth vnto hym: Lorde, not my fete onely, but also the handes and the head.
Iesus sayth to hym: he that is wasshed, nedeth not, saue to wasshe his fete, but is cleane euery whyt. And ye are cleane, but not all.
For he knewe who it was that shuld be traye hym. Therfore sayd he: ye are not all cleane:
So after he had wasshed their fete, and receaued hys clothes, and was sett downe, he sayde vnto them agayne: wote ye what I haue done to you?
Ye call me master and Lorde, and ye saye well, for so am I.
If I then youre lorde and master haue wasshed youre fete, ye also ought to wasshe one anothers fete.
For I haue geuen you an ensample that ye shulde do, as I haue done to you.
Uerely verely, I saye vnto you: the seruaunte is not greater then his master, nether the messenger greater then he that sent hym.
If ye vnderstande these thinges happy are ye, yf ye do them.
I speake not of you all, I knowe whom I haue chosen. But that the scripture maye be fulfylled: he that eateth bread with me, hath lyfte vp hys hele against me.
Now tell I you before it come that when it is come to passe, ye might beleue that I am he.
Uerely verely, I saye vnto you: He that receaueth whomsoeuer I sende, receaueth me. And he that receaueth me, receaueth him that sent me.
When Iesus had thus sayd, he was troubled in the sprete, and testifyed and sayd: verely verely, I saye vnto you: that one of you shall be traye me.
Then the disciples loked one on another, dowtynge of whom he spake.
There was one of Iesus disciples, (which leaned on hym) euen he whom Iesus loued.
To hym beckened Symon Peter therfore, that he shulde aske, who it was of whom he spake.
He then when he leaned on Iesus brest, sayd vnto him: Lord, who is it?
Iesus answered: he it is to whom I geue a soppe. And he wet the brede Ꟶ gaue it to Iudas Iscarioth Simons sonne.
And after the soppe. Satan entred into him. Then sayd Iesus vnto him: that thou dost, do quyckly.
That wist no man at the table, for what intent he spake vnto him.
Som of them thought because. Iudas had the bagge, that Iesus had sayd vnto him: bye those thinges that we haue nede of agaynst the feaste: or that he shuld geue some thyng to the poore.
Assone then as he had receaued the soppe, he went immediatly out and it was night.
Therfore when he was gone oute. Iesus sayd: Now is the sonne of man glorifyed. And God is gloryfyed by him.
If God be glorifyed by him, God shall also glorify hym by hym selfe: and shall strayght waye gloryfy hym.
Lytle chyldren, yet a lytel whyle am I with you. Ye shall seke me, Ꟶ as I sayd vnto the Iewes, whyther I goo, thyther can ye not come. Also to you saye I now.
A newe commaundement geue I vnto you, that ye loue together, as I haue loued you, that euen so ye loue one another.
By this shall all men knowe that ye are my discyples, yf ye haue loue one to another.
Symon Peter sayd vnto hym: Lorde, whyther goest thou? Iesus answered him: whyther I go, thou canst not folowe me now, but thou shalt folowe me afterwardes.
Peter sayd vnto him: Lorde, why cannot I folowe the now: I wyl ieoparde my lyfe for thy sake?
Iesus answered hym: wylt thou ieoparde thy lyfe for my sake? Uerely verely, I saye vnto the: the cocke shall not crowe, tyll thou haue denyed me thryse.
And he sayde vnto his disciples: lett not your herte be troubled. Ye beleue in God, beleue also in me.
In my fathers house are many mansions: If it were not so, I wolde haue tolde you. I go to prepare a place for you.
And yf I go to prepare a place for you, I will come agayne, and receaue you euen vnto my selfe: that wher I am, ther maye ye be also.
And whyther I go, ye knowe, and the waye ye knowe.
Thomas sayth vnto him: Lord, we knowe not whither thou goest. And how is it possible for vs to knowe the waye?
Iesus sayeth vnto hym: I am the waye and the treuth, and the lyfe. No man cometh vnto the father, but by me.
If ye had knowen me, ye had knowen my father also. And now ye knowe him, and haue sene hym.
Philip sayth vnto hym: Lorde, shewe vs the father, Ꟶ it suffiseth vs.
Iesus sayth vnto hym: haue I bene so longe tyme with you, Ꟶ yet hast thou not knowen me? Philip, he that hath sene me, hath sene my father. And howe sayest thou then: shewe vs the father?
Beleuest thou not, that I am in the father, Ꟶ the father in me? The wordes that I speake vnto you, I speake not of my self: but the father that dwelleth in me is he that doth the workes.
Beleue me that I am in the father, Ꟶ the father in me. Or els beleue me for the worckes sake.
Uerely verely, I saye vnto you: he that beleueth on me, the worckes that I do, the same shal he do also, Ꟶ greater worckes then these shall he do, because I go vnto my father.
And whatsoeuer ye aske in my name, that will I do, that the father maye be glorifyed by the sonne.
If ye shall aske any thynge in my name. I will do it.
If ye loue me, kepe my commaundementes,
Ꟶ I will praye the father, and he shall geue you another comforter, that he maye bide wt you for euer:
euen the sprete of treuth, whom the world cannot receaue, because the worlde seeth hym not, nether knoweth him. But ye knowe him. For he dwelleth wt you, Ꟶ shalbe in you.
I wyll not leaue you comforteles: but will come to you:
Yet a lytell while and the world seeth me nomore: but ye se me. For I lyue, Ꟶ ye shall lyue.
That daye shall ye knowe that I am in my father, and you in me, and I in you.
He that hath my commaundementes, and kepeth them: the same is he that loueth me. And he that loueth me, shalbe loued of my father: and I wyll loue hym, and wyll shewe myne awne selfe to him.
Iudas sayth vnto hym: (not Iudas Iscarioth) Lorde, what is done that thou wylt shewe thy selfe vnto vs, and not vnto the world?
Iesus answered Ꟶ sayd: vnto them: yf a man loue me, he will kepe my sayinges, and my father wyll loue hym, and we wyll come vnto hym, and dwell wt hym.
He that loueth me not, kepeth not my sayinges. And the worde which ye heare, is not myne, but the fathers which sent me.
These thinges haue I spoken ynto you, being yet present with you.
But the comforter which is the holy ghost whom my father wil sende in my name, he shal teach you all thinges, Ꟶ bryng all thinges to your remembraunce whatsoeuer I haue sayd vnto you.
Peace I leaue with you, my peace I geue vnto you. Not as the world geueth, geue I vnto you. Let not youre hertes be greued, nether feare.
Ye haue hearde howe I sayde vnto you: I go, and come agayne vnto you. If ye loued me, ye wolde verely reioyse, because I sayd: I go vnto the father, for the father is greater then I.
And nowe haue I shewed you before it come, that when it is come to passe, ye myght beleue.
Here after wyll I not talke many wordes vnto you. For the prince of this worlde commeth, and hath naught in me.
But that the worlde maye knowe that I loue the father. And as the father gaue me commaundment, euen so do I. Ryse, let vs go hence.
I am the true vyne, and my father is the husbandman.
Euery braunche that beareth not frute in me, he will take awaye. And euery braunche that beareth frute, will he pourge, that it maye bring forth more frute.
Nowe are ye cleane thorow the wordes which I haue spoken vnto you.
Byde in me, and I in you. As the braunche cannot beare frute of it selfe, excepte it byde in the vyne: nomore can ye, except ye abyde in me.
I am the vyne, ye are the braunches. He that abydeth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth moche frute. For without me can ye do nothing.
If a man byde not in me, he is cast forth as a braunche, Ꟶ is wythered: and men gather them: and cast them into the fyre, and they burne.
If ye byde in me, and my wordes abyde in you: aske what ye wyll, and it shalbe done for you.
Herin is my father glorifyed: that ye beare moch frute, and become my disciples.
As the father hath loued me, euen so haue I also loued you. Continue ye in my loue.
If ye kepe my commaundementes, ye shall byde in my loue, euen as I haue kepte my fathers commaundementes, Ꟶ byde in hys loue.
These thynges haue I spoken vnto you, that my ioye myghte remayne vnto you, and that youre ioye myght be full.
Thys is my commaundement, that ye loue together, as I haue loued you.
Greater loue hath no man, then thys: that a man bestowe hys lyfe for his frendes.
Ye are my frendes, yf ye do whatsoeuer I commaunde you.
Hence forth call I you not seruauntes: for the seruaunt knoweth not what hys lorde doeth. But you haue I called frendes: for all thynges that I haue heard of my father, haue I opened to you.
Ye haue not chosen me, but I haue chosen you, and ordeyned you, to goo, and brynge forth frute, and that your frute shuld remayne, that whatsoeuer ye aske of the father in my name, he maye geue it you.
This commaunde I you, that ye loue together.
If the worlde hate you, ye knowe that it hated me before it hated you.
If ye were of the worlde, the worlde wolde loue his awne. Howbeit, because ye are not of the world. But I haue chosen you out of the world therfore the world hateth you.
Remember the worde that I sayd vnto you: the seruaunt is not greater then the lorde. If they haue persecuted me, they wyll also persecute you. If they haue kept my saying, they will kepe youres also.
But all these thinges wyll they do vnto you for my names sake, because they haue not knowen hym that sent me.
If I had not come and spoken vnto them, they shuld haue had no synne: but now haue they nothyng to cloke their synne withall.
He that hateth me, hateth my father also:
If I had not done amonge them the workes whych none other man dyd, they shuld haue had no synne. But now haue they both sene, Ꟶ hated: not onely me but also my father.
But thys happeneth that the sayinge myght be fulfylled, that is writen in their lawe: they hated me without a cause.
But when the comforter is come, whom I will sende vnto you from the father (euen the sprete of treuth, which proceadeth of the father) he shall testifye of me.
And ye shall beare witnesse also, because ye haue bene with me from the begynning.
These thynges haue I sayde vnto you because ye shuld not be offended.
They shall excommunicat you: ye the tyme shall come, that whosoeuer kylleth you, will thinke that he doth God seruyce.
And such thinges will they do vnto you, because they haue not knowen the father, nether yet me.
But these thinges haue I tolde you, that when the tyme is come, ye maye remember then that I tolde you. These thynges sayde I not vnto you at the begynninge, because I was present with you.
But now I go my waye to hym that sent me, Ꟶ none of you asketh me whyther I go.
But because I haue sayd suche thynges vnto you, your hertes are ful of sorowe.
Neuertheles, I tel you the treuth, it is expedient for you, that I goo awaye. For yf I goo not awaye, that comforter wyll not come vnto you. But yf I departe, I wyll sende hym vnto you.
And when he is come, he wyll rebuke the worlde of synne, and of rightewesnes, Ꟶ of iudgement.
Of synne, because they beleue not on me.
Of ryghtewesnes, because I go to my father, and ye shal se me nomore:
Of iudgement, because the prynce of thys worlde is iudged all ready.
I haue yet many thinges to saye vnto you but ye cannot beare them awaye now.
Howbeit when he is come (which is the sprete of treuth) he will leade you into all treuthe. He shall not speake of hym selfe: but whatsoeuer he shall heare, that shall he speake, and he will shewe you thinges to come.
He shal glorify me, for he shall receaue of myne, Ꟶ shall shewe vnto you.
All thynges that the father hath, are myne. Therfore sayde I vnto you, that he shall take of myne and shewe vnto you.
After a while ye shall not se me, and agayne after a whyle ye shall se me: for I go to the father.
Then sayde some of hys discyples betwene them selues: what is thys that he saith vnto vs, after a while, ye shall not se me, and agayne after a whyle ye shall se me: and that I go to the father?
They sayd therfore: what is this that he sayth: after a whyle? we cannot tell what he sayth.
Iesus perceaued, that they wolde aske him, and sayde vnto them. Ye enquire of this betwene your selues, because I sayde after a whyle ye shal not se me, Ꟶ agayne after a whyle ye shall se me.
Uerely verely, I saye vnto you: ye shall wepe and lamente, but contrary wyse, the world shall reioyse. Ye shall sorowe, but yor sorowe shalbe turned to ioye.
A woman when she trauaileth, hath sorowe, because her houre is come: but assone as she is deliuered of the childe, she remembreth nomore the anguisshe, for ioye that a man is borne into the worlde.
And ye now therfore haue sorowe: but I will se you agayne, and your hertes shall reioyse, and your ioye shal no man take from you.
And in the daye shall ye aske me no question. Uerely verely, I saye vnto you: whatsoeuer ye shall aske the father in my name, he wyll geue it you.
Hytherto haue ye asked nothynge in my name. Aske, and ye shall receaue: that youre ioye maye be full.
These thinges haue I spoken vnto you by prouerbes. The tyme will come, when I shal nomore speake vnto you by prouerbes: but I shall shewe you playnely from my father.
At that daye shall ye aske in my name. And I saye not vnto you that I will speake vnto my father for you.
For the father him selfe loueth you, because ye haue loued me, and haue beleued, that I came out from God.
I went out from the father, and came into the worlde. Agayne, I leaue the worlde, and go to the father.
His disciples sayd vnto him: lo, now talkest thou playnly, and speakest no prouerbe.
Nowe are we sure, that thou knowest all thinges, and nedest not, that eny man shulde aske the any question. Therfore beleue we, that thou camest from God.
Iesus answered them: Now ye do beleue.
Behold, the houre draweth nye, and is all ready come, that ye shalbe scatered euery man to his awne, Ꟶ shal leaue me alone. And yet am I not alone. For the father is with me.
These wordes haue I spoken vnto you, that in me ye myghte haue peace. For in the worlde shall ye haue tribulacyon: but be of good chere, I haue ouercome the worlde.
These wordes spake Iesus, and lift vp his eyes to heauen, and sayde: father, the houre is come: glorify thy sonne that thy sonne also maye glorify the:
as thou hast geuen him power ouer all flesh, that he shuld geue eternall lyfe to as many as thou hast geuen him.
This is lyfe eternal, that they might knowe the, the onely true God, Ꟶ Iesus Christ whom thou hast sent.
I haue glorifyed the on the erth. I haue finysshed the worcke, which thou gauest me to do.
And now glorifye thou me (O father) with thyne awne self, with the glory, which I had with the, yer the worlde was.
I haue declared thy name vnto the men, which thou gauest me out of the world. Thyne they were, and thou gauest them me, and they haue kept thy worde.
Now they haue knowen, that all thinges whatsoeuer thou hast geuen me, are of the.
For I haue geuen vnto them the wordes which thou gauest me, and they haue receaued them, and haue knowen surely, that I came out from the: and they haue beleued, that thou diddest send me.
I praye for them, I praye not for the world: but for them which thou hast geuen me, for they are thyne.
And all myne are thyne, Ꟶ thyne are myne, Ꟶ I am glorified in them.
And now I am not in the worlde, and they are in the worlde, and I come to the. Holy father, kepe thorow thine awne name, them which thou hast geuen me, that they also maye be one, as we are.
Whyle I was with them in the world, I kepte them in thy name. Those that thou gauest me, haue I kepte, and none of them is lost, but that lost childe, that the scripture might be fulfilled.
Now come I to the, Ꟶ these wordes speake I in the world, that they might haue my ioy ful in them.
I haue geuen them thy worde, and the worlde hath hated them, because they are not of the world, euen as I also am not of the world.
I desyre not that thou shuldest take them out of the worlde: but that thou kepe them from euyll.
They are not of the worlde, as I also am not of the worlde.
Sanctify them thorow thy treuth. Thy word is the treuth.
As thou dyddest send me into the worlde, euen so haue I also sent them into the world,
Ꟶ for their sakes sanctifie I my selfe, that they also myght be sanctifyed thorowe the treuth.
Neuertheles, I praye not for them alone, but for them also which shall beleue on me thorow their preaching:
that they al maye be one, as thou father art in me, and I in the, and that they also maye be one in vs: that the worlde maye beleue, that thou hast sent me:
And the glory which thou gauest me, I haue geuen them, that they maye be one, as we also are one.
I in them, and thou in me, that they maye be made parfecte in one, Ꟶ that the worlde maye knowe, that thou hast sent me, and hast loued them as thou hast loued me.
Father, I will that they which thou hast geuen me be with me where I am, that they maye se my glory, which thou hast geuen me. For thou louedest me before the makyng of the worlde.
O righteous father, the worlde also hath not knowen the: but I haue knowen the: and these haue knowen, that thou hast sent me.
And I haue declared vnto them thy name, and will declare it, that the loue wherwith thou hast loued me, maye be in them, Ꟶ I in them.
When Iesus had spoken these wordes, he went forth with hys discyples ouer the broke Cedron, wher was a garden, into the which he entred and hys disciples.
Iudas also which betrayed him, knewe the place: for Iesus ofte tymes resorted thyther wt his discyples.
Iudas then after he had receaued a bonde of men, (and mynysters of the hye Prestes Ꟶ Pharyses) came thyther with lanternes, and fyerbrandes, and wepens.
And Iesus knowyng all thynges that shulde come on hym, went forth, and sayde vnto them: whom seke ye?
They answered him: Iesus of Nazareth. Iesus sayeth vnto them: I am he. Iudas also which betrayed hym, stode with them.
Assone then as he had sayde vnto them, I am he, they went backewarde and fell to the grounde.
Then asked he them agayne: whom seke ye? They sayde: Iesus of Nazareth.
Iesus answered: I haue tolde you, that I am he. If ye seke me therfore lett these goo their waye.
That the saying might be fulfylled which he spake: of them which thou gauest me, haue I not lost one.
Then Simon Peter hauynge a swearde, drue it, and smote the hye prestes seruaunt, and cut of hys ryght eare. The seruauntes name was Malchus.
Therfore sayeth Iesus vnto Peter: put vp thy swearde into the sheath: shall I not dryncke of the cup, which my father hath geuen me?
Then the company and the Captayne, and mynysters of the Iewes toke Iesus, and bounde hym,
and led him awaye to Anna fyrst: for he was father in lawe vnto Cayphas, which was the hye Preste that same yere.
Cayphas was he, which gaue counsell to the Iewes that it was expedient, that one man shulde dye for the people.
And Symon Peter folowed Iesus, and so dyd another dyscyple: that dyscyple was knowen vnto the hye preste, Ꟶ went in with Iesus into the palace of the hye Preste.
But Peter stode at the dore without. Thent went out that other discyple (which was knowen vnto the hye preste) and spake to the damsell that kept the dore, and brought in Peter.
Then sayde the damsell that kept the dore, vnto Peter. Art not thou also one of this mannes dyscyples? He sayde: I am not.
The seruauntes and the ministers stode there, which had made a fyer of coles: for it was colde, and they warmed them selues. Peter also stode amonge them, and warmed hym.
The hye preste then asked Iesus of hys dyscyples and of hys doctryne.
Iesus answered hym: I spake openly in the worlde. I euer taught in the Synagoge, and in the temple, whyther all the Iewes resorte, and in secret haue I sayde nothyng.
Why askest thou me? Aske them which hearde me, what I haue sayd vnto them. Beholde, they can tell what I sayde.
When he had thus spoken, one of the ministers which stode by, smote Iesus on the face, sayinge: answerest thou the hye preaste so?
Iesus answered hym: If I haue euyll spoken, beare witnes of the euyll: But yf I haue well spoken, why smytest thou me?
And Annas sent hym bounde vnto Cayphas the hye preste.
Symon Peter stode, and warmed him selfe Then sayde they vnto hym: art not thou also one of hys dyscyples? He denyed it, Ꟶ sayde: I am not.
One of the seruauntes of the hye prestes (hys cosyn whose eare Peter smote of) sayde vnto hym: dyd not I se the in the garden with him?
Peter therfore denyed agayne: and immediatly the cocke crewe.
Then led they Iesus from Cayphas into the hall of iudgement. It was in the mornynge, Ꟶ they them selues went not into the iudgement hall lest they shulde be defyled, but that they myght eate Passeouer.
Pylate then went out vnto them and sayde: what accusacyon bryng ye agaynste thys man?
They answered and sayde vnto him: If he were not an euyll doar we wolde not haue delyuered him vnto the.
Then sayde Pylate vnto them take ye hym, Ꟶ iudge him after youre awne lawe. The Iewes therfore sayd vnto him: It is not lawfull for vs to put eny man to deeth.
That the wordes of Iesus myght be fulfylled which he spake, signifyeng, what deeth he shuld dye.
Then Pylate entred into the iudgement hall agayne, and called Iesus, and sayde vnto hym: art thou the kynge of the Iewes?
Iesus answered: sayst thou that of thy selfe, or dyd other tell it the of me?
Pylate answered: Am I a Iewe? Thyne awne nacion and hye prestes haue delyuered the vnto me. What hast thou done?
Iesus answered: my kyngdome is not of this worlde. Yf my kyngdome were of this worlde, then wolde my mynysters suerly fyght, that I shulde not be delyuered to the Iewes, but now is my kyngdome not from hence.
Pylate therfore sayde vnto him. Art thou a kyng then? Iesus answered: thou sayst that I am a kyng. For this cause was I borne, Ꟶ for this cause came I into the worlde, that I shulde beare witnes vnto the trueth. And all that are of the trueth, heare my voyce.
Pylate sayde vnto him, what thynge is trueth? And when he had sayde this, he went out agayne vnto the Iewes, and sayeth vnto them. I fynde in him no cause at all.
Ye haue a custome, that I shulde deliuer you one loose at Easter. Wyll ye that I lose vnto you the kynge of the Iewes?
Then cryed they all agayne sayinge. Not hym, but Barrabas: the same Barrabas was a murtherer.
Then Pylate toke Iesus therfore, Ꟶ scourged hym.
And the soudiers wounde a croune of thornes, and put it on hys heed. And they dyd on him a purple garment,
and sayde: hayll kynge of the Iewes: and they smote hym on the face.
Pylate went forth agayne, and sayde vnto them: beholde, I brynge hym forth to you, that ye maye know, that I fynde no faute in hym.
Then came Iesus forth, wearynge a croune of thorne, and a robe of purple. And he sayeth vnto them: beholde the man.
When the hye Prestes therfore and ministers sawe hym, they cryed sayinge: crucify him, crucify hym. Pylate sayeth vnto them: Take ye him, and crucify him: for I fynde no cause in him.
The Iewes answered him: We haue a lawe, and by oure lawe he ought to dye: because he made him selfe the sonne of God.
When Pylate hearde the sayinge, he was the moare afrayde,
and went agayne into the iudgement hall, and sayeth vnto Iesus: whence arte thou? But Iesus gaue him none answere.
Then sayde Pylate vnto him: Speakest thou not vnto me? Knowest thou not, that I haue power to crucify the, and haue power to loose the?
Iesus answered: Thou couldest haue no power at all agaynst me, except it were geuen the from aboue. Therfore he that delyuered me vnto the, hath the more synne.
And from thence forth sought Pylate meanes to loose hym: but the Iewes cryed sayinge: yf thou let him go, thou art not Cesars frende. For whosoeuer maketh hym selfe a kynge, is agaynst Cesar.
When Pylate hearde that sayinge, he brought Iesus forth, and sate downe to geue sentence, in a place that is called the pauement: but in the Hebrue tonge, Gabbatha.
It was the preparyng daye of the easter, aboute the syxte houre. And he sayeth vnto the Iewes: beholde youre king?
They cryed, awaye wt him, awaye wt him, crucifye him. Pylate saieth vnto them: shall I crucifye your kyng? The hye prestes answered: we haue no kyng but Cesar.
Then delyuered he hym vnto them, to be crucified. And they toke Iesus, and led hym away.
And he bare hys crosse, and went forth into a place, which is called the place of deed mens sculles. But in Hebrue, Golgotha:
where they crucified hym, and two other with hym; on ether syde one, and Iesus in the myddes.
And Pylate wrote a tytle, Ꟶ put it on the crosse. The wrytynge was. Iesus of Nazareth kynge of the Iewes.
Thys tytle redd many of the Iewes. For the place where Iesus was crucyfyed, was nye to the cytye. And it was wrytten in Hebrue, and Greke and Latyn.
Then sayde the hye prestes of the Iewes to Pylate: wrytte not kynge of the Iewes, but that he sayde, I am kynge of the Iewes:
Pylate answered: what I haue wrytten, that haue I wrytten.
Then the soudiers, when they had crucifyed Iesus, they toke his garmentes Ꟶ made foure partes, to euery soudier a parte, Ꟶ also hys coate. The coate was without seme, wrought vpon thorowe out.
They sayd therfore amonge them selues: Lett vs not deuyde it, but cast lotes for it, who shall haue it. That the scrypture myght be fulfylled, sayinge: They parted my rayment amonge them, and for my coate dyd they cast lotes. And the soudiers dyd soch thynges in dede.
There stode by the crosse of Iesus hys mother, and his mothers syster, Mary the wyfe of Cleophas, Ꟶ Mary Magdalene.
When Iesus therfore sawe his mother, Ꟶ the disciple stondinge whom he loued, he sayeth vnto his mother: woman: beholde thy sonne.
Then sayde he to the disciple: beholde thy mother. And from that houre the disciple toke her for hys awne.
After these thinges, Iesus knowinge that all thinges were now performed: that the scripture myght be fulfylled: he sayeth: I thyrst
So ther stode a vessel by, full of veneger. Therfore they fylled a sponge with veneger and wounde it about with ysope, and put it to his mouth.
Assone as Iesus then receaued of the veneger, he sayde. It is fynisshed, Ꟶ bowed his heed, and gaue vp the goost.
The Iewes therfore because it was the preparing of the Sabboth, that the bodyes shuld not remayne vpon the crosse on the sabboth daye (for that sabboth daye was an hye daye) besought Pilate, that their legges might be broken and that they might be taken downe.
Then came the soudiers, and brake the legges of the fyrst, and of the other which was crucyfied with him.
But when they came to Iesus: and sawe that he was deed already, they brake not his legges:
but one of the soudiers wt a speare, thrust him into the syde, and forth with came ther out bloude and water.
And he that sawe it, bare recorde, Ꟶ hys record is true. And he knoweth that he sayth true, that ye might beleue also.
For these thinges were done, that the scripture shulde be fulfylled. Ye shall not breake a bone of him.
And agayne another scripture sayeth: they shal loke on him, whom they pearsed.
After this, Ioseph of Aramathia (which was a disciple of Iesus: but secretly for feare of the Iewes) besought Pilate, that he might take downe the body of Iesus. And Pilate gaue him licence.
And ther cam also Nicodemus (which at the begynnynge came to Iesus by night) Ꟶ brought of myrre and aloes mingled together, aboute an hundred pounde wayght.
Then toke they the body of Iesu, Ꟶ wounde it in lynnen clothes wt the odoures, as the maner of the Iewes is to bury.
And in the place where he was crucified, there was a garden, and in the garden a newe sepulchre, wherin was neuer man layd.
There layde they Iesus therfore, because of the preparinge of the Sabboth of the Iewes for the sepulchre was nye at hande.
The fyrst daye of the Sabbothes cam Mary Magdalene early (when it was yet darcke) vnto the sepulchre, and sawe the stone taken awaye from the graue.
Then she ranne, and came to Symon Peter, and to the other dyscyple whom Iesus loued, and sayeth vnto them. They haue taken awaye the Lorde out of the graue, Ꟶ we cannot tell where they haue layde him.
Peter therfore went forth, Ꟶ that other disciple, and came vnto the sepulchre.
They ranne both together, Ꟶ the other disciple dyd out runne Peter, Ꟶ came fyrst to the sepulchre.
And whan he had stowped downe he sawe the lynnen clothes lyenge, yet went he not in.
Then came Symon Peter, folowinge him, Ꟶ went into the sepulchre, Ꟶ sawe the lynnen clothes lye,
Ꟶ the napkin that was aboute his heed, not lyinge wt the lynnen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by it selfe.
Then went in also the other discyple, which came fyrst to the sepulchre, and he sawe Ꟶ beleued.
For as yet they knew not the scripture, that he shulde ryse agayne from deeth.
Then the disciples went awaye agayne vnto theyr awne home.
Mary stode without at the sepulcre wepinge. So as she wepte, she bowed her selfe into the sepulchre,
Ꟶ seeth two angels clothed in whyte, sytting, the one at the heed Ꟶ the other at the fete, where they had layde the body of Iesus.
They saye vnto her, woman, why wepest thou? She sayeth vnto them: for they haue taken awaye my Lord, Ꟶ I wote not where they haue layde him.
When she had thus sayd, she turned her selfe backe, Ꟶ sawe Iesus standinge, and knewe not that it was Iesus:
Iesus sayeth vnto her: woman, why wepest thou? Whom sekest thou? She supposing that he had bene a gardener, sayeth vnto him. Syr: yf thou haue borne him hence, tell me wher thou hast layde him, and I wyll fet him.
Iesus sayeth vnto her. Mary. She turned her selfe, Ꟶ sayd vnto hym: Rabboni, which is to saye, master.
Iesus sayeth vnto her, touche me not, for I am not yet ascended to my father. But go to my brethren, Ꟶ saye vnto them? I ascende vnto my father Ꟶ youre father: Ꟶ to my God, Ꟶ youre God.
Mary Magdalene came Ꟶ tolde the disciples, that she had sene the Lorde, and that he had spoken soch thinges vnto her.
The same daye at night: which was the fyrst daye of the Sabothes, when the dores were shut (where the disciples were assembled together for feare of the Iewes) came Iesus, and stode in the myddes, Ꟶ saieth vnto them: peace be vnto you.
And when he had so sayde, he shewed vnto them his handes, Ꟶ his syde. Then were the disciples glad when they sawe the Lord.
Then sayd Iesus to them agayne: peace be vnto you. As my father sent me, euen so sende I you also.
And when he had sayd those wordes, he brethed on them and sayeth vnto them: Receaue ye the holy goost.
Whosoeuers synnes ye remitte, they are remitted vnto them. And whosoeuers synnes ye retayne, they are retayned.
But Thomas one of the twelue (which is called Didymus) was not wt them when Iesus came.
The other disciples therfore sayde vnto him: we haue sene the Lorde. But he sayde vnto them: except I se in hys handes the prynt of the nayles, Ꟶ put my fynger in to the prynte of the nayles, Ꟶ thrust my hande into his syde, I will not beleue.
And after .viij. dayes, agayne his disciples were wt in, Ꟶ Thomas wt them. Then came Iesus when the dores were shut, Ꟶ stode in the myddes, and sayde: peace be vnto you.
After that sayd he to Thomas: bringe thy fynger hether, Ꟶ se my handes, Ꟶ reach hyther thy hande, Ꟶ thrust it into my syde, Ꟶ be not faythlesse, but beleuinge.
Thomas answered, and sayde vnto him: my Lorde, Ꟶ my God:
Iesus sayeth vnto him: Thomas, because thou hast sene me, thou hast beleued, blessed are they that haue not sene, and yet haue beleued.
And many other sygnes truly dyd Iesus in the presence of his discyples, which are not wrytten in this boke.
These are written, that ye myght beleue, that Iesus is Chryst the sonne of God, and that (in beleuyng) ye myght haue lyfe thorow hys name.
After warde dyd Iesus shewe hym selfe agayne, at the see of Tyberias. And on this wyse shewed he him selfe
There were together Symon Peter Ꟶ Thomas (which is called Didymus) and Nathanael of Cana in Galile, and the sonnes of zebeddei, and two other of hys disciples.
Simon Peter sayeth vnto them: I wyll go a fisshinge. They saye vnto him: we also wyll go with the. They went theyr waye Ꟶ entred into a shyppe immediatly, Ꟶ that night caught they nothinge.
But when the mornynge was now come, Iesus stode on the shore: neuerthelesse the disciples knewe not that it was Iesus.
Iesus sayeth vnto them: Children, haue ye eny meat? they answered him, no.
And he saieth vnto them: cast out the net on the ryght syde of the ship, Ꟶ ye shall fynde. They cast out therfore, and anone they were not hable to drawe it for the multitude of fysshes.
Then sayde the disciple whom Iesus loued vnto Peter: It is the Lord: When Symon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he gyrde his coate vnto him (for he was naked) Ꟶ sprange into the see.
The other disciples came by shyp for they were not farre from lande, but as yt were two hondred cubites, Ꟶ they drewe the net wt fisshes.
Assone then as they were come to lande, they sawe hoote coles, Ꟶ fisshe layd theron, Ꟶ breed.
Iesus sayeth vnto them. brynge of the fysshe which ye haue now caught:
Symon Peter went vp, Ꟶ drewe the net to londe full of great fysshes, an hondred Ꟶ .liij. And for all ther were so many, yet was not the net broken.
Iesus sayeth vnto them: come Ꟶ dyne. And none of the discyples durst aske him: what art thou? For they knewe that it was the Lorde.
Iesus then came, and toke breed, Ꟶ gaue them, and fisshe lykewyse.
This is nowe the thyrde tyme that Iesus appeared to hys discyples, after that he was rysed agayne from deeth.
So when they had dyned, Iesus sayeth to Simon Peter: Symon Ioanna, louest thou me more then these? He sayd vnto him: ye Lord, thou knowest, that I loue the. He sayeth vnto him: fede my lambes.
He sayeth to him agayne the seconde tyme: Symon Ioanna, louest thou me? He saieth vnto him. Yee Lord, thou knowest that I loue the. He sayde vnto him: fede my shepe.
He sayde vnto him the thyrde tyme: Symon Ioanna, louest thou me? Peter was sory, because he sayde vnto hym the thyrde tyme: louest thou me, and he sayde vnto hym: Lord, thou knowest all thinges, thou knowest that I loue the, Iesus saieth vnto him: fede my shepe.
Uerely, verely, I saye vnto the: when thou wast yong, thou gerdedst thy selfe, and walkedst whither thou woldest: but when thou art olde, thou shalt stretche forth thy handes, Ꟶ another shall gyrde the, Ꟶ leade the whyther thou woldest not.
That spake he, sygnyfyinge, by what death he shuld glorifye God. And when he had spoken thys, he sayeth vnto him: folowe me.
Peter turned about, and sawe the disciple whom Iesus loued, folowynge (which also leaned on hys brest at supper, and sayde: Lord, which is he that betrayeth the?)
When Peter therfore sawe him, he sayeth to Iesus: Lord, what shall he here do?
Iesus sayeth vnto hym, If I wyll haue him to tary tyll I come, what is that to ther folowe thou me.
Then went thys sayinge abroade among the brethren, that the discyple shulde not dye. Yet Iesus sayde not to hym, he shall not dye: but yf I wyll that he tary tyll I come, what is that to the?
The same dyscyple is he, which testifieth of these thynges, and wrote these thynges. And we knowe, that hys testimony is true.
There are also many other thynges which Iesus dyd, the which yf they shulde be wrytten euery one, I suppose the worlde coulde not contayne the bokes that shulde be wrytten.
In the former treatyse (Deare Theophylus) we haue spoken of all that Iesus beganne to do and teache,
vntyll the daye in which he was taken vp, after that he, thorow the holy goost, had geuen commaundementes vnto the Apostles, whom he had chosen:
to whom also he shewed hym selfe alyue after hys passion (and that by many tokens) appearynge vnto them fourtye dayes, and speakynge of the kyngdome of God,
and gathered them together, and commaunded them, that they shulde not departe from Ierusalem: but to wayte for the promys of the father wherof (sayeth he) ye haue hearde of me.
For Iohn truly baptysed with water, but ye shalbe baptysed with the holy goost after these feawe dayes.
When they therfore were come together, they asked of him, sayinge: Lorde, wilt thou at this tyme, restore agayne the kyngdome to Israel?
And he sayde vnto them: It is not for you to knowe the tymes, or the seasons, which the father hath put in his awne power:
but ye shal receaue power after that the holy goost is come vpon you. And ye shalbe witnesses vnto me not onely in Ierusalem, but also in all Iewry and in Samary, and euen vnto the worldes ende.
And when he had spoken these thynges, whyle they beheld, he was taken vp an hye, Ꟶ a cloude receaued him vp out of their sight.
And while they looked stedfastly vp towarde heauen, as he went, beholde, two men stode by them in whyte apparell,
which also sayd: ye men of Galile, why stande ye gasynge vp into heauen? This same Iesus which is taken vp from you into heauen, shall so come, euen as ye haue sene him go into heauen.
Then returned they vnto Ierusalem from the mount (that is called Olyuete) which is from Ierusalem, a Saboth dayes iorney.
And when they were come in, they went vp into a parler, where aboade both Peter and Iames, and Iohn and Andrew, Philip Ꟶ Thomas, Barthelemew and Mathew, Iames the sonne of Alpheus, and Simon zelotes, and Iudas the brother of Iames.
These all contynued with one accorde in prayer and supplicacyon with the wemen Ꟶ Mary the mother of Iesu, and with hys brethren.
And in those dayes Peter stode vp in the myddes of the discyples, and sayde (the nombre of names that were together, were aboute an hundred and twentye.)
Ye men Ꟶ brethren, thys scripture must haue nedes ben fulfylled, which the holy goost thorowe the mouth of Dauid spake before of Iudas, which was gyde to them that toke Iesus.
For he was noumbred with vs, and had obtayned felowshypp in thys mynystracyon.
And the same hath now possessed a plat of grounde with the rewarde of iniquite: and when he was hanged, he burst a sondre in the myddes, and all his bowels gusshed out.
And it is knowen vnto all the inhabiters of Ierusalem: in so moch that the same felde is called in their mother tonge, Acheldama, that is to saye, the bloude felde.
For it is wrytten in the boke of Psalmes: hys habitacyon be voyde, and no man be dwellynge therin: and his Bysshoprycke let another take.
Wherfore of these men which haue companyed with vs (all the tyme that the Lorde Iesus had all hys conuersacyon amonge vs,
begynnynge at the baptyme of Iohn, vnto that same daye that he was taken vp from vs) must one be ordeyned, to be a witnes with vs of hys resurreccyon.
And they apoynted two, Ioseph which is called Barsabas (whose syr name was Iustus) and Mathias,
And whan they prayed they sayde: thou Lorde, which knowest the hertes of all men, shewe whether of these two thou hast chosen:
that he maye take the roume of thys ministracyon and Apostleshypp, from which Iudas by transgressyon fell, that he myght go to hys awne place.
And they gaue forth their lottes, and the lot fel on Mathias, and he was counted with the eleuen Apostles.
When the fyftye dayes were come to an ende, they were all with one accorde together in one place.
And sodenly ther came a sounde from heauen, as it had bene the commynge of a myghty wynde, and it fylled all the house where they sate.
And there appered vnto them clouen tonges, lyke as they had bene of fyer, and it sate vpon eache one of them:
and they were all fylled with the holy goost, and beganne to speake with other tonges, euen as the same sprete gaue them vtteraunce.
Ther were dwellyng at Ierusalem, Iewes, deuoute men, out of euery nacyon of them that are vnder heauen.
When thys was noysed aboute, the multitude came together, Ꟶ were astonnyed, because that euery man hearde them speake with his awne langage.
They wondred all, and marueyled, sayinge among them selues: beholde, are not all these which speake, of Galile?
And how heare we euery man his awne tong, wherin we were borne?
Parthians, and Medes and Elamytes, and the inhabiters of Mesopotamia, and of Iury, and of Capadocia, of Ponthus and Asia,
Phrygia, and Pamphilia, of Egypte, and of the partyes of Lybia which is besyd? Syren, and straungers of Rome, Iewes Ꟶ Proselites.
Grekes and Arabians: we haue herd them speake in oure awne tonges the greate worckes of God.
They were all amased, and wondred sayinge one to another: what meaneth this?
Other mocked, sayinge: these men are full of new wyne.
But Peter stepped forth with the eleuen, and lyft vp his voyce, and sayde vnto them: Ye men of Iewrye, and all ye that dwell at Ierusalem: be this knowen vnto you, Ꟶ with youre eares heare my wordes.
For these are not droncken, as ye suppose, seynge it is but the thyrde houre of the daye.
But this it that which was spoken by the Prophete Iohel:
And it shalbe in the last dayes, sayth God: of my sprete I wyll poore out vpon all flesshe. And youre sonnes Ꟶ youre daughters shall prophesy, and youre yonge men shall se vysyons, and youre olde men shall dreame dreames.
And on my seruauntes, Ꟶ on my hande maydens I wyll poore out of my sprete in those dayes, and they shall prophesye.
And I wyll shewe wonders in heauen aboue, and tokens in the erth beneth, bloud and fyre and the vapour of smoke.
The sunne shalbe turned into darcknes, Ꟶ the moone into bloude, before that great and notable daye of the Lorde come.
And it shall come to passe, that whosoeuer shall call on the name of the Lorde, shalbe saued.
Ye men of Israel, heare these wordes: Iesus of Nazareth a man aproued of God amonge you with myracles, wonders and sygnes, which God dyd by hym in the myddes of you (as ye youre selues knowe)
hym haue ye taken by the handes of vnryghtewes persones, after he was delyuered by the determinat counsell Ꟶ foreknowledge of God, Ꟶ haue crucifyed and slayne him:
whom God hath raysed vp, Ꟶ loosed the sorowes of deeth, because it was vnpossible, that he shulde be holden of it.
For Dauid speaketh of him. A fore hande I sawe God alwayes before me: for he is on my ryght hande, that I shulde not be moued.
Therfore dyd my hert reioyce, Ꟶ my tonge was glad. Moreouer also my flesshe shall rest in hope,
because thou wilt not leaue my soule in hell, nether wilt thou suffre thine holye to se corrupcion.
Thou hast shewed me the wayes of lyfe, thou shalt make me full of ioye with thy countenaunce.
Ye men and brethren, let me frely speake vnto you of the patriarke Dauid: For he is both deed and buryed, and hys sepulchre remayneth with vs vnto this daye.
Therfore, seinge he was a Prophet, and knewe that God had sworne with an othe to him, that Christ (as concerninge the flessh) shulde come of the frute of his loynes, and on hys seat,
he knowyng this before, spake of the resurreccyon of Chryst, that his soule shulde not be left in hell: nether hys flesshe shulde se corrupcyon.
This Iesus hath God raysed vp, wherof we all are witnesses.
Sence now that he by the ryght hande of God exalted is, and hath receaued of the father the promyse of the holy Goost, he hath sheed forth thys which ye now se and heare.
For Dauid is not ascendyd into heuen: but he sayeth: The Lord sayde to my Lorde: syt thou on my ryght hand,
vntyll I make thy fooes thy fote stole.
So therfore, let all the house of Israel knowe for a suerty, that God hath made that same Iesus (whom ye haue crucified) Lorde and Chryst.
When they hearde this, they were pricked in their hertes, and sayd vnto Peter, Ꟶ vnto the other Apostles: Ye men Ꟶ brethren what shall we do?
Peter sayde vnto them: repent of youre synnes, and be baptysed euery one of you in the name of Iesus Chryst for the remission of synnes, and ye shall receaue the gyfte of the holy goost.
For the promyse was made vnto you and to youre chyldren, and to all that are a farre of, euen as many as the Lorde oure God shall call.
And with many other wordes bare he witnes, and exhorted them, sayinge: Saue youre selues from this vntowarde generacion.
Then they that gladly receaued his preachinge, were baptised: and the same daye, ther were added vnto them aboute thre thousande soules.
And they continued in the Apostles doctrine and felowshyp, Ꟶ in breakynge of bread, and in prayers.
And feare came ouer euery soule. And many wondres Ꟶ signes were shewed by the Apostles.
And all that beleued, kept them selues together, Ꟶ had all thynges commen,
and solde their possessions and goodes, and parted them to all men, as euery man had nede.
And they continued dayly with one accorde in the temple, Ꟶ brake bread from house to house, Ꟶ dyd eate their meate together, wt gladnes Ꟶ singlenes of hert,
praysinge God, and had fauour with all the people. And the Lorde added to the congregacion dayly, soch as shulde be saued.
Peter and Iohn went vp together into the temple at the nynth houre of prayer.
And a certayne man that was halt from hys mothers wombe, was brought, whom they layde daylie at the gate of the temple (which is called bewtyfull) to aske almes of them that entred into the temple.
When he sawe Peter and Iohn, that they wolde into the temple, he desyred to receaue an almes.
And Peter fastened his eyes on him with Iohn, Ꟶ sayd: loke on vs.
And he gaue hede vnto them, trustynge, to receaue some thynge of them.
Then sayde Peter: Syluer and golde haue I none such as I haue, geue I the. In the name of Iesus Chryst of Nazareth, ryse vp and walke.
And he toke hym by the ryght hand, and lyfte hym vp. And immediatly hys fete and anclebones receaued strength.
And he sprange, stode, and walked, and entred with them into the temple, walkynge, and leapynge, and praysynge God.
And all the people sawe hym walke and prayse God.
And they knewe hym, that it was he, which sate and begged at the beutyfull gate of the temple. And they wondred and were sore astonyed at that which had happened vnto hym.
And as the halt which was healed, helde Peter and Iohn, all the people ranne amased vnto them in the porche that is called Salomons.
When Peter sawe that, he answered vnto the people. Ye men of Isral, why maruayle ye at this, or why loke ye so on vs, as though by oure awne power or strength we had made thys man go?
The God of Abraham, and of Isaac and of Iacob, the God of oure fathers hath glorified hys sonne Iesus, whom ye delyuered, and denyed in the presence of Pylate, when he had iudged hym to be loosed.
But ye denyed the holy and iust, and desyred a mortherar to be geuen you,
and kylled the Lorde of lyfe, whom God hath raysed from deeth, of the which we are witnesses.
And hys name thorowe the fayth of his name, hath made this man sound, whom ye se and knowe. And the fayth which is by hym, hath geuen to hym thys health in the presence of you all.
And now brethren, I wote that thorow ignoraunce ye dyd it, as dyd also youre rulers.
But God (which before had shewed, by the mouth of all hys Prophetes, howe that Chryst shuld suffre) hath thus wyse fulfylled.
Let it repente you therfore, and conuerte, that youre synnes maye be done awaye when the tyme of refresshynge commeth, which we shall haue of the presence of the Lorde,
and when God shal sende him, which before was preached vnto you, that is to with Iesus Christ,
which must receaue heauen vntyll the tyme that all thynges, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all hys holy Prophetes sence the worlde began, be restored agayne.
Moses trulye sayde vnto the fathers: a Prophet shall the Lorde youre God rayse vp vnto you, euen of youre brethren lyke vnto me: him shall ye heare, in all thynges whatsoeuer he shall saye vnto you.
For the tyme wyll come, that euery soule which wyll not heare that same Prophet, shalbe destroyed from amonge the people.
All the Prophetes also from Samuel and thence forth (as many as haue spoken) haue in lyke wyse tolde of these dayes.
Ye are the chyldren of the Prophetes, and of the couenaunt, which God made vnto oure fathers, sayinge to Abraham: Euen in thy seede shal all the kynredes of the earth be blessed.
Fyrst whan God had raysed vp hys sonne Iesus vnto you, he sent him to blesse you, that euery one of you shulde turne from his wyckednes.
As they spake vnto the people, the prestes and the rulars of the temple, and the Saduces, came vpon them,
takyng it greuously, that they taught the people, and preached in Iesus the resurreccyon from deeth.
And they layde handes on them, and put them in holde vntyll the nexte daye: for it was now euentyde.
Howbeit many of them which hearde the wordes beleued, and the nombre of the men was aboute fyue thousande.
And it chaunsed on the morow, that their rulars and elders and Scribes,
(and Annas the chefe Prest, and Cayphas, and Iohn, and Alexander, Ꟶ as many as were of the kynred of the hye Prestes) gathered together at Ierusalem.
And whan they had set them before them they asked by what power, or in what name haue ye done this?
Then Peter full of the holy goost sayde vnto them ye rulars of the people, and elders of Israel,
yf we this daye be examined of the good dede that we haue done to the sycke man by what meanes he is made whoale:
be it knowen vnto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Iesus Chryst of Nazareth, whom ye crucyfyed, whom God raysed agayne from deeth: euen by him doth this man stande here present before you whoale.
This is the stone which was cast asyde of you buylders, which is become the chefe of the corner.
Nether is there saluacyon in eny other. For amonge men vnder heauen there is geuen none other name, wherin we must be saued.
When they sawe the boldnes of Peter and Iohn, and vnderstode that they were vnlerned and laye men, they marueyled, and they knewe them, that they had bene with Iesu:
and beholdynge also the man (which was healed) standynge with them, they coulde not saye agaynst it:
but commaunded them to go asyde out of the counsell, and counceled amonge them selues,
sayinge: what shall we do to these men? For a manifest sygne is done by them, and is openly knowen to all them that dwell in Ierusalem, and we cannot denye it.
But that it be noysed no farther amonge the people, let vs threaten and charge them, that they speake hence forth to no man in thys name.
And they called them, and commaunded them, that in no wyse they shulde speake ner teach in the name of Iesu.
But Peter Ꟶ Iohn answered and sayde vnto them: whether it be ryght in the sight of God, to herken vnto you more then to God, iudge ye.
For we cannot but speake, that which we haue sene Ꟶ heard.
So threatened they them, and let them go, and founde nothynge howe to punysshe them, because of the people. For all men praysed God because of that which was done:
for the man was aboue fourty yeare olde, on whom thys myracle of healynge was shewed.
Assone as they were let go, they came to theyr felowes, and shewed all that the hye Prestes and elders had sayde.
And when they hearde that, they lyfte vp their voyces to God with one accorde, and sayde: Lorde, thou art God, which hast made heauen and erth, the see, Ꟶ all that in them is,
which by the mouth of thy seruaunt Dauid hast sayd: Why dyd the hethen rage, and the people ymagen vayne thynges?
The kynges of the erth stode vp, and the rulars came together, agaynst the Lorde and agaynst hys anoynted.
For of a trueth, agaynst thy holy chylde Iesus (whom thou hast anoynted) both Herode and also Poncius Pylate, which the Gentyls and the people of Israel, gathered them selues together
for to do whatsoeuer thy hande and thy counsell determyned before to be done.
And now Lorde, beholde their threatenynges, and graunte vnto thy seruauntes, that with all confydence they maye speake thy worde.
So that thou stretche forth thyne hande, that healynge and sygnes and wonders be done by the name of thy holy chylde Iesus.
And assone as they had prayed the place moued where they were assembled together and they were all fylled with the holy Goost, and they spake the worde of God boldely.
And the multitude of them that beleued, were of one hert, Ꟶ of one soule. Neyther sayde anye of them, that ought of the thynges which he possessed, was hys awne: but they had all thinges commen.
And with greate power gaue the Apostles wytnes of the resurrecyon of the Lord Iesu. And great grace was with them all.
Nether was ther eny among them, that lacked. For as many as were possessers of landes or houses, solde them, and brought the pryce of the thinges that were solde,
and layed it downe at the Apostles fete: And distribucion was made vnto euery man accordynge as he had nede.
And Ioses, which was also called of the Apostles, Barnabas (that is to saye, the sonne of consolacyon) beynge a Leuite, and of the countre of Cypers
whan he had lande, solde it, and layde the pryce downe at the Apostles fete.
A certayne man named Ananias with Saphyra his wyfe solde a possession,
and kepte awaye parte of the pryce (hys wyfe also beynge of counsell) and brought a certayne parte, and layde it downe at the Apostles fete.
But Peter sayde: Ananias, how is it, that Sathan hath fylled thyne hert, that thou shuldest lye vnto the holy goost, and kepe awaye parte of the pryce of the lande?
Pertayned it not vnto the onely? Ꟶ after it was solde, was it not in thyne awne power? Why hast thou conceaued this thinge in thyne herte? Thou hast not lyed vnto men, but vnto God.
When Ananias herde these wordes, he fell downe, and gaue vp the goost. And great feare came on all them that hearde these thinges.
And the yonge men rose vp, and put hym a parte, and caryed hym out, and buried hym.
And it fortuned, that (as it were aboute the space of thre houres after) his wyfe came in, ignoraunt of that which was done.
And Peter sayde vnto her: Tell me, Solde ye not the lande for so moch? And she sayd: yee, for so moch.
Then Peter sayde vnto her: why haue ye agreed together, to tempt the sprete of the Lorde? Beholde, the fete of them which haue buried thy husband, are at the dore, and shall cary the out.
Then fell she downe strayght waye at his fete, and yelded vp the goost. And the yonge men came in, and founde her deed, Ꟶ caryed her out, Ꟶ buryed her by her husbande.
And great feare came on all the congregacyon, and on as many as hearde it.
By the handes of the Apostles were many sygnes and wondres shewed among the people. And they were all together with one accorde in Salomons porche.
And of other durst no man ioyne him self to them: neuertheles the people magnified them.
The nombred of them that beleued in the Lorde both of men and wemen, grewe more Ꟶ moare:
in so moch that they brought the sycke into the stretes, and layde them on beddes and couches, that at the least waye the shadowe of Peter when he came by, myght shadowe some of them,
There came also a multitude out of the cyties rounde aboute, vnto Ierusalem, bryngynge sycke folkes, and them which were vexed with vnclene spretes. And they were healed euery one.
Then the chefe Preste rose vp, and all they that were with him (which is the secte of the Saduces) and were full of indignacion,
and layde handes on the Apostles, and put them in the commen preson.
But the angell of the Lorde by nyght opened the preson dores, and brought them forth, and sayde:
go, and stande, and speake in the temple to the people all the wordes of this lyfe.
When they hearde that, they entred into the temple early in the mornynge: and taught. But the chefe preste came and they that were with him, and called a counsell together, and all the elders of the chyldren of Israel, and sent men to the preson, to fet them.
When the mynysters came, and founde them not in the preson, they returned and tolde,
sayinge: the preson truly founde we shut with all diligence, and the kepers standynge without before the dores. But when we had opened, we founde no man with in.
When the chefe Prest and the ruler of the temple, and the hye Prestes hearde these thynges, they douted of them, wher vnto thys wolde growe.
Then came one and shewed them: beholde, the men that ye put in preson, stande in the temple, and teach the people:
Then went the ruler of the temple, with ministres, and brought them without vyolence. For they feared the people, lest they shulde haue bene stoned.
And when they had brought them, they set them before the counsell. And the chefe Preste asked them,
sayinge: dyd not we straytely commaunde you: that ye shuld not teach in this name? And behold, ye haue fylled Ierusalem with youre doctryne, and intende to brynge this mans bloud vpon vs.
Peter and the other Apostles answered, Ꟶ sayde: We ought more to obey God then men.
The God of oure fathers raysed vp Iesus, whom ye slewe, and hanged on tre.
Hym hath God lyft vp with his ryght hand, to be a ruler and a sauiour, for to geue repentaunce to Israel, and forgeuenes of synnes.
And we are recordes of these thinges which we saye, and so is also the holy goost, whom God hath geuen to them that obey him.
When they hearde that, they claue asunder, and sought meanes to slee them.
Then stode ther vp one in the counsell, a Pharysey, named Gamaliel, a doctoure of lawe (had in reputacyon among all the people) and commaunded the Apostles to go asyde a lytell space,
and sayd vnto them: ye men of Israel, take hede to youre selues, what ye entende to do, as touchynge these men.
For before these dayes rose vp one Thudas, boastynge hym selfe, to whom resorted a nombre of men, about a foure hondred, which was slayn: and they all which beleued hym. were scatred abrode, and brought to nough
After this man, was ther one Iudas of Galile in the dayes of the tribute, and drewe awaye moche people after hym. He also perisshed and all, euen (as many as harkened to him) were scatered abrode.
And now I saye vnto you: refraine your selues from these men, and lett them alone. For yf this councel or this worke be of men, it wyll come to naught.
But and yf it be of God, ye cannot destroye it, lest haply ye be founde to stryue agaynst God.
And to hym agreed the other: and whan they had called the apostles, they bet them, and commaunded that they shulde not speake in the name of Iesu, and let them go.
And they departed from the counsell, I reioysinge, that they were counted worthy, to suffre rebuke for his name.
And dayly in the temple and in euery house they ceased not, to teach and preach Iesus Christ.
In those dayes (whan the nomber of the discyples grewe) there arose a grudge amonge the Grekes against the Hebrues, because their weddowes were despysed in the dayly ministracyon.
Then the twelue called the multitude of the disciples together and sayde, it is not mete, that we shuld leaue the worde of God: and serue tables.
Wherfore brethren, loke ye out amonge you seuen men of honeste report, and full of the holy ghost and wisdom, to whom we maye committe this busynes.
But we wyll geue oure selues continually to prayer, and to the ministracyon of the worde.
And the sayinge pleased the whole multitude. And they chose Steuen a man full of faith and of the holy ghost, and Philip, and Procorus, and Nichanor, and Timon, and Permenas, and Nicolas a conuert of Antioche.
These they set before the apostles: and when they had prayed, they layde theyr handes on them.
And the word of God encreased, and the nomber of the disciples multiplyed in Ierusalem greatly, and a greate companye of the prestes were obedient to the fayth.
And Steuen, full of fayth and power, dyd great wondres and miracles amonge the people.
Then ther arose certen of the Synagoges, which is called the Synagoge of the Libertynes and Sirenytes, and of Alexandria, and of Celicia, and of Asia, disputynge with Steuen.
And they coulde not resyste the wisdome, Ꟶ the sprete, which spake.
Then sent they in men, which sayde: we haue hearde hym speake blasphemous wordes against Moses, and agaynst God.
And they moued the people and the elders and the scribes: and came vpon him and caught hym,
and brought him to the councell, and brought forth false witnesse, which sayde: Thys man ceaseth not to speake blasphemous wordes against this holy place and the lawe:
for we heard him saye: this Iesus of Nazareth shal destroye this place, and shal chaunge the ordinaunces, which Moses gaue vs.
And all that sate in the counsell, loked stedfastly on him, and sawe his face as it had bene the face of an aungell.
Then sayd the chefe preste: is it euen so?
And he sayd: ye men, brethren and fathers, hearken. The God of glory appeared vnto our father Abraham, whan he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran,
and sayd vnto hym: Get the out of thy countre, and from thy kynred, and come into the land, which I shall shewe the.
Then came he out of the lande of Chalde, and dwelt in Charran. And from thence, whan hys father was deed, he brought him into this lande in which ye now dwel,
and he gaue hym none inheritaunce in it, no not the bredeth of a fote: and promysed that he wold geue it to him to possesse Ꟶ to his seed after hym, when as yet he had no chylde.
God verely spake on thys wise that his seade shulde sogeourne in a straunge lande, Ꟶ that they shulde kepe them in bondage, and entreate them euell .iiij.C. yeares.
And the nacyon (to whom they shalbe in bondage) will I iudge, sayd God. And after that shal they come forth and serue me in thys place.
And he gaue him the couenaunt of circuncisyon. And he begat Isaac, and circumcised him the eight daye, and Isaac begat Iacob, and Iacob begat the twelue patriarckes.
And the patriarkes hauing indygnacyon solde Ioseph into Egypte. And God was with hym,
and delyuered hym out of al his aduersities, and gaue him fauour Ꟶ wysdome in the syght of Pharao kynge of Egypte. And he made hym gouernoure ouer Egypte, and ouer all hys housholde.
But ther came a derth ouer all the land of Egypt and Canaan, and great afflyccion that our fathers founde no sustenaunce.
But when Iacob hearde that there was corne in Egypt he sent our fathers first.
And at the second tyme, Ioseph was knowen of his brethren, Ꟶ Iosephs kynred was made knowne vnto Pharao.
Then sent Ioseph a message, and caused hys father to be brought, and all his kynne .lxxv. soules.
And Iacob descended into Egypte and dyed both he and oure fathers,
and were caryed ouer into Sichem, and layde in the sepulchre, that Abraham bought for money of the sonnes of Emor, the sonne of Sichem.
But when the tyme of the promesse drue nye (which God had sworne to Abraham) the people grewe Ꟶ multiplyed in Egipt,
tyll another kyng arose which knewe not of Ioseph.
The same dealt suttely with oure kinred, and euyll intreated our fathers, and made them cast out their yonge chyldren, that they shulde not remayne alyue.
The same tyme was Moses borne, and was acceptable vnto God, and nourysshed vp in hys fathers house thre monethes.
When he was cast out, Pharoes daughter toke him vp, Ꟶ nourysshed hym vp for her awne sonne.
And Moses was learned in all maner wysdome of the Egypcians, and was mighty in dedes and in wordes.
And whan he was full fourty yere old, it came into his hert, to vyset hys brethren the chyldren of Israell.
And when he sawe one of them suffre wrong, he defended him, Ꟶ auenged hys quarell that had the harme done to him, and smote the Egypcian.
For he supposed hys brethren wolde haue vnderstande, how that God by hys hande shulde delyuer them. But they vnderstode not.
And the next daye he shewed him self vnto them as they stroue, and wolde haue sett them at one agayne, sayinge: Syrs, ye are brethren, why hurte ye one another?
But he that dyd hys neyghboure wronge, thrust hym awaye, sayinge: who made the a ruler and a iudge ouer vs?
wilt thou kyll me, as thou dydest the Egypcian yesterdaye?
Then fleed Moses at that saying, and was a straunger in the land of Madian, where he begat two sonnes.
And whan fourty yeares were expired, there appeared to hym in the wildernesse of mount Sina an angell of the Lord in a flamme of fyre in a busshe.
When Moses sawe it, he wondred at the syght. And as he drue neare to beholde, the voyce of the Lord came vnto hym.
I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob. Moses trembled, and durst not beholde.
Then sayd the Lorde to him: Put of thy shoes from thy fete, for the place where thou standest, is holy grounde.
I haue perfectlye sene the affliccyon of my people, which is in Egypte, and I haue heard theyr gronyng, and am come downe to delyuer them. And nowe come, and I wyll sende the into Egypte.
This Moses whom they forsoke (saying: who made the a ruler and a iudge?) the same dyd God sende to be a ruler and a delyuerer, by the handes of the aungell which appeared to hym in the busshe.
And the same brought them out, shewynge wondres and signes in Egypt, and in the red see, and in the wyldernes fourty yeres.
Thys is that Moses, which sayde vnto the children of Israel: A prophete shall the Lord your God rayse vp vnto you of your brethren, like vnto me, him shall ye heare.
This is he that was in the congregacion, in the wildernes with the angel (which spake to hym in the mount Sina) and with our fathers. This man receaued the word of life to geue vnto vs,
to whom our fathers wold not obey, but cast it from them, and in theyr hertes turned backe agayne into Egypt,
sayinge vnto Aaron: make vs goddes to go before vs. For as for thys Moses that brought vs out of the lande of Egypte, we wote not what is become of hym.
And they made a calfe in those dayes, and offered sacrifyce vnto the ymage, and reioysed ouer the workes of theyr awne handes.
Then God turned hym selfe, and gaue them vp, that they shulde worshyp the hoost of the skye, as it is written in the booke of the prophetes. O ye of the house of Israel, gaue ye to me sacrifyces and meate offerynges by the space of fourty yeares in the wyldernes?
And ye toke vnto you the tabernacle of Moloch, and the starre of youre God Rempham, fygures which ye made to worshyp them. And I will translate you beyonde Babylon.
Oure fathers had the tabernacle of witnes in the wyldernesse, as he had appoynted them speakyng vnto Moses: that he shulde make it, according to the fassyon that he had sene.
Which tabernacle also oure fathers that cam after, brought in with Iosue into the possession of the Gentyls, whom God draue out before the face of oure fathers, vnto the tyme of Dauid:
which founde fauoure before God, and wold fayne haue founde a tabernacle for the God of Iacob.
But Salomon bylt him an house.
Howbeit he that is hyest of al, dwelleth not in temples made with handes, as sayth the prophete:
heauen is my seate, and earth is my fote stole. What house wyll ye bylde for me, sayth the Lorde? or which is the place of my rest:
hath not my hand made al these thinges?
Ye stiffenecked and of vncircumcised hertes and eares: ye haue allwayes resysted the holy ghost: as youre fathers dyd, so do ye.
Which of the prophetes haue not your fathers persecuted? And they haue slaine them which shewed before of the comming of that Iust, whom ye haue nowe betrayd, and murdred.
And ye also haue receaued the lawe by the minystracyon of aungels, and haue not kept it.
When they heard these thinges, theyr hertes claue asunder, and they gnasshed on him with theyr teth.
But he beyng ful of the holy ghost, loked vp stedfastlye wt hys eyes into heauen, and sawe the glorye of God, and Iesus standyng on the ryght hande of God,
and sayd: beholde, I se the heauens open, and the sonne of man standyng on the right hand of God.
Then they gaue a shout with a loud voyce, and stopped theyr eares, and ranne vpon him all at once,
and cast hym out of the cytie, and stoned him. And the witnes layd downe theyr clothes at a yong mannes fete, whose name was Saul.
And they stoned Steuen callynge on and sayinge: Lorde Iesu, receaue my sprete.
And he kneled downe Ꟶ cryed with a loude voyce: Lorde, laye not thys synne to theyr charge. And when he had thus spoken, he fell a slepe.
Saul consented vnto hys death. And at that tyme there was a greate persecucyon agaynst the congregacyon which was at Ierusalem, and they were all scatered abrode thorowout the regyons of Iewry and Samaria, except the apostles.
But deuout men dressed Steuen, and made great lamentacyon ouer hym.
As for Saul he made hauocke of the congregacyon, and entred into euery house, and drew out both men and women, and thrust them into preson.
Therfore, they that were scatered abrode, went euery where preachyng the worde of God.
Then came Philip into a cytie of Samaria, Ꟶ preached Christ vnto them.
And the people gaue hede vnto those thynges which Philip spake wt one accord, hearyng Ꟶ seyng the myracles whych he dyd.
For vncleane spretes cryinge with loude voyce, came out of many that were possessed of them. And many taken wt palsyes, Ꟶ many that halted, were healed.
And ther was great ioye in that cyte.
But ther was a certen man called Symo, which before tyme in the same cytye vsed witchecrafte, and bewitched the people of Samary, saying that he was a man that coulde do great thynges.
Whom they regarded, from the lest to the greatest, sayinge: this man is the power of God, which is called greate.
And him they sett moche by, because that of longe tyme he had bewitched them with sorceries.
But assone as they gaue credence to Philippes preachyng of the kyngdome of God, Ꟶ of the name of Iesu Christ, they were baptysed both men Ꟶ wemen.
Then Simon hym selfe beleued also. And whan he was baptised, he continued wt Philip, and wondred, beholding the miracles Ꟶ sygnes, which were shewed.
When the apostles which were at Ierusalem herd saye, that Samary had receaued the word of God, they sent vnto them Peter Ꟶ Iohn.
Which whan they were come downe, prayed for them, that they might receaue the holy ghost.
For as yet he was come on no one of them: but they were baptysed onely in the name of Christ Iesu.
Then layd they their handes on them, Ꟶ they receaued the holy ghos
When Simon sawe that thorow laying on of the apostles handes, the holy ghost was geuen, he offered them money,
saying: geue me also this power, that on whomsoeuer I put the handes, he maye receaue the holy ghost.
But Peter sayd vnto him: thy money perisshe with the, because thou hast thought that the gift of God maye be obteyned with money.
Thou hast nether parte, nor felowshyp in thys busynes. For thy hert is not ryght in the syght of God.
Repente therfore of thys thy wyckednes, Ꟶ praye God, that the thought of thyne herte maye be forgeuen the.
For I perceaue that thou art full of bitter gall, and wrapped in iniquite.
Then answered Simon Ꟶ sayde: praye ye to the Lorde for me, that none of these thynges which ye haue spoken, fall on me.
And they when they had testifyed and preached the worde of God, returned towarde Ierusalem, and preached the gospell in many cyties of the Samaritans.
The aungell of the Lorde spake vnto Philip, saying: aryse, Ꟶ go toward the south vnto the waye that goeth downe from Ierusalem vnto the cyte of Gaza, which is in the desert.
And he arose, Ꟶ went on. And behold, a man of Ethiopia (a chamberlene, Ꟶ of greate auctorite with Candace quene of the Ethiopians, Ꟶ had the rule of al her treasure came to Ierusalem for to worshyp.
And as he returned home agayne syttinge in hys charet, he red Esay the prophete.
Then the sprete sayd vnto Philip: go neare, and ioyne thy self to yonder charet.
And Philip ran to hym, and heard him reade the prophete Esay, and sayd: Understandest thou what thou readest?
And he said: How can I, except I had a gyde? And he desyred Philip, that he wolde come vp, and sytt with hym.
The tenoure of the scripture which he read, was this: He was led as a shepe to be slayne: and lyke a lambe domme before his shearer, so opened he not his mouth.
Because of hys humblenes, he was not estemed. But who shal declare hys generacion? for his lyfe is taken from the earth.
The chamberlayn answered Philip, and sayd: I praye the of whom speaketh the prophete thys? of hym selfe, or of some other man?
Philip opened hys mouth, and began at the same scripture, and preached vnto hym Iesus.
And as they went on theyr waye, they cam vnto a certen water, and the chamberlayne said: Se, here is water what doth let me to be baptysed?
Philip sayde vnto him: If thou beleue with all thyne hert, thou mayest. And he answered, and sayde: I beleue that Iesus Christ is the sonne of God.
And he commaunded the charet to stande styll. And they went downe both into the water: both Philip and also the chamberlayn, and he baptysed hym.
And assone as they were come out of the water, the sprete of the Lord caught awaye Philip, and the chamberlayn sawe him nomore. And he went on hys waye reioysinge:
but Philip was founde at Azotus. And he walked thorowout the countre, preaching in all the cyties, tyll he came to Cesarea.
And Saul yet brethyng out threatnynges and slaughter agaynst the disciples of the Lorde, wente vnto the hye preste,
and desyred of hym letters, to cary to Damasco, to the synagoges. that yf he founde any of thys waye, (whyther they were men or wemen) he myght brynge them bounde vnto Ierusalem.
And when he iornyed, it fortuned that as he was nye to Damasco, sodenly their shyned round about hym a lyght from heauen,
and he fell to the earth and hearde a voyce, sayinge to him: Saul Saul, why persecutest thou me?
And he sayde: what art thou Lorde? And the Lorde sayd: I am Iesus, whom thou persecutest. It is hard for the to kycke against the pryckes.
And he both tremblynge, Ꟶ astonyed sayde: Lorde, what wylt thou haue me to do? And the Lord sayd vnto hym: aryse, and go into the cytie, and it shalbe told the, what thou must do.
The men which iorneyed with hym, stode amased, hearynge a voyce, but seynge no man.
And Saul arose from the earth, Ꟶ when he opened his eyes, he sawe no man. But they led him by the hande, and brought hym into Damasco.
And he was thre dayes without syght, and nether dyd eate nor dryncke.
And ther was a certen disciple at Damasco, named Ananias, and to him sayd the Lord in a visyon: Ananias? And he sayd: behold, I am here Lorde.
And the Lorde sayde vnto hym: aryse, and go into the strete (whych is called strayght) and seke in the house of Iudas after one called Saul of Tharsus. For beholde, he prayeth,
and hath sene in a vision a man named Ananias comyng into him, and puttyng hys handes on hym, that he myght receaue his syght.
Then Ananias answered: Lorde, I haue heard by many of this man how moch euyll he hath done to thy sayntes at Ierusalem:
Ꟶ here he hath auctoryte of the hye prestes, to bynde all that call on thy name.
The Lorde vnto him: go thy waye, for he is a chosen vessel vnto me, to beare my name before the Gentyls, and kynges, and the chyldren of Israel.
For I wyll shewe hym, how greate thinges he must suffre for my names sake.
And Ananias went his waye, and entred into the house, and put hys handes on hym, and sayd: brother Saul, the Lord that apperyd vnto the in the waye as thou camest, hath sent me, that thou myghtest receaue thy syght, and be fylled with the holy ghost.
And immediatly ther fell from hys eyes as it had bene scales and he receaued syght: and arose, and was baptised,
and receaued meate and was comforted. Then was Saul a certen dayes with the disciples which were at Damasco.
And straight waye he preached Christ in the Sinagoges, howe that he was the sonne of God,
but all that heard him, were amased, Ꟶ sayd: is not this he, that spoyled them which called on this name in Ierusalem, and came hyther for that entent, that he myght bring them bounde vnto the hye prestes?
But Saul encreased the more in strength, Ꟶ confounded the Iewes which dwelt at Damasco, affyrminge that this was very Christ.
And after a good whyle, the Iewes toke councell together, to kill him.
But their layinge awayte was knowen of Saul. And they watched the gates daye and nyght to kyll him.
Then the disciples toke him by night and put hym thorowe the wall, and let hym downe in a basket.
And when Saul was come to Ierusalem, he assaide to couple him selfe to the disciples: but they were all afrayde of hym, Ꟶ beleued not that he was a disciple.
But Barnabas toke hym, Ꟶ brought hym to the apostles, Ꟶ declared to them, howe he had sene the Lorde in the waye, and that he had spoken to him, Ꟶ how he had done boldely at Damasco in the name of Iesu.
And he had hys conuersacyon with them at Ierusalem,
speakynge boldly in the name of the Lorde Iesu. And he spake Ꟶ disputed agaynst the Grekes: but they wente about to slee hym.
Which when the brethren knewe, they brought hym to Cesarea, and sent him forth to Tharsus.
Then had the congregacyons rest thorowout all Iewry, and Galile, and Samary, and were edifyed, and walked in the feare of the Lord, and multyplied by the comfort of the holy ghost.
And it chaunsed as Peter walked through out all quarters, he cam also to the saynctes, which dwelt at Lydda.
And there he founde a certen man name Eneas, which had kepte his beed eyght yeares, and was sycke of the palsye.
And Peter sayde vnto hym: Eneas? The Lord Iesu Christ make the whole: aryse, and make thy beed. And he arose immediatly.
And all that dwelt at Lidda and Assaron sawe him, and tourned to the Lorde.
There was at Ioppa a certen woman, a disciple named Tabitha (which by interpretacyon is called Dorcas) the same was full of good workes and almes dedes, which she dyd.
And it chaunsed in those dayes that she was sycke, Ꟶ dyed. Whom when they had wesshed, they layd her in a chamber.
But for as moch as Lydda was nye to Ioppa, and the disciples had heard that Peter was there, they sent vnto him, desyringe him, that he wolde not be greued to come vnto them.
Peter arose, Ꟶ came with them. And when he was come, they brought him into the chamber. And all the widdowes stode round about him, wepynge, and shewyng the coates and garmentes, which Dorcas made, whyle she was with them.
And Peter put them all forth, and kneled downe, and prayde. and turned him to the body, and sayd: Tabitha, aryse. And she opened her eyes, and when she sawe Peter, she sat vp.
And he gaue her the hand. and lyft her vp. And whan he had called the saynctes and widdowes, he shewed her alyue.
And it was knowne thorowout al Ioppa, Ꟶ many beleued on the Lorde.
And it fortuned, that he taryed many dayes in Ioppa, with one Simon a tanner.
There was a certen man in Cesarea called Cornelius, a captayn of the soudyers of Italy,
a deuote man, Ꟶ one that feared God with all hys housholde, which gaue moch almes to the people, and prayde God all waye.
The same sawe by a vision euidently (about the ninth houre of the daye) an angel of God commynge into him, and sayinge vnto him: Cornelius?
When he loked on hym, he was afrayde, and sayd: what is it Lorde? He sayde vnto him: Thy prayers Ꟶ thy almeses are come vp into remembraunce before God.
And now sende men to Ioppa, Ꟶ call for one Symon, whose syrname is Peter.
He lodgeth wt one Simon a tanner, whose house is by the see syde. He shall tell the, what thou oughtest to do.
And when the angell which spake vnto hym, was departed, he called two of hys housholde seruauntes, and a deuoute soudier of them that wayted on him,
and tolde them all the matter, and sent them to Ioppa.
On the morowe as they went on their iorney, and drewe ny vnto the cytie, Peter went vp vpon the toppe of the house to praye, about the syxt houre.
And when he wexed an hongred, he wolde haue eaten. But whyle they made ready, he fell into a traunce,
and sawe, heauen opened, and a certen vessell come downe vnto hym, as it had bene a great shete, knyt at the foure corners, and was let downe to the earth,
wherin were all maner of fourfoted beastes of the earth, Ꟶ vermen and wormes Ꟶ foules of the ayer.
And ther came a voyce to him, rise Peter, kyl Ꟶ eate.
But Peter sayd: not so Lorde, for I haue neuer eaten eny thinge that is commen or vncleane.
And the voyce spake vnto him agayne the second tyme: what God hath clensed, that call not thou commen.
This was done threse, and the vessell was receaued vp agayne into heauen.
Whyle Peter also mused in him self what thys visyon (which he had sene) meant: beholde, the men which were sent from Cornelius had made inquirance for Simons house, and stode before the dore:
and called out one, and asked whether Simon which was syrnamed Peter were lodged there.
Whyle Peter thought on the visyon, the sprete sayd vnto him: behold, men seke the:
aryse therfore, and get the downe, Ꟶ go with them, Ꟶ dowte not for I haue sent them.
Peter went downe to the men which were sent vnto hym from Cornelius and sayd: Behold, I am he whom ye seke, what is the cause wherfore ye are come?
They sayd: Cornelius the captayne a iust man, and one that feareth God, Ꟶ of good reporte amonge all the people of the Iewes, was warned by an holy angell to sende for the into his house, Ꟶ to heare wordes of the.
Then called he them in, and lodged them. And on the morowe, Peter went awaye with them, and certayn brethren from Ioppa accompanyed hym.
And the thyrde daye entred they into Cesarea. And Cornelius wayted for them, and had called togeather hys kynsmen, and speciall frendes.
And as it chaunsed Peter to come in, Cornelius mete hym, and fell downe at hys fete, Ꟶ worshypped hym.
But Peter toke hym vp, sayinge: stande vp, I my selfe also am a man.
And as he talked with him, he came in, and founde many that were come together.
And he sayde vnto them: Ye knowe how that it is a vnlawful thinge for a man that is a Iewe, to company or come vnto an alient: but God hath shewed me, that I shulde not call any man commen or vncleane:
therfore came I vnto you without delaye, assone as I was sent for. I aske therfore, for what intent haue ye sent for me.
And Cornelius sayd: This daye now .iiij. dayes about this houre, I sat fasting, and at the nynthe houre I prayde in my house: and behold, a man stode before me in bryght clothynge,
and sayde: Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thyne almes dedes are had in remembraunce in the syght of God.
Sende men therfore to go to Ioppa, and call for Symon, whose syrname is Peter. He is lodged in the house of one Symon a tanner by the see syde: which assone as he is come, shall speake vnto the.
Then sent I for the immediatly, Ꟶ thou hast well downe, that thou art come. Nowe therfore are we all here present before God, to heare all thinges that are commaunded vnto the of God.
Then Peter opened his mouth, and sayde: Of a treuth I perceaue that there is no respect of persones with God,
but in all people, he that feareth hym, and worketh ryghtewesnes, is accepted with him.
Ye knowe the preachynge that God sent vnto the children of Israel, preachyng peace by Iesu Christ, which is Lord ouer all thynges.
Which preachynge was publisshed thorowout all Iewry (and began in Galile, after the baptyme which Iohn preached)
how God anoynted Iesus of Nazareth wt the holy ghost, and with power. Which Iesus went about doynge good, and healynge all that were oppressed of the deuyll, for God was with him.
And we are witnes of all thinges which he dyd in the lande of the Iewes and at Ierusalem: whom they slewe, and hanged on tre.
Him God raysed vp the thyrd daye, Ꟶ shewed him openly,
not to all the people, but vnto vs witnesses (chosen before of God for the same intent) which dyd eate Ꟶ dryncke wt him, after he arose from deeth.
And he commaunded vs to preach vnto the people, and to testify that it is he, which was ordened of God to be the iudge of quycke and deed.
To hym geue all the prophetes witnes, that thorowe hys name whosoeuer beleueth in him, shall receaue remissyon of synnes.
Whyle Peter yet spake these wordes, the holy ghost fell on all them which heard the preachyng.
And they of the circumcisyon which beleued, were astonnied, as many as came with Peter, because that on the Gentils also was shed out the gyft of the holy ghost.
For they hearde them speake with tonges, Ꟶ magnify God. Then answered Peter:
can eny man forbyd water, that these shuld not be baptysed, which haue receaued the holy ghost as well as we?
And he commaunded them to be baptysed in the name of the Lord. Then prayd they him, to tary a few dayes.
And the Apostles and brethren that were in Iewry, heard that the heathen had also receaued the word of God.
And when Peter was come vp to Ierusalem. they that were of the circumcision contended against hym,
sayng: Thou wentest into men vncircumcised, and dydest eate with them.
But Peter rehearsed the matter from the begynning, and expounded it by order vnto them, sayinge:
I was in the cytie of Ioppa, praying: and in a traunce, I sawe a visyon, a certen vessel descende, as it had bene a great shete, let downe from heauen by the foure corners, Ꟶ it came to me.
Into the which when I had fastened myne eyes, I considred, Ꟶ sawe fourfoted beastes of the earth, and vermen and wormes, and foules of the ayer.
And I heard a voyce saying vnto me: aryse Peter, sley, and eate.
But I sayde: not so Lorde, for nothynge comen or vncleane hath at eny tyme entred into my mouth.
But the voyce answered me agayne from heauen: count not thou those thinges comen, which God hath clensed
And this was done thre tymes. And all were taken vp agayne into heauen.
And beholde, immediatly ther were thre men all ready come vnto the house where I was, sent from Cesarea vnto me.
And the spyrite sayd vnto me, that I shuld go with them, without doutynge. Moreouer, these syxe brethren accompanyed me, and we entred into the mans house.
And he shewed vs, howe he had sene an aungel in his house, which stode and sayd to him: send men to Ioppa, and call for Simon, whose syrname is Peter:
he shall tell the wordes, wherby both thou and all thyne house shalbe saued.
And as I beganne to preach, the holy ghost fell on them, as he dyd on vs at the begynninge.
Then came it to my remembraunce, howe that the Lorde sayd: Iohn baptised wt water, but ye shalbe baptised with the holy ghost.
For asmoch then as God gaue them lyke gyftes, as he dyd vnto vs, when we beleued on the Lord Iesus Chryst: what was I, that I shulde haue withstande God?
When they heard this, they helde theyr peace, and glorifyed God, sayinge: then hath God also to the Gentyls graunted repentaunce vnto lyfe.
They also which were scattred abrode thorow the affliccyon that arose about Steuen, walked thorowout vnto Phenices and Cypers, and Antioche, preachinge the worde to no man, but vnto the Iewes onely
some of them were men of Cypers Ꟶ Siren: which when they were come to Antioche, spake vnto the Grekes, and preached the Lorde Iesus.
And the hande of the Lorde was with them, Ꟶ a greate nombre beleued and turned vnto the Lorde.
Tydinges of these thinges came vnto the eares of the congregacyon, which was in Ierusalem. And they sent forth Barnabas, that he shulde go vnto Antioche.
Which when he came, Ꟶ had sene the grace of God, was glad, Ꟶ exhorted them all, that with purpose of hert, they wold contynually cleaue vnto the Lord.
For he was a good man, and full of the holy ghost Ꟶ of faith: and moch people was added vnto the Lorde.
Then departed Barnabas to Tharsus, for to seke Saul.
And when he had founde him, he brought him vnto Antioche. And it chaunsed that a whole yeare they had their conuersacion with the congregacion there, and taught moch people: in so moch, that the discyples of Antioche were the fyrst that were called Christen.
In those dayes came prophetes from the cytie of Ierusalem vnto Antioche.
And there stode vp one of them named Agabus, and sygnifyed by the sprete, that there shuld be greate derth thorow out all the world, which came to passe in the Emperoure Claudius dayes.
Then the disciples euery man accordynge to his abylyte, purposed to sende socour vnto the brethren which dwelt in Iewry.
Which thinge they also dyd, and sent it to the elders by the handes of Barnabas and Saul.
At the same tyme Herode the kyng stretched forth hys handes to vexe certen of the congregacyon.
And he kylled Iames the brother of Iohn with the swerd.
And because he sawe that it pleased the Iewes, he proceded farther, and toke Peter also. Then were the dayes of swet bread.
And when he had caught hym, he put him in preson also, Ꟶ delyuered him to .iiij. quaternions of soudiers to be kepte, entendynge after Ester to bringe him forth to the people.
And Peter was kepte in preson. But prayer was made without ceasynge of the congregacyon, vnto God for hym.
And when Herode wolde haue brought him oute vnto the people, the same nyght slepte Peter betwene two soudiers, bounde with two chaynes, and the kepers before the dore kepte the preson.
And behold, the angel of the Lord was ther present, and a lyght shyned in the habytacyon. And he smote Peter on the syde, and steryd him vp, sayinge: aryse vp quickly. And his cheynes fel of from his handes.
And the angel sayd vnto hym: gyrde thy selfe, and bynde on thy sandales. And so he dyd. And he sayth vnto him: cast thy garment about the, Ꟶ folowe me.
And he came out Ꟶ folowed him, and wyst not that it was trueth which was done by the angell, but thought he had sene a visyon.
When they were past the fyrst and the seconde watch, they came vnto the yron gate, that leadeth vnto the cytie, whych opened to them by the awne accorde. And they went oute, and passed thorow one strete, and forth with, the angell departed from him.
And whan Peter was come to him selfe, he sayd: nowe I knowe of a surety, that the Lorde hath sent his angell, and hath delyuered me out of the hande of Herode, and from all the wayting for, of the people of the Iewes.
And as he consydred the thynge, he came to the house of Mary the mother of one Iohn, whose syrname was Marke, where many were gathered togeather in prayer.
As Peter knocked at the entry dore, a damsell came forth to herken, named Rhoda.
And when she knew Peters voyce, she opened not the entry for gladnes, but ran in, Ꟶ told how Peter stode before the entry.
And they sayde vnto her: thou art mad: But she affirmed that it was euen so. Then sayd they: it is hys angel.
But Peter contynued knockinge: Ꟶ when they had opened the dore, and sawe him, they were astonyed.
And whan he had beckned vnto them with the hande, that they myght holde theyr peace, he tolde them by what meanes the Lorde had brought him out of the preson. And he sayde: go shewe these thinges vnto Iames and to the brethren. And he departed, and went into another place.
Assone as it was daye, ther was no littel ado among the soudiers, what was become of Peter.
When Herode had sought for him, and founde hym not, he examined the kepers, and commaunded them to be caryed awaye. And he descended from Iewry to Cesarea, Ꟶ ther aboode.
Herode was displeased wt them of Tyre and Sidon. But they came all with one accorde, Ꟶ made intercession vnto Blastus the kynges chamberlayne, and desyred peace, because their countre was norysshed by the kynges prouysyon.
And vpon a daye appoynted, Herode arayed him in royall apparell, and sett hym in hys seate, and made an oracion vnto them.
And the people gaue a showte, sayinge: it is the voyce of a God Ꟶ not of a man.
And immediatly the angell of the Lorde smote hym, because he gaue not God the honour, and he was eaten of wormes and gaue vp the ghost.
And the worde of God grewe and multiplyed.
And Barnabas and Paul returned to Ierusalem, when they had fulfylled their offyce, and toke wt them Iohn whose syrname was Marke.
There were in the congregacyon that is at Antioche, certayn prophtes, and teachers: as Barnabas and Simon that was called Niger, and Lucius of Cerene and Manahen, Herode the Tetrarkes norsfelow, and Saul.
As they ministred to the Lorde and fasted, the holy ghost saide: separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the worcke wherunto I haue called them.
And whan they had fasted and prayed, and layde their handes on them, they let them go.
And they after they were sent forth of the holy ghost, departed vnto Seleutia, Ꟶ from thence they sayled to Ciprus.
And when they were at Salamine, they shewed the word of God in the sinagoges of the Iewes. And they had Iohn to theyr minyster.
When they had gone thorow the yle vnto Paphos, they founde a certayne sorcerer, (a false prophet, a Iewe) whose name was Bariesu,
which was with the ruler of the countre one Sergius Paulus a prudent man. The same ruler called vnto hym Barnabas and Saul, and desyred to heare the worde of God.
But Elymas the sorcerar (for so is hys name by interpretacion) with stode them, and sought to turne awaye the ruler from the faith.
Then Saul (which also is called Paul) beynge full of the holy ghost, set hys eyes on him,
and sayde. O full of all suttelty and disseytfulnesse, thou chylde of the deuyll, thou enemy of all righteousnes: wilt thou not cease to peruerte the strayght wayes of the Lorde?
And now beholde, the hande of the Lorde is vpon the, and thou shalt be blynde, and not se the sunne for a ceason. And immediatly, there fell on hym a myste and a darcknes, and he went about, sekynge them that shuld leade hym by the hande.
Then the rular when he sawe what had happened beleued, Ꟶ wondred at the doctryne of the Lorde.
When Paul departed from Paphos, they that were with him, came to Perga in Pamphilia: and Iohn departed from them, and returned to Ierusalem.
But they wandred thorow the countres, and came from Perga to Antioche in Pisidia, and wente into the synagoge on the saboth daye, and sate downe.
And after the lecture of the lawe and the prophetes, the rulers of the synagoge sente vnto them, sayinge: Ye men and brethren, yf ye haue eny sermon to exhorte the people, saye on.
Then Paul stode vp, and beckened with the hande for sylence, and sayde: Men of Israell, and ye that feare God, geue audience.
The God of this people chose oure fathers, and exalted the people, when they dwelt as straungers in the land of Egipt, and with a hye arme brought he them oute of it,
and about the tyme of fourtye yeares, suffred he theyr maners in the wyldernes.
And he destroyed seuen nacyons in the lande of Canaan, and deuyded theyr land to them by lot.
And afterwarde, he gaue vnto them iudges about the space of foure hundred and fyftye yeares, vnto the tyme of Samuell the prophete.
And afterwarde, they desyred a kynge, and God haue vnto them Saul the sonne of Cis, a man of the trybe of Beniamin, by the space of fourty yeares.
And whan he was put downe, he sett vp Dauid to be theyr kynge, of whom he repported saying: I haue founde Dauid the sonne of Iesse, a man after myne awne hert, which shall fulfyll all my wyll.
Of this mannes seed hath God (accordynge as he had promysed) brought forth to Israell, a sauioure, one Iesus,
when Iohn had fyrst preached before his commynge the baptyme of repentaunce to Israel.
And when Iohn had fulfilled his course, he sayd: whom ye thynke that I am, the same am I not. But behold, ther cometh one after me, whose shoes of his fete I am not worthy to loose.
Ye men and brethren, chyldren of the generacyon of Abraham, and whosoeuer among you feareth God, to you is thys worde of saluacyon sent.
For the inabiters of Ierusalem and theyr rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet the voyces of the prophetes which are redde euery Saboth daye, they haue fulfylled them, in condempnynge him.
And when they founde no cause of deeth in hym, yet desyred they Pylate to kyll hym.
And whan they had fulfylled all that were wryten of him, they toke him downe from the tree, and put hym in a sepulchre.
But God raysed him agayne from death,
and he was sene many dayes of them whych came vp with hym from Galile to Ierusalem: Which are hys wytnesses vnto the people.
And we declare vnto you, how that the promesse (whych was made vnto the fathers)
God hath fulfilled vnto their children (euen vnto vs) in that he raysed vp Iesus agayne. euen as it is writen in the fyrst psalme: Thou art my sonne, this daye haue I begoten the.
As concernynge that he raysed him vp from death, now nomore to returne to corrupcion he sayd on thys wyse: The holy promyses made to Dauid, wyl I geue faythfully to you.
Wherfore, he sayeth also in another place. Thou shalt not suffre thyne holy to se corrupcyon.
For Dauid (after he had in hys tyme fulfylled the wyll of God) fell on slepe, and was layde vnto hys fathers, and sawe corrupcyon.
But he whom God raysed agayn sawe no corrupcyon.
Be it knowne vnto you therfore (ye men and brethren) that thorowe thys man is preached vnto you the forgeuenes of sinnes,
and that by hym, all that beleue, are iustyfyed from all thynges, from which ye coulde not be iustifyed by the lawe of Moses.
Beware therfore, lest that fall on you, which is spoken of in the prophetes:
Behold, ye despysers, and wonder, and peryssh ye: for I do a worke in youre dayes, which ye shall not beleue, though a man declare it you.
When the Iewes were gone out of the congregacyon, the Gentyls besought that they wolde preache the word to them the next Saboth.
When the congregacyon was broken vp, many of the Iewes and verteous proselytes folowed Paul and Barnabas, which spake to them: Ꟶ exhorted them to continue in the grace of God.
And the next Saboth daye cam almost the whole cytie together, to heare the worde of God.
But when the Iewes sawe the people, they were full of indignacion Ꟶ spake agaynst those thynges, which were spoken of Paul, spekynge agaynst it, Ꟶ raylinge on it:
Then Paul and Barnabas wexed bolde, Ꟶ sayde: it was mete that the worde of God shulde fyrst haue bene preached to you. But seynge ye put it from you, and thynke youre selues vnworthy of euerlastynge lyfe: lo, we turne to the Gentyls:
For so hath the Lorde commaunded vs. I haue made the a lyght of the Gentyls, that thou be the saluacyon vnto the ende of the worlde.
Whan the gentyls hearde thys, they were glad and glorifyed the worde of the Lorde, Ꟶ beleued: euen as many as were ordeyned vnto eternal lyfe.
And the worde of the Lorde was publisshed thorowe out all the regyon.
But the Iewes moued the deuoute and honest wemen, and the chefe men of the cytie, Ꟶ reysed persecucyon agaynst Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of theyr coastes
But they shouke of the duste of theyr fete agaynst them, and came vnto Iconium.
And the discyples were fylled with ioye and with the holy ghost.
And it fortuned in Iconium, that they went both together into the synagoge of the Iewes, and so spake, that a greate multytude both of the Iewes and also of the Grekes beleued.
But the vnbeleuyng Iewes, steryd vp, and vnquieted the myndes of the gentyls agaynste the brethren.
Longe tyme abode they there, and quyt them selues boldly with the helpe of the Lord, which gaue testimony vnto the worde of his grace, Ꟶ graunted sygnes and wondres to be done by their handes.
But the multitude of the cytie was deuyded: and parte helde with the Iewes, Ꟶ parte with the Apostles.
When ther was an assaute made both of the Gentyles Ꟶ also of the Iewes with their rulers, to do them violence, and to stone them
they were ware of it, and fled vnto Lystra and Derba, cyties of Lycaonia, and vnto the regyon that lyeth ronnde aboute,
and there preached the Gospell.
And ther sate a certayne man at Lystra weake in hys fete, beynge creple from his mothers wombe, and neuer had walked.
The same hearde Paul preache. Which beholdynge hym, and perceauynge that he had fayth to be whole,
sayd with a loude voyce: stande vpryght on thy fete: And he stert vp, and walked.
And when the people sawe what Paul had done, they lyfte vp their voyces, sayinge in the speache of Lycaonia: Goddes are come downe to vs in the lyknes of men.
And they called Barnabas Iupiter, and Paul Mercurius, because he was the preacher,
Then Iupiters preste, which dwelt before their cytie, brought oxen and garlandes vnto the porche, and wolde haue done sacryfice with the people.
Which when the Apostles, Barnabas and Paul herde of, they rent their clothes, and ran in amonge the people, cryinge
and sayinge: syrs why do ye this? We are mortall men like vnto you, and preache vnto you, that ye shulde turne from these vanyties vnto the lyuinge God, which made heauen and erth and the see and all thynges that are ther in:
the which in tymes past suffred all nacyons to walcke in theyr awne wayes.
Neuerthelesse, he left not hym selfe withoute wytnes, in that he shewed hys beuefytes from heauen, in geuynge vs rayne and frutefull ceasons, fyllyng oure hertes with fode and gladnes.
And with these sayinges, sease refrayned they the people, that they had not done sacryfyce vnto them.
Thyther came certayne Iewes from Antioche and Iconium: which (whan they had obtayned the peoples consent and had stoned Paul) drew him out of the cytie, suppoge he had bene deed.
Howbeit as the disciples stode rounde about him, he arose vp, and came into the cytie. And the nexte daye he departed with Barnabas to Derba.
And whan they had preached to that cytie, Ꟶ had taught many, they returned agayne to Lystra, and to Iconium and Antioche,
and strengthed the discyples soules agayne, and exhorted them to contynue in the fayth affirmynge that we must thorowe moche tribulacyon enntre into the kyngdome of God.
And whan they had ordened them elders by eleccyon in euery congregacyon, and had prayde and fasted, they commended them to the Lorde on whom they beleued.
And whan they had gone thorowe out Pisidia, they came to Pamphilia,
Ꟶ whan they had preached the worde in Perga, they descended into the cyte Attalia,
and thence departed by shyppe to Antioche from whence they were committed vnto the grace of God to the worcke which they fulfylled.
When they were come, and had gathered the congregacion together, they rehersed all that God had doue by them and how he had opened the dore of fayth vnto the Gentyls.
And there they abode longe tyme with the discyples.
And certayne men which came downe taught the brethren excepte ye be circumcysed after the maner of Moses, ye cannot be saued.
So when ther was rysen dissencion Ꟶ disputyng not a lyttel vnto Paul and Barnabas agaynst them, they determined that Paule and Barnabas, and certayne other of them, shulde go vp to Ierusalem vnto the Apostles and elders about thys questyon.
And after they were brought on their waye by the congregacion, they passed ouer Phenices and Samaria, declaryng the conuersion of the Gentyls, and they brought greate ioye vnto all the brethren.
And when they were come to Ierusalem, they were receaued of the congregacion Ꟶ of the Apostles and elders. And they declared all thynges that God had done by them.
Then rose vp certayne of the secte of the Pharyses, which dyd beleue, saying, that it was nedfull to circumcyse them, and to commaunde them to kepe the lawe of Moses.
And the Apostles Ꟶ elders came together, to reason of thys matter.
And when ther was moche disputyng, Peter rose vp, Ꟶ sayde vnto them: Ye men Ꟶ brethren, ye knowe how the a good whyle agoo, God dyd chose amonge vs, that the Gentyls by my mouth shuld heare the worde of the Gospell, and beleue.
And God which knoweth the hertes, bare them wytnes, and gaue vnto them the holy goost, euen as he dyd vnto vs,
and put no difference betwene vs and them seynge that with fayth he purified theyr hertes.
Now therfore, why tempte ye God, to put on the disciples neckes the yoke which nether our fathers nor we were able to beare,
But we beleue, that thorow the grace of the Lorde Iesu Christ, we shalbe saued, as they do.
Then all the multitude was peased Ꟶ gaue audience to Barnabas Ꟶ Paul, which tolde what sygnes Ꟶ wondres God had shewed amonge the Gentyls by them.
And when they helde their peace, Iames answered, sayng: Men Ꟶ brethren, herken vnto me.
Simeon tolde, how God at the beginning dyd visit the gentyls, to receaue of them a people in his name.
And to this agree the wordes of the prophetes, as it is written:
After this I wyll returne, and wyll buylde agayne the tabernacle of Dauid, which is fallen downe and that which is fallen in decaye of it, wyll I buylde agayne, and I wyll set it vp,
that the resydue of men myght seke after the Lord Ꟶ also the Gentyls vpon whom my name is named sayth the Lorde, which doth all these thynges:
knowen vnto God are all hys workes from the begynning of the world.
Wherfore my sentence is, that we trouble not them: which from amonge the Gentyls, are turned to God:
but that we wryte vnto them, that they absteyne them selues from filthynes of ymages, and from fornicacyon, and from straunglyd, and from bloude.
For Moses of olde tyme hath in euery cytie them that preache hym, in the synagoges, when he is redd euery Saboth daye.
Then pleased it the Apostles and elders with the whole congregacion, to sende chosen men of theyr awne company to Antioche wt Paul and Barnabas, They sent Iudas (whose syrname was Barsabas) and Sylas, which were chefe men amonge the brethren,
and gaue them leters in theyr handes after thys maner. The Apostles, and elders and brethren send gretynges vnto the brethren which are of the Gentyls in Antioche, Syria and Cylicia.
For as moche as we haue hearde, that certayne which departed from vs, haue troubled you with wordes, and combred youre myndes saying: Ye must be circumcysed, and kepe the lawe, to whom we gaue no soch commaundement.
It semed therfore to vs a good thynge, when we were come together with one accorde, to sende chosen men vnto you, with oure beloued Barnabas and Paul,
men that haue ieoparded their lyues for the name of oure Lorde Iesus Christ.
We haue sent therfore Iudas and Sylas, which shall also tell you the same thinges by mouth.
For it semed good to the holy ghost and to vs, to charge you with no more then these necessary thynges:
that is to saye, that ye abstayne from thynges offered to ymages, and from bloud, and from straungled and from fornicacyon. From which yf ye kepe youre selues, ye shall do well. So fare ye well.
When they therfore were departed, they cam to Antioche and gathered the multytude together, Ꟶ deliuered the pistle.
Which when they had red, they reioysed of the consolacyon.
And Iudas Ꟶ Sylas being Prophetes, exhorted the brethren with moch preachynge, Ꟶ strengthed them.
And after they had taryed there a space, they were let go in peace of the brethren vnto the Apostles.
Not withstandyng it pleased Sylas, to abyde there styll
Paul and Barnabas continued in Antioche, teachynge Ꟶ preachynge the worde of the Lorde with other many.
But after a certayne space, Paul sayd vnto Barnabas: Let vs go agayne, and visite oure brethren in euery cytie where we haue shewed the word of the Lord, Ꟶ se how they do.
And Barnabas gaue counsell to take with them Iohn, whose syrname was Marcke.
But Paul wold not take him vnto their company which departed from them at Pamphilia, Ꟶ went not with them to the worcke.
And the contencion was so sharpe betwene them: that they departed asunder one from the other Ꟶ so Barnabas toke Marcke, and sayled vnto Cypers.
And Paul chose Sylas, Ꟶ departed, beynge commytted of the brethren vnto the grace of God.
And he went thorow Cyria and Cylicia, stablisshinge the congregacions:
Then cam he to Derba and to Lystra, And beholde, a certayne dyscyple was there named Timotheus a womans sonne, which was a Iewesse and beleued: but hys father was a Greke.
Of whom reported well the brethren that were at Lystra and Iconium
Hym wold Paul that he shulde go forth with him, Ꟶ toke and circumcised hym, because of the Iewes which were in those quarters: for they knewe all, that hys father was a Greke.
As they went thorowe the cyties, they deliuered them the decrees for to kepe, that were ordeyned of the Apostles and elders, which were at Ierusalem.
And so were the congregacyons stablyshed in the fayth, and encreased in nombre dayly.
When they had gone thorow out Phrigia. and the region of Galacia, and were forbydden of the holy ghost to preach the word in Asia,
they came to Mysya, and sought to go into Bethynia. But the sprete soffred them no
But whan they had gone thorow Mysia they came downe to Troada.
And a visyon appered to Paul in the nyght. There stode a man of Macedonia and prayed him, saying: come into Macedonia, and helpe vs.
After he had sene the vision, immediatly we prepared to go into Macedonia, beinge certifyed that the Lorde had called vs, for to preach the gospell vnto them.
Whan we losed forth then from Troada, we came wt a strayte course to Samothracia, and the nexte daye to Neapolin,
Ꟶ from thence to Philippos, which is the chefe cytie in the partes of Macedonia, Ꟶ a fre cytie. We were in that cytie abydinge certayne dayes.
And on the Saboth dayes we went out of the citie besydes a ryuer, where men were wont to praye. And we sate downe, Ꟶ spake vnto the wemen which resorted thyther.
And a certayne woman (named Lydia) a seller of purple, of the cytie of Thyatira, which worshypped God, gaue vs audience. Whose hert the Lorde opened, that she attended vnto the thynges, which Paul spake.
When she was baptised, and her housholde, she besought vs, sayinge: If ye thyncke that I beleue on the Lorde, come into my house, and abyde there. And she constrayned vs.
And it fortuned as we went to prayer, a certayn damsell possessed with a sprete that prophesyed, met vs, which brought her master: Ꟶ mastres moche vauntage wt Prophesyinge.
The same folowed Paul and vs, and cryed, sayinge: these men are the seruauntes of the most hye God, which shew vnto vs the waye of saluacyon.
And thys dyd she many dayes. But Paul not content, turned aboute, and sayde to the sprete. I commaunde the in the name of Iesu Christ, that thou come out of her. And he came out the same houre
And when her master and mastres sawe that the hope of their gaynes was gone, they caught Paul and Sylas, and drue them into the market place vnto the rulars,
Ꟶ brought them to the officers, sayinge: These men trouble oure cytie seing they are Iewes,
Ꟶ preach ordinaunces, which are not laufull for vs to receaue, nether to obserue, seynge we are Romanys.
And the people ranne agaynst them, and the officers rent their clothes, Ꟶ commaunded them to be beaten with roddes.
And when they had beaten them sore, they cast them into preson, commaundynge the iayler of the preson to kepe them diligently.
Which when he had receaued such commaundement, thrust them into the ynner preson, Ꟶ made theyr fete fast in the stockes.
At mydnyght Paul Ꟶ Sylas prayed, and lauded God. And the presoners hearde them.
And sodenly ther was a greate erthquake, so that the foundacion of the preson was shaken, and immediatly all the dores opened and euery mannes bandes were loosed.
When the keper of the preson waked out of his slepe and sawe the preson dores open, he drue out his swearde and wolde haue kylled him selfe supposyng that the presoners had bene fledd.
But Paul cryed with a loude voyce, saying: do thy selfe no harme, for we are all heare.
Then he called for a lyght and sprange in and ran tremblynge vnto Paul, and fell downe at the fete of Paul Ꟶ Sylas,
and brought them out, Ꟶ sayde: Syrs what must I do to be saued?
And they sayde: beleue on the Lorde Iesus, Ꟶ thou shalt be saued Ꟶ thy housholde.
And they preached vnto him the worde of the Lord, Ꟶ to all that were in hys house.
And he toke them the same houre of the nyght, Ꟶ wasshed their woundes, and was baptised and all they of hys housholde strayght waye.
And when he had brought them into hys house, he set meate before them, and ioyed that he with all his housholde, beleued on God.
And when it was daye, the officers sent the ministers, saying: let those men go.
The keper of the preson tolde this sayinge to Paul: the officers haue sent word to lose you. Now therfore, get you hence and go in peace.
Then sayde Paul vnto them: they haue beaten vs openly vncondemned, for all that we are Romayns, and haue cast vs into preson: Ꟶ now wolde they sende vs awaye preuely? Naye Uerely, but let them come them selues, Ꟶ fet vs out.
When the ministers tolde these wordes vnto the officers, they feared when they hearde, that they were Romaynes
they cam and besought them: and brought them out, and desyred them, to departe out of the cytie.
And they went out of the preson, and entred into the house of Lidia, and when they had sene the brethren, they conforted them, and departed
As they made their iourney thorowe Amphipolis: and Appolonia, they cam to Thessalonica, where was a Synagoge of the Iewes.
And Paul (as hys maner was) went in vnto them, and thre Saboth dayes declared out of the scrypture vnto them, openynge
Ꟶ allegyng, that Christ must nedes haue suffred, and ryse agayne from deeth, and that thys Iesus was Christ, whom (sayde he) I preach to you.
And some of them beleued, and cam and companyed with Paul Ꟶ Sylas, and of the deuote. Grekes a greate multitude, and of the chefe wemen, not a feawe.
But the Iewes which beleued not, had indignacion and toke vnto them euyll men, which were vagabundes, and gathered a company, and set all the cytie on a roare, Ꟶ made assaute vnto the house of Iason, Ꟶ sought to brynge them out to the people.
And when they founde them not they drue Iason, Ꟶ certayne brethren vnto the heades of the cytie, cryinge: these that trouble the worlde, are come hyther also,
whom Iason hath receaued preuely. And these all do contrary to the decrees of Cesar, affirmynge another kynge, one Iesus.
And they troubled the people, Ꟶ the officers of the cytie, when they hearde these thinges.
And when they were sufficiently answered of Iason, and of the other, they let them go.
And the brethren immediatly sent awaye Paul and Sylas by nyghte vnto Berrea. Which when they were come thyther, they entred into the Synagoge of the Iewes.
These were the noblest of byrth amonge them of Thessalonia, which receaued the word with all dilygence of mynde, and searched the scryptures dayly, whether those thynges were euen so.
And many of them beleued: also of worshypfull wemen which were Grekes, and of men not a feawe.
When the Iewes of Thessalonia had knowledge, that the word of God was preached of Paul at Berrea: they came, and moued the people there.
And then immediatly the brethren sent awaye Paul, to go as it were to the see: but Sylas and Timotheus abode there styll
And they that gyded Paul, brought him vnto Athens, Ꟶ receaued a commaundement vnto Sylas Ꟶ Timotheus, for to come to hym wt spede, Ꟶ came their waye.
Whil Paul wayted for them at Athens, his sprete was moued in him, whan he sawe the cytie geuen to worshippynge of ymages.
Then disputed he in the synagoge with the Iewes, and with the deuoute personnes: and in the market dayly with them that came vnto him by chaunce.
Certayne Philosophers of the Epicures and of the Stoyckes, disputed with hym. And some ther were which sayde: what will thys babler saye? Other sayde: he semeth to be a tydynges brynger of newe deuyls, because he preacheth vnto them Iesus Ꟶ the resurreccion.
And they toke him, Ꟶ brought him into Marce strete, saying: maye we not knowe what thys newe doctryne wherof thou speakest, is?
For thou bryngest straunge tydynges to oure eares. We wold knowe therfore, what these thinges meane.
For all the Athenians and straugers which were there, gaue them selues to nothing els, but ether to tell, or to heare some newe thynge.
Paul stode in the myddes of Marce strete, Ꟶ sayde: ye men of Athens, I perceaue that in all thinges ye are to supersticyous.
For as I passed by, and behelde the maner how ye worshyp youre goddes, I founde an aulter wherin was writen: vnto the vnknowen God. Whom ye then ignorantly worshyppe, hym shew I vnto you.
God that made the worlde and all that are in it (seing that he is Lorde of heauen and earth) dwelleth not in tempels made with handes,
nether is worshipped with mennes handes, as though he neded of eny thynge, seinge he hym selfe geueth lyfe and breth to all men euery where,
Ꟶ hath made of one bloude all nacions of men, for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath assigned before, how longe tyme, Ꟶ also the endes of their inhabitacyon,
that they shuld seke God, yf they myght fele and fynde him, though he be not farre from euery one of vs.
For in hym we lyue, moue, and haue oure beinge, as certayne of youre awne Poetes sayde: For we are also his generacion,
For as moch then as we are the generacyon of God, we ought not to thinke that the Godhead is lyke vnto golde, syluer or stone, grauen by crafte and ymaginacyon of man.
And the tyme of this ignoraunce God regarded not. But now biddeth all men euery where repen
because he hath appoynted a daye, in the which he will iudge the world wt ryghte wesnes, by that man by whom he hath appoynted, Ꟶ hath offered fayth to all men, after that he had raysed him from deeth.
When they hearde of the resurreccion from deeth, some mocked, and other sayd: we wyll heare the agayne of thys matter.
So Paul departed from amonge them.
Howbeit certayne men claue vnto hym and beleued: amonge the which was Dyonysyus a senatour, and a woman named Damaris, and other with them.
After thys, Paul departed from Athens, and came to Corynthum,
and founde a certayne Iewe named Aquila, borne in Ponthus, lately come from Italie with his wyfe Priscilla (because that the Emperour Claudius had commaunded all Iewes to departe from Rome) and he drew vnto them,
because he was of the same crafte, he abode with them, Ꟶ wrought: theyr crafte was to make tentes.
And he preached in the synagoge euery Sabboth daye and exhorted the Iewes and the gentyls.
When Silas, and Timotheus were come from Macedonia, Paul was constrayned by the sprete, to testyfye to the Iewes that Iesus was very Chryst.
And when they sayde contrary Ꟶ blasphemed he shoke hys rayment and sayde vnto them: youre bloude be vpon youre awne heedes: from hence forth wyll I go blamelesse vnto the gentyls.
And he departed thence, and entred into a certayne mannes house, named Iustus, a worshypper of God, whose house ioyned hard to the synagoge.
Howbeit, one Crispus the chefe ruler of the synagoge beleued on the Lorde with all his housholde, and many of the Corinthians whan they gaue audience, beleued, and were baptised.
Then spake the Lorde to Paul in the nyght by a visyon: be not afrayde, but speake, and holde not thy peace:
for I am with the, Ꟶ noman shall inuade the that shall hurte the. For I haue moch people in this cytie.
And he continued there a yeare and syxe monethes, and taught them the worde of God.
When Gallio was ruler of the countre of Acaia, the Iewes made insurreccyon with one accorde agaynst Paul, and brought hym to the iudgement seate,
sayinge: this felowe counceleth men to worship God contrary to the lawe.
And whan Paul nowe was about to open his mouth, Gallio sayd vnto the Iewes: yf it were a matter of wronge, or an euyll dede (O ye Iewes) reason wolde that I shulde heare you:
but yf it be a question of wordes or of names, or of youre lawe, loke ye to it youre selues, For I will be no iudge of soche matters,
and he draue them from the seate.
Then all the Grekes toke Softenes the chefe ruler of the Synagoge, and smote hym before the iudges seate, And Gallio cared for none of those thynges.
Paul after thys, taryed there yet a good whyle, and then toke his leaue of the brethren and sayled thence into Ciria, Priscilla and Aquila accompanyinge hym. And he shore his heed in Cenchrea, for he had a vowe:
And he cam to Ephesus and lefte them there: but he hym selfe entred into the Synagoge, and reasoned with the Iewes.
When they desyred him to tary longer tyme with them, he consented not,
but bad them fare well sayinge. I must nedes (at thys feast that cometh) be in Ierusalem: but I wyll returne agayne vnto you yf God will. And he departed from Ephesus:
and whan he was come vnto Cesarea: and ascended vp and saluted the congregacyon, he departed vnto Antioche:
and when he had taryed there a whyle, he departed: and went ouer all the countre of Galacia and Phrygia by order, strengthynge all the discyples.
And a certayne Iew named Apollos, borne at Alexandria, came to Ephesus, an eloquent man, and myghty in the scryptures
The same was informed in the waye of the Lorde, and spake feruently in the sprete, and taught diligently the thinges of the Lord, Ꟶ knewe but the baptyme of Iohn onely.
And the same began to speake boldely in the Synagoge. Whom when Priscilla Ꟶ Aquila had hearde they toke him vnto them, Ꟶ expounded vnto hym the waye of God more perfectly.
And when he was disposed to go into Acaia, the brethren wrote, exhortyng the discyples to receaue him. Which whan he was come helped them moche which had beleued thorow grace.
For he ouercame the Iewes myghtely, and that openly, shewynge by the scryptures, that Iesus was Chryst.
It fortuned that whyll Apollo was at Corinthum, Paul passed thorowe the vpper coastes, and came to Ephesus, and founde certayne dysciples,
and sayde vnto them haue ye receaued the holy ghost, sence ye beleued? And they sayde vnto hym: no, we haue not hearde whether ther be eny holy ghost or no.
And he sayde vnto them. wherwith were ye then baptysed? And they sayde: with Iohns baptyme.
Then sayde Paul: Iohn verely baptysed with the baptim of repentaunce, sayinge vnto the people that they shulde beleue on hym, which shuld come after him: that is on Christ Iesus.
When they hearde thys, they were baptysed in the name of the Lorde Iesu.
And whan Paul layde hys handes vpon them. the holy ghost came on them, and they spake with tonges, and prophesyed,
and all the men were aboute twelue.
And he went into the synagoge, and behaued hym selfe boldely for the space of thre monethes, disputinge and geuinge them exhortacions of the kyngdome of God.
When dyuers wexed hard herted and beleued not, but spake euyll of the waye (and that before the multitude) he departed from them, and seperated the disciples. And he disputed dayly in the scole of one called Tyranus.
And this contynued by the space of two yeares: so that all they which dwelt in Asia, heard the worde of the Lorde Iesu, both Iewes and Grekes.
And God wrought speciall myracles by the handes of Paul:
so that from his body, were brought vnto the sicke, napkins Ꟶ partelettes, Ꟶ the diseases departed from them, and the euyll spretes went out of them.
Then certayne of the vagabunde Iewes exorcistes, toke vpon them to call ouer them (which had euyll spretes) the name of the Lorde Iesus, sayinge: We adiure you by Iesu, whom Paul preacheth.
And ther were seuen sonnes of one Sceua a Iew and chefe of the prestes which dyd so.
And the euyll sprete answered and sayd: Iesus I knowe, Ꟶ Paul I knowe: but who are ye?
And the man in whom the euyll sprete was, ranne on them, and ouercame them, and preuayled agaynst them so that they fledd out of that house naked and wounded.
And this was knowen to all the Iewes and Grekes also, which dwelt at Ephesus, Ꟶ feare came on them all, Ꟶ the name of the Lorde Iesus was magnyfyed.
And many that beleued, cam, and confessed and shewed their worckes.
Many of them which vsed curious craftes, brought their bokes, and burned them before all men, and they counted the pryce of them, and founde it fyfty thousand syluerlynges.
So mightely grewe the word of God, and preuayled.
After these thynges were ended, Paul purposed in the sprete (whan he had passed ouer Macedonia and Achaia) to go to Ierusalem, saying: After I haue bene there, I must also se Rome.
So sent he into Macedonia two of them that ministred vnto hym, euen Timotheus Ꟶ Erastus: but he hym selfe remayned in Asia for a season.
The same tyme ther arose no lytell a do aboute that waye.
For a certayne man named Demetrius, a syluersmyth (which made syluer shrynes for Diana) was not a lytell beneficiall vnto the craftesmen.
Whom he called together with the workemen of lyke occupacion, and sayd: Syrs, ye knowe that by this crafte we haue aduauntage.
Moreouer, ye se Ꟶ heare that not alone at Ephesus, but allmost thorowe out all Asia, thys Paul hath persuaded Ꟶ turned awaye moche people sayinge, that they be not goddes which are made with handes.
So that not only this oure crafte cometh into parell to be set at nought: but also that the temple of the greate Goddesse Diana shulde be despysed, Ꟶ her magnificence shulde be destroyed, whom all Asia and the world worshyppeth.
When they hearde these sayinges, they were full of wrathe, Ꟶ cryed out, sayinge. Greate is Diana of the Ephesians.
And al the cytie was on a rore, and they russhed into the comen hall with one assent, Ꟶ caught Gaius and Aristarcus, men of Macedonia, Pauls companions.
When Paul wolde haue entred in vnto the people, the dysciples suffred hym not.
But certayne of the chefe of Asia (which were his frendes) sent vnto him, desyrynge him, that he wolde not preace into the comen hall.
Some therfore cryed one thyng and some another, Ꟶ the congregacion was all out of quiete, Ꟶ the moare parte knewe not wherfore they were come together.
Some of the company drue forth Alexander, the Iewes thrustynge hym forwardes. Alexander: beckened with the hande, and wolde haue geuen the people an answer.
When they knewe that he was a Iewe, ther arose a shoute almost for the space of two houres, of all men, cryinge: greate is Diana of the Ephesyans.
When the towne clarcke had ceased the people, he sayde: ye men of Ephesus, what man is it that knoweth not how that the cytie of the Ephesyans is a worshypper of the great goddesse Diana, of the ymage which cam from heauen.
Seinge then that no man sayth here agaynst, ye ought to be content, and to do nothynge rashly:
for ye haue brought hyther these men: which are nether robbers of churches, not yet despisers of youre goddesse
Wherfore, yf Demetrius and the craftes men which are with hym, haue a matter agaynst eny man, the lawe is open, and ther are rulers, let them accuse one another.
But yf ye goo aboute eny other thynge, it shall be determined in a lawfull congregacyon.
For we are in ieopardy to be accused of thys dayes vproure, for as moche as ther is no cause, wherby we maye geue a rekenynge of thys concourse of people.
And when he had thus spoken, he let the congregacion departe.
After that the rage was ceased, Paul called the dyscyples vnto hym, and toke hys leaue of them, and departed for to go into Macedonia.
And when he had gone ouer those partyes, and had geuen them a longe exhortacyon, he cam into Grece
Ꟶ there abode .iij. monethes. And when the Iewes layde wayt for him as he was about to sayle into Syria, he purposed to returne thorow Macedonia.
Ther accompanied him into Asia, Sopater of Berrea, and of Thessalonia, Aristarcus and Secundus, and Gayus of Derba, Ꟶ Timotheus, Ꟶ out of Asia Tychicus and Trophimus.
These goynge before, taryed vs at Troas.
And we sayled awaye from Philippos after the dayes of swete bread, and cam vnto them to Troas in fyue dayes, where we abode seuen dayes.
And vpon one of the Saboth dayes, whan the disciples came together for to breake breed Paul preached vnto them (ready to departe on the morowe) Ꟶ continued the preaching vnto mydnyght.
And there were many lyghtes in the chamber, where we were gathered together,
Ꟶ ther sate in a wyndowe a certayne yonge man (named Euticus) beinge fallen into a depe sleepe. And as Paul was preachinge, he was the more ouercome with slepe, and fell downe from the thyrde lofte, Ꟶ was taken vp deed.
But whan Paul went doune, he fell on him Ꟶ embrased him and sayde: make nothynge a do, for his lyfe is in hym.
So when he was come vp agayne, Ꟶ had broken the bread Ꟶ eaten, and talcked a longe whyle (euen tyll the mornyng) at the last he departed.
And they brought the yonge man alyue, Ꟶ were not a lytell conforted.
And we went afore to shyppe, Ꟶ lowsed vnto Asson there to receaue Paul. For so had he appoynted, and wolde hym selfe goo a fote.
When we were come together at Asson, we toke him in, Ꟶ came to Mytilenes.
And we sayled thence, and cam the nexte daye ouer agaynst Chios. And the nexte daye we ariued at Samos, Ꟶ taried at Trogylon. The nexte daye we came to Myleton:
for Paul had determined to sayle ouer by Ephesus, because he wolde not spende the tyme in Asia. For he hasted (yf it were possible for him) to kepe at Ierusalem the daye of Pentecoste.
And from Myleton he sent messaungers to Ephesus, Ꟶ called the elders of the congregacion.
Which when they were come to him, he layd vnto them: Ye knowe from the fyrst daye that I cam into Asia, after what maner I haue bene wt you at all ceasons,
seruynge the Lorde with all humblenes of mynde, and with many teares Ꟶ temptacions which happened vnto me by the layinges awayte of the Iewes,
because I wolde kepe backe nothynge that was profitable vnto you: but to shewe you and teache you openly, Ꟶ thorowe out euery house,
witnessynge both to the Iewes, Ꟶ also to the Grekes, the repentaunce, that is toward God, Ꟶ the fayth which is toward oure Lorde Iesus.
And now beholde I go bounde in the sprete vnto Ierusalem, not knowing the thinges that shal come on me there,
but the the holy goost witnesseth in euery cytie, saying. that bandes and trouble abyde me.
But none of these thinges moue me nether is my lyfe deare vnto my selfe, that I might fulfyll my course with ioye, and the ministracyon which I haue receaued of the Lorde Iesu, to testifye the Gospell of the grace of God.
And now beholde, I am sure, that henceforth ye all (thorow whom I haue gone preachynge the kyngdom of God) shall se my face no more.
Wherfore, I take you to recorde this daye that I am pure from the bloude of all men.
For I haue spared no laboure, but haue shewed you all the counsell of God.
Take hede therfore vnto youre selues Ꟶ to all the flocke amonge whom the holy ghost hath made you ouersears, to rule the congregacyon of God which he hath purchased with his bloude.
For I am sure of thys, that after my departynge shall greueous wolues entre in amonge you, not sparyng the flocke.
Moreouer, of youre awne selues shall men arise, speaking peruerse thinges to drawe disciples after them.
Therfore awake, Ꟶ remember, that by the space of .iij. yeres: I ceased not to warne euery one of you nyght and daye with teares.
And now brethren, I commende you to God and to the worde of his grace, which is able to build farther, Ꟶ to geue you an inheritaunce amonge all them which are sanctifyed
I haue desyred no mans syluer, golde, or vesture.
Yee, ye your selues knowe that these handes haue ministred vnto my necessyties, Ꟶ to them that were with me.
I haue shewed you all thinges, how that so laboring ye ought to receaue the weake, Ꟶ to remember the wordes of the Lorde Iesu, how that he sayd: it is more blessed to geue then to receaue.
And when he had thus spoken, he kneled downe and prayed with them all.
And they all wepte sore and fell on Pauls necke, and kyssed hym,
sorowynge, most of all for the wordes which he spake, that they shulde se hys face nomore. And they conuayed hym vnto the shyppe.
And whan it chaunced that we had launched forth, and were departed from them, we came with a strayght course vnto Choon and the daye folowynge vnto the Rhodes, and from thence vnto Patara.
And whan we had gotten a shyppe that wolde sayle vnto Phenyces, we went aborde into it, and set forth.
But whan Ciprus beganne to appeare vnto vs, we lefte it on the lefte hande, and sayled vnto Siria, and cam vnto Tyre. For there the shyppe vnladed the burthen.
And when we had founde brethren, we taryed there .vij. dayes. And they tolde Paul thorowe the sprete that he shuld not go vp to Ierusalem.
And when the dayes were ended we departed and went oure waye, and they all brought vs on oure waye, with wyues and chyldren, tyll we were come out of the cytie. And we kneled downe in the shore and prayde.
And when we had taken oure leaue one of another, we toke shippe, Ꟶ they returned home agayne:
When we had full ended the course from Tyre, we went downe to Ptolomaida, Ꟶ saluted the brethren, Ꟶ abode with them one daye
The nexte daye, we that were of Pauls company departed, and came vnto Cesarea. And we entred into the house of Philip the Euangelist, which was one of the seuen, Ꟶ abode wt hym.
The same man had fower daughters virgens, which dyd prophesy.
And as we taryed there a good mayny of dayes, there cam a certaine prophet from Iurie, named Agabus.
When he was come vnto vs, he toke Pauls gerdell, Ꟶ bounde his fete Ꟶ handes, Ꟶ sayd: Thus sayth the holy ghost so shal the Iewes at Ierusalem bynde the man that oweth this gerdell, and shall delyuer hym into the handes of the Gentyls.
When we hearde this, both we and other which were of the same place, besought him that he wolde not go vp to Ierusalem.
Then Paul answered, Ꟶ sayde: what do ye wepynge Ꟶ veryng myne herte? I am ready, not to be bounde onely, but also to dye at Ierusalem for the name of the Lorde Iesu.
When we coulde not turne hys mynde, we ceased, sayinge the wyll of the Lord be fulfylled.
After those dayes we toke vp oure burthens, Ꟶ went vp to Ierusalem.
Ther went with vs also certayne of the discyples of Cesarea, and brought with them one Mnason of Cyprus an olde discyple, with whom we shulde lodge.
And when we were come to Ierusalem, the brethren receaued vs gladly.
And on the morow, Paul went in with vs vnto Iames. And all the elders came together.
And when he had saluted them, he tolde by order all thynges, that God had wrought amonge the gentyls by his ministracyon.
And when they hearde it, they glorifyed the Lorde, and sayde vnto him: Thou seest brother, how many thousande Iewes ther are which beleue, and they are all ernest folowers ouer the lawe.
And they are informed of the, that thou teachest all the Iewes which are amonge the gentyls, to forsake Moses: and sayst, that they ought not to circuncise theyr chyldren, nether to lyue after the customes.
What is it therfore? The multytude must nedes come together: For they shall heare that thou arte come.
Do therfore this, that we saye to the. We haue .iiij. men, which haue a vowe on them.
Them take, Ꟶ purifie thy selfe with them, and do cost on them, that they maye shaue their heades: and all shall knowe, that those thynges which they haue hearde concernyng the, are nothyng: but that thou thy selfe also walkest and kepest the lawe.
But as touchynge the gentyls which beleue we haue written and concluded, that they obserue no soche thyng: saue onely that they kepe them selues from thynges offred to ydoles, and from bloude, and from strangled, and from fornicacyon.
Then the nexte daye Paul toke the men, and puryfyed hym selfe with them and entred into the temple, declarynge that he obserued the dayes of the purificacyon, vntyll that an offeryng shuld be offered for euery one of them.
And whan the seuen dayes were nowe almost ended, that Ieues which were of Asia (when they sawe hym in the temple) moued all the people, and layde handes on him,
crying: men of Israell, helpe. This is the man, that teacheth all men euery where agaynst the people and the lawe, and thys place. He hath also brought Grekes into the temple, and hath polluted thys holy place.
For they had sene with hym one in the cytie. Trophinus an Ephesian, whom they supposed that Paul had brought into the temple.
And all the cytie was moued, and the people swarmed together. And they toke Paul and drue him out of the temple, and forth with, the dores were shut.
As they went about to kyll him, tidinges came vnto the hye captayne of the soudyers, that all Ierusalem was moued.
Which immediatly toke soudiers and vndercaptaynes, and ranne downe vnto them. When they sawe the vpper captayne and the soudiers: they lefte smytinge of Paul.
Then the captayne cam neare and toke hym, and commaunded hym to be bounde with two chaynes, and demaunded what he was, and what he had done.
And some cryed one thinge, some another amonge the people. And when he coulde not knowe the certayntie for the rage, he commaunded him to be caryed into the castle.
And when he cam vnto a stayre, it fortuned that he was borne of the soudiers for the violence of the people.
For the multitude of the people folowed after, cryinge: awaye with hym.
And whan Paul beganne to be caryed into the castle, he sayde vnto the hye Captayne: maye I speake vnto the? Which sayde: Canst thou speake Greke?
Art not thou that Egypcyan, which before these dayes madest an vproure, and leddest out into the wildernes: .iiij. thousande men that were motherers?
But Paul sayde: I am a man which am a Iewe of Tharsus a cytie in Cycill, a Cytesin of no vyle citie, I beseche the soffre me to speake vnto the people.
And when he had geuen him lycence, Paul stode on the steppes, and beckened with the hande vnto the people: and whan there was made a greate sylence he spake vnto them in the Hebrue tonge, sayinge.
Men, brethren, and fathers, heare ye myne answere which I make nowe vnto you.
When they hearde, that he spake in the Hebrue tonge to them, they kept the more sylence. And he sayeth:
I am verely a man which am a Iewe borne in Tarsus a cytie in Cycile: neuertheles, yet brought vp in thys cytie, at the fete of Gamaliell, and informed dilygently in the lawe of the fathers, and was seruent mynded to God warde, as ye all are thys same daye,
and I persecuted thys waye vnto the death byndynge and delyueryng into preson both men and wemen,
as the chefe preste doth beare me wytnesse, and all the estate of the elders: of whom also I receaued lettres vnto the brethren, and went to Damasco to bring them, (which were there bounde) vnto Ierusalem for to be punysshed.
And it fortuned (that as I made my iorney and was come nye vnto Damasco aboute none) sodenly there shone from heauen a greate lyght ronnde aboute me,
and I fell vnto the earthe, and hearde a voyce sayinge vnto me: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
And I answered: what arte thou Lorde? And he sayde vnto me: I am Iesus of Nazareth, whom thou persecutest.
And they that were wyth me, sawe verely a lyghte, and were afrayde: but they hearde not the voyce of hym that spake with me.
And I sayde: what shall I do Lorde? And the Lorde sayde vnto me: Aryse, and go into Damasco, and there it shall be tolde the of all thynges, whych are appoynted for the to do.
And whan I sawe nothynge for the bryghtnes of that lyght, I was leade by the hande of them that were wyth me, and came into Damasco.
And one Ananias a parfecte man, (and as pertaynynge to the lawe hauynge good reporte of all the Iewes, whych there dwelt)
cam vnto me, and stode, and sayde vnto me: Brother Saul, receaue thy lyght. And the same houre I receaued my syghte, and sawe hym.
And he sayde: the God of our fathers hath ordeyned the before, that thou shuldest knowe hys wyll, and shuldest heare the voyce of hys mouth:
for thou shalt be hys wytnes vnto all men of those thinges, which thou hast sene and heard.
And nowe, why taryest thou? Aryse, and be baptysed, and wasshe awaye thy synnes in callyng on the name name of the Lorde.
And it fortuned, that whan I was come agayne to Ierusalem, and prayde in the temple, I was in a traunce,
and sawe hym, sayinge vnto me: Make haste, and get the quyckly oute of Ierusalem: for they wyll not receaue thy wytnesse, that thou bearest of me
And I sayde: Lorde, they knowe that I presoned, and bett in euery Synagoge them that beleued on the.
And whan the bloude of thy wytnes Steuen was shed, I also stode by, and consented vnto hys death, and kept the rayment of them that slewe hym.
And he sayd vnto me departe, for I wyll sende the a farre hence vnto the Gentyls.
They gaue hym audience vnto thys worde, and then lyft vp theyr voyces and sayde: awaye with soche a felowe from the earth: for it is not reason that he shuld lyue.
And as they cryed, and cast of thir clothes, and thrue dust into the ayer,
the captayne commaunded hym to be brought into the castle, and bad that he shulde be scourged, and to be examined, that he might knowe, wherfore they cryed so on hym.
And whan they bounde hym wyth thonges, Paul sayde vnto the Centurion, that stode by him: Is it lauful for you to scourge a man that is a Romayn and vncondempned?
When the Centurion hearde that, he went and tolde the vpper captayne, saying: What intendest thou to do? For thys man is of Rome.
Then the vpper captayne cam, and sayd vnto him: tell me, art thou a Romayne? He sayd: Yee.
And the captayne answered, with a great some obtayned I thys fredom. And Paul sayd: I was fre borne.
Then strayght waye departed from hym they which shulde haue examyned hym. And the hye captayne also was afrayde, after he knewe that he was a Romayne, and because he had bounde hym.
On the morowe (because he wolde haue knowen the certentye wherfore he was accused of the Iewes) he losed hym from hys bondes, and commaunded the hye prestes and all the counsell to come together and brought Paul forth, Ꟶ set hym before them.
Paul behelde the councel, and sayde: men, and brethren I haue lyued in all good conscyence before God vntyll this daye.
And the hye preste Ananias commaunded them that stode by, to smyte hym on the mouth.
Then sayde Paul vnto hym: God shall smyte the thou paynted wall. Syttest thou and iudgest me after the lawe: and commaundest me to be smytten contrary to the lawe?
And they that stode by, sayde reuylest thou Goddes hye preste?
Then sayd Paul: I wist not brethren, that he was the hye preste. For it is wrytten: thou shalt not curse the ruler of thy people.
When Paul perceaued that the one parte were Saduces, and the other Pharises, he cryed out in the councell: Men and brethren, I am a Pharisey, the sonne of a Pharisey. Of the hope and resurreccyon from death, I am iudged.
And whan he had so sayde, there arose a debate betwene the Phariseyes and the Saduces and the multitude was deuyded.
For the Saduces saye, that there is no resurreccyon, nether angel, nor sprete: But the Phariseyes graunt both.
And there arose a greate crye: and whan the Scrybes which were of the Phariseyes parte arose, they stroue saying: we fynde none euyll in thys man. Though a sprete or an angell hath apeared to hym, let vs not stryue agaynst God.
And when there arose greate debate, the captayne (fearyng, lest Paul shulde haue bene pluckte a sondre of them) commaunded the soudyers to go downe, and to take hym from amonge them, and to brynge hym into the castell.
The nyght folowynge, God stode by hym, and sayde: be of good cheare Paul: for as thou hast testifyed of me in Ierusalem so must thou beare wytnesse also at Rome.
And whan it was daye, certayne of the Iewes gathered them selues togeather, and made a vowe, sayinge: that they wolde nether eate nor dryncke, tyll they had kylled Paul.
They were moo then fourtye men, which had made thys conspiracyon.
And they came to the chefe prestes and elders, and sayde: we haue bounde oure selues with a vowe, that we wyll eate nothynge, vntyll we haue slayne Paul.
Nowe therfore geue ye knowledge to the vpper captayne and to the councell, that he brynge hym forth vnto vs to morowe, as though we wold knowe some thyng more perfectly of him. But we (or euer he come neare) are redy to kyll hym.
Whan Pauls systers sonne hearde of theyr layinge awayte, he went, and entred into the castell, and tolde Paul.
And Paul called one of the vnder captaynes vnto him and sayde: brynge thys younge man vnto the hye captayne: for he hath a certayne thynge to shewe hym.
And he toke hym and brought hym to the hye captayne, and sayd: Paul the presoner called me vnto hym, and prayed me to brynge thys younge man vnto the, whych hath a certayne matter to shewe the.
The hye captayne toke hym by the hand, and went with him out of the waye, and asked him: what is yt that thou hast to tell me?
And he sayde: the Iewes are determyned to desyre the, that thou woldest brynge forth Paul to morow into the counsell, as though they wolde enquyre somwhat of hym more perfectly.
But folowe not thou theyr myndes: for there lye in wayte for hym of them, moo then fourtye men, which haue bounde them selues with a vowe, that they will nether eate nor dryncke, tyll they haue kylled hym. And now are they redy, and loke that thou shuldest promes.
The vpper captayne then let the younge man departe, and charged hym, sayinge: se thou, tell it oute to no man, that thou hast shewed these thynges to me:
And he called vnto hym two vnder captaynes sayinge: make ready two hundred soudiers to go to Cesarea, and horssmen threscore, and ten: and speare men two hundred, at the thyrde houre of the nyghte.
And delyuer them beastes, that they maye sett Paul on, and brynge hym safe vnto Felix the hye debyte
and he wrote a letter after thys maner.
Claudius Lysias vnto the most myghty rular Felix, sendeth, gretynges.
Thys man was taken of the Iewes, and shuld haue bene kylled of them. Then came I with soudyers, and reskued hym, and perceaued that he was a Romayn.
And when I wold haue knowen the cause, wherfore they accused hym, I broughte hym forth into theyr councell.
There perceaued I that he was accused of questions of their lawe. But was not gyltye of eny thynge worthy of death or of bondes.
And when it was shewed me, how that Iewes layde wayte ther for him, I sent hym strayght waye to the, and gaue commaundement to hys accusars, that the thynges, which they haue agaynst hym, they shulde tell before the: fare well.
Then the soudyers (as it was commaunded them) toke Paul, and brought hym by night to Antipatras.
On the morow they left the horssmen to go with hym, and returned vnto the castle.
Whych when they came to Cesarea, (and delyuered the epistle to the debyte) presented Paul also before him.
When the debite had redde the lettre, he asked of what countre he was. And when he vnderstode that he was of Cilicia
I wyll heare the (sayde he) when thyne accusars are come also: and he commaunded hym to be kepte in Herodes iudgement hall.
After fyue dayes, Ananias the hye preste descended with the elders, and with a certayne oratour named Tartullus, which enformed the debite against Paul.
And when Paul was called forth, Tartullus beganne to accuse hym, saying: Seyinge that we lyue in greate quietnes by the meanes of the, and that many good thynges are done vnto thys nacion thorowe thy prouidence.
that alowe we euer and in all places moost noble Felix with all thankes.
Notwithstandynge, that I be not tedious vnto the, I praye the, that thou woldest heare vs of thy curtesy a feaw wordes:
For we haue founde this man a pestilent felowe, and a mouer of debate vnto all the Iewes in the whole world, and a maynteyner of the secte of the Nazarites
which hath also enforsed to pollute the temple. Whom we toke, and wolde haue iudged accordinge to our lawe:
but the hye captayne Lisias came vpon vs, and with great violence toke hym awaye oute of oure handes,
commaundynge hys accusars to come vnto the. Of whom thou mayest (yf thou wilt enquyre) knowe the certenty of all these thinges, wherof we accuse him:
The Iewes lykewyse affermed, sayinge, that these thinges were euen so.
Then Paul (after that the debite hym selfe had beckened vnto hym that he shulde speake) answered: With a moare quiet minde do I answere for my selfe,
for as moche as I vnderstande, that thou hast bene of many yeares a iudge vnto thys people, because that thou mayest knowe, that ther are yet, but twelue dayes sence I went vp to Ierusalem for to worshyppe,
and they nether founde me in the temple disputynge with eny man, ether raysinge vp the people, nether in the Synagoges, nor in the cytie.
Nether can they proue the thynges wherof they accuse me
But thys I confesse vnto the, that after the waye (which they call heresye) so worship I the God of my fathers, beleuynge all thinges which are wrytten in the lawe Ꟶ the prophetes,
and haue hope towardes God, that the same resurreccion of the deed (which they them selues loke for also) shalbe, both of iust and vniust.
And therfore study I to haue allwaye a cleare conscience toward God, and towarde men.
But after many yeares, I came and brought almes to my people and offerynges
in the which they founde me purifyed in the temple, nether with multitude, nor yet with vnquyetnesse. Howbeit there were certen Iewes out of Asia,
which ought to be here present before the, and accuse me, yf they had ought agaynst me:
or elles lett these same here saye, yf they haue found any euyll doynge in me, whyle I stande here in the councell:
except it be for this one voyce, that I cryed standynge among them. of the resurreccyon from death am I iudged of you thys daye.
When Felix heard these thinges, he deferde them, for he knew very well of that waye, and sayde: when Lysias the captayne is come downe. I will knowe the vtmost of your matter.
And he commaunded an vndercaptayne to kepe Paul, and to let hym haue rest, and that he shuld forbyd none of hys acquayntaunce to minister vnto him, or to come vnto hym.
And after a certayne dayes, whan Felix came with his wyfe Drusilla (which was a Iewesse) he called forth Paul, and hearde hym of the fayth, which is towarde Chris
And as he preached of ryghtewesnes temperaunce, and iudgement to come, Felix trembled, and answered: Go thy waye for thys tyme: whan I haue a conuenient season, I wyll sende for the.
He hoped also, that money shulde haue bene geuen hym of Paul, that he myght loose him: wherfore, he called hym the oftenner and comened with hym.
But after two yeare, Festus Porcius came into Felix rowme. And Felix wyllynge to shewe the Iewes a pleasure, lefte Paul in preson bounde.
When Festus had receaued the offyce, after thre dayes, he ascended from Cesarea vnto Ierusalem.
Then enformed him the hye prestes and the chefe of the Iewes, of Paul. And they besought hym,
and desyred fauour agaynst hym, that he wolde sende for hym to Ierusalem: and they layde awayte for hym in the waye, to kyll hym.
Festus answered, that Paul shulde be kept. at Cesarea, but that he hym selfe wold shorly departe thyther.
Let them therfore (sayde he) which among you are able, come downe with vs, and accuse hym, yf there be any fawte in the man.
When he had taryed there amonge them more then ten dayes, he wente downe vnto Cesarea and the nexte daye sat downe in the iudgement seate, and commaunded Paul to be brought.
Which when he was come, the Iewes which were come from Ierusalem, stode aboute hym, and layde many and greueous complayntes agaynst Paul, whych they coulde not proue,
as longe as he answered for hym self that he had nether agaynst the lawe of the Iewes, nether agaynst the temple, nor yet agaynst Cesar offended any thynge at all.
Festus wyllynge to do the Iewes a pleasure, answered Paul, and sayde: wylt thou go vp to Ierusalem, and there be iudged of these thynges before me?
Then sayde Paul: I stande at Cesares iudgement seate, where I ought to be iudged. To the Iewes haue I no harme done, as thou very well knowest.
If I haue hurte them, or commytted any thyng worthy of death, I refuse not to dye. If no one of these thynges are, where of they accuse me, no man maye delyuer me to them, I appeale vnto Cesar.
Then spake Festus with deliberacyon, and answered: Thou hast appealed vnto Cesar: vnto Cesar shalt thou go.
And after a certayne dayes, kinge Agripa and Bernice came vnto Cesarea to salute Festus.
And whan they had bene there a good ceason, Festus rehearsed Paules cause vnto the kynge, sayinge: there is a certayne man lefte in preson of Felix,
aboute whom whan I came to Ierusalem, the hye prestes and elders of the Iewes enfourmed me, and desyred to haue iudgement agaynst hym.
To whom I answered: It is not the maner of the Romaynes, for fauoure to delyuer any man, that he shulde perysshe, before that he which is accused, haue the accusars before hym, and haue lycence to answere for hym selfe, concernynge the cryme layde agaynst hym.
Therfore, whan they were come hyther, withoute any delaye, on the morowe I sate to geue iudgment, and commaunded the man to be brought forth.
Agaynst whom, whan the accusars stode vp, they brought noone accusacion of soch thynges as I supposed:
but had certen questious agaynst hym of theyr awne supersticion, and of one Iesus which was deed, whom Paul affyrmed to be alyue.
And because I douted of soche maner of questions, I asked hym, whether he wolde go to Ierusalem, and there be iudged of these matters.
But whan Paul had appealed to be kepte vnto the knowledge of Cesar, I commaunded hym to be kepte, tyll I myght sende hym to Cesar.
Agripa sayde vnto Festus: I wolde also heare the man my selfe. Tomorowe, (sayde he) thou shalt heare hym.
And on the morowe whan Agripa was come and Bernice, with greate pompe, and were entred into the councell house, with the captaynes and chefe men of the cytie, at Festus commaundement was Paul brought forth.
And Festus sayde: kyng Agripa, Ꟶ all ye men which are heare present with vs, ye se thys man, about whom all the multitude of the Iewes haue intreated me, both at Ierusalem and also here cryinge, that he ought not to lyue any lenger.
Yet founde I nothyng worthy of death, that he had committed. Neuertheles, seying that he hath appealed to Cesar, I haue determined to send hym.
Of whom I haue no certayne thyng to write vnto my lord. Wherfore, I haue brought hym vnto you, and specially vnto the: O kynge Agripa, that after examinacyon had, I myght haue sumwhat to wryte.
For me thincketh it vnreasonable, for to sende a presoner, and not to shewe the causes which are layde agaynst hym
Agrippa sayde vnto Paul: thou art permytted to speake for thy selfe. Then Paul stretched forth the hand, and answered for hym selfe.
I thinke my self happy king Agrippa, because I shall answere this daye before the, of all the thinges wherof, I am accused of the Iewes:
namely, because thou arte experte in all customes and questions, which are among the Iewes. Wherfore I beseche the, to heare me paciently.
My lyuynge that I haue lead of a chylde (which was at the fyrst among myne awne nacion at Ierusalem) knowe all the Iewes,
which knewe me from the begynnynge, yf they wolde testyfye. For after the moost straytest secte of our religion, I lyued a pharisey.
And now I stande and am iudged for the hope of the promes made of God vnto oure father:
vnto which promes our twelue tribes (instantly seruyng God daye Ꟶ night) hope to come. For which hopes sake, kynge Agrippa, I am accused of the Iewes.
Why shulde it be thought a thynge incredyble vnto you, that God shulde rayse agayne the deed?
I also verely thought in my selfe, that I ought to do many contrary thynges, cleane agaynst the name of Iesus of Nazareth:
which thynge I also dyd in Ierusalem. And many of the saynctes dyd I shut vp in preson, and had receaued auctorite of the hye Prestes. And when they were put to deeth. I gaue the sentence.
And I punisshed them ofte in euery synagoge, and compelled them to blaspheme: and was yet more mad vpon them, and persecuted them, euen vnto straunge cyties.
About which thinges as I went to Damasco wyth auctorite and licence of the hye Prestes,
euen at myddaye. (O kyng) I sawe in the waye a lyght from heauen aboue the bryghtnes of the sonne shyne rounde about me, and them whych iorneyed wyth me.
When we were all fallen to the erthe, I heard a voyce speakynge vnto me, Ꟶ saying in the Hebrue tonge: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? It is harde for the to kicke agaynst the prickes.
And I sayd: Who art thou Lorde? And he sayde: I am Iesus whom thou persecutest,
but ryse and stand vp on thy fete. For I haue appeared vnto the for thys purpose, to make the a minister and a witnes both of those thynges whych thou hast sene, Ꟶ of those thynges in the which I will appeare vnto the,
delyueringe the from the people, and from the gentyls, vnto whom now I sende the,
to open their eyes, that they maye be turned from darckness to light, and from the power of Satan vnto God, that they maye receaue forgeuenes of synnes, and inheritaunce amonge them whych are sanctified by fayth that is toward me.
Wherfore (O kynge Agryppa) I was not disobedient vnto the heauenly visyon:
but shewed fyrst vnto them of Damasco, and at Ierusalem, and thorow out all the coastes of Iewry, and then to the gentyls, that they shuld repent, and turne to God, and do soch workes as become them that repent.
For thys cause the Iewes caught me in the temple, and went about to kyll me.
Seyng therfore that I haue obtained helpe of God: I contynew vnto thys daye, wytnessinge bothe to small Ꟶ to great, saying none other thynges, then those whych the prophetes and Moses dyd saye shuld come:
that Christ shulde soffer, and that he shulde be the fyrst that shuld ryse from deth, and shuld shew lyght vnto the people, and to the gentyls.
As he thus spake for hym selfe: Festus sayde with a loude voyce: Paul, thou art besyde thy selfe. Moch learnynge doth make the madd.
And Paul sayde: I am not mad (most deare Festus) but speake forth the wordes of trueth and sobernes.
For the kynge knoweth of these thynges, before whom also I speake frely: nether thynke I that eny of these thynges are hydden from him. For thys thynge was not done in a corner.
Kynge Agrippa beleuest thou the Prophetes? I wote well that thou beleuest.
Agrippa sayde vnto Paul: Sumwhat thou bryngest me in mynde for to become Chrysten.
And Paul sayde? I wolde to God that not onely thou: but also all that heare me to daye were, not somwhat onely, but all together, soch as I am, except these bondes.
And when he had thus spoken, the kynge rose vp, and the debite, and Bernice, and they that sate with them,
And when they were gone aparte, they talked betwene them selues, sayinge. Thys man doeth nothyng worthy of deeth, or of bondes.
Then sayde Agrippa vnto Festus. Thys man myght haue bene let loose, yf he had not appealed vnto Cesar.
When it was concluded, that we shuld sayle into Italy they delyuered both Paul Ꟶ certayne other presoners, vnto one named Iulius, an vndercaptayne of Cesars soudiars.
And we entred into a shyp of Adramicium, and loosed from land, apoynted to sayle by the coastes of Asia, one Aristarcus out of Macedonia, of the contre of Thessalonia taryinge styll with vs.
And the nexte daye we came to Sidon. And Iulius courteously entreated Paul, and gaue him lyberte, to go vnto his frendes, Ꟶ to refresshe hym selfe.
And whan we had launched from thence, we sayled harde by Cypers, because the wyndes were contrarye.
And whan we had sayled ouer the see of Cylicia, Ꟶ Pamphilia, we cam to Myra whych is in Lycia.
And there the vndercaptayne founde a shyppe of Alexandria ready, that sayled into Italy, and he put vs therin.
And when we had sayled slowly many dayes, and scace were come ouer agaynst Guydon (because the wynde wyth stode vs) we sayled harde by the coaste of Candy, ouer agaynst Salmo,
and wyth moche worke sayled beyonde it, Ꟶ came vnto a place which is called the fayre hauens. Nye wher vnto was the cytie of Lasea
when moche tyme was spent, and whan sayling was now ieoperdous, because also that they had ouerlonge fasted, Paul put them in remembraunce,
and sayd vnto them: Syrs I perceaue, that thys viage wilbe wyth hurte and moche damage, not of the ladynge and shyp onely, but also of your lyues:
Neuerthelesse the vnder captayne beleued the gouerner Ꟶ the master of the shyp more then those thynges whych were spoken of Paul.
And because the hauen was not commodious to wynter in, many toke counsell to departe thence, yf by eny meanes they myght attayne to Phenices Ꟶ there to wynter, whych is an hauen of Candy, and lyeth toward the southwest and north west wynde.
When the south wynde blewe, they supposynge to obtayne their purpose, loosed vnto Asson, and sayled past all Candy.
But not long after, ther arose agaynst theyr purpose, a flawe of wynde out of the northeast.
And when the shyp was caught Ꟶ could not resyst the wynde, we let her go, and draue with the wether.
But we were caryed in to an yle whych is named Clauda, and had moche worke to come by a bote,
whych they toke vp, and vsed helpe, Ꟶ made fast the shyppe, fearinge, lest they shuld fall into the Syrtes. And so they let downe a vessell, and were caryed.
The nexte daye (when we were tossed wyth an exceadinge tempest) they lyghttened the shyp,
and the thyrde daye we cast out wyth oure awne handes the taklynge of the shippe.
When at the last, nether the sunne nor starres in many dayes appeared, and no small tempest laye vpon vs, all hope that we shuld escape, was then taken awaye.
But after longe abstynence, Paul stode forth in the myddes of them, Ꟶ sayde: Syrs, ye shulde haue harkened to me, and not haue loosed from Candy, nether to haue brought vnto vs thys harme Ꟶ losse.
And now I exhorte you to be of good chere. For ther shalbe no losse of eny mans lyfe amonge you, saue of the ship onely.
For ther stode by me thys nyght the angell of God, whose I am, and who I serue,
saying: feare not Paul thou must be brought before Cesar, And lo, God hath geuen the all them that sayle wyth the.
Wherfore syrs be of good chere: for I beleue God, that it shalbe euen as it was tolde me.
How be it we must be cast into a certayne ylonde:
But when the fourtenth nyght was come (as we were sayling in Adria about mydnyght) the shypmen demed, that ther appeared some countre vnto them:
and sounded, Ꟶ founde it .xx. feddoms. And when they had gone a lytell further, they sounded agayne, and founde .xv. feddoms.
Then fearynge lest they shuld haue fallen on some rocke, they cast .iiij. ancres out of the sterne, and wysshed for the daye.
As the shypmen were about to flee out of the shyp (whan they had let downe the bote into the see, vnder a couloure, as though they wolde haue cast ancres out of the forshippe)
Paul sayde vnto the vndercaptayne and to the soudyers: excepte these abyde in the shypye cannot be safe.
Then the soudyers cut of the rope of the bote, and let it fall awaye.
And whan the daye beganne to appeare, Paul besought them all to take meate, sayinge: thys is the fourtenth daye, that ye haue taryed and contynued fastynge, receauynge nothing at all.
Wherfore, I praye you to take meate: for this no dout is for youre helth: for ther shall not an heer fall from the heed of eny of you.
And when he had thus spoken, he toke breed and gaue thankes to God in presence of them all: and whan he had broken it, he beganne to eate.
Then were they all of good cheare, and they also toke meate.
We were all together in the shyp, two hundred threscore and syxtene soules.
And when they had eaten ynough, they lyghtened the shyp, and cast out the wheate in to the see.
When it was daye, they knew not the lande, but they spyed a certayne hauen with a bancke, into the whych they were mynded (if it were possyble) to thrust in the shyp.
And when they had taken vp the ancres, they committed them selues vnto the see, and lowsed the rudder bondes and hoysed vp the mayne sayle to the wynde, and drue to lande.
And whan they chaunced on a place, whych had the see on both the sydes, they thrust in the shyp. And the foreparte stucke fast and moued not, but the hynder parte brake wyth the violence of the waues.
The Soudyars councell was to kyll the presoners, lest eny of them, when he had swome out, shulde ronne awaye.
But the vndercaptayne wyllinge to saue Paul, kept them from theyr purpose, and commaunded that they whych coulde swymme, shulde cast them selues fyrst into the see, and scape to lande.
And the other he commaunded to go, some on bordes, and some on broken peces of the shyp. And so it came to passe, that they escaped all safe to lande.
And when they were scaped, then they knewe, that: the yle was called Milete.
And the straungers shewed vs no lytell kyndnes: for they kyndled a fyre, and receaued vs euery one, because of the present rayne, Ꟶ because of the colde.
And when Paul had gathered a bondell of styckes, and layde them on the fyre, ther came a vyper out of the heat, Ꟶ caught hym by the hande.
When the straungers sawe the beast hange on hys hande, they sayde amonge them selues: no doute thys man is a mortherer: Whom (though he haue escaped the see) yet vengeaunce suffreth not to lyue.
And he shouke of the vyper into the fyre, and felt no harme.
Howbeit they wayted when he shulde haue swolne, or fallen downe deed sodenly. But after they had loked a greate whyle, and sawe no harme come to hym, they chaunged theyr myndes, and sayde that he was a God.
In the same quarters were londes of the chefe man of the yle (whose name was Publius) whych receaued vs, Ꟶ lodged vs thre dayes courteously.
And it fortuned that the father of Publius laye sycke of a feuer, and of a bloudy flixe. To whom paul entred in and prayde, and layde hys handes on hym Ꟶ healeth him.
So, when this was done, other also whych had dyseases in the yle, cam and were healed:
whych also dyd vs great honoure. And when we departed, they laded vs wt soch thynges as were necessary.
After thre monethes we departed in a ship of Alexandry, whych had wyntred in the yle, whose badge was Castor Ꟶ Pollux.
And when we came to Cyracusa, we taryed there thre dayes.
And from thence we fet a compasse, and came to Regium. And after one daye the south wynde blewe, and we came the nexte daye to Putiolus:
where we founde brethren, and were desyred to tary wyth them seuen dayes, and so came we to Rome.
And from thence, when the brethren hearde of vs, they came to mete vs at Apiphorum, and at the thre tauernes. When Paul sawe them, he thancked God, and wexed bolde.
And when we came to Rome, the vndercaptayne delyuered the presoners to the chefe captayne of the host: but Paul was suffred to dwell by hym selfe wyth a soudyer that kept hym.
And after thre dayes, Paul called the chefe of the Iewes together. And when they were come, he sayde vnto them: Men and brethren, though, I haue committed nothing agaynst the people or lawes of the Elders yet was I delyuered presoner from Ierusalem into the handes of the Romayns.
Whych when they had examined me, wolde haue let me go, because ther was no cause of death in me.
But when the Iewes spake contrary, I was constrayned to appeale vnto cesar: not that I had ought to accuse my people of.
For thys cause then haue I called for you, euen to se you, and to speake wyth you: because that for the hope of Israel I am bounde wt this cheyne.
And they sayde vnto hym: we nether receaued lettres out of Iewry pertayninge vnto the nether eny of the brethren that came shewed or spake eny harme of the.
But we wyll heare of the what thou thynckest. For as concernyng thys secte, we knowe that euery where it is spoken agaynst.
And when they had appoynted him a daye, ther came many to hym into hys lodgyng. To whom he expounded and testifyed the kyngdom of God and preached vnto them of Iesus: both out of the lawe of Moses and out of the Prophetes, euen from morninge to nyght.
And some beleued the thynges whych were spoken, and some beleued not.
And when they agreed not amonge them selues, they departed, after that Paul had spoken one worde: well spake the holy ghost by Esay the prophet vnto oure fathers,
saying: Go vnto thys people, and saye: wyth youre eares shall ye heare, and shall not vnderstande: and wyth youre eyes shall ye se, Ꟶ not perceaue.
For the hert of thys people is wexed grosse, and wyth their eares haue they had no lust to heare, and their eyes haue they closed: lest they shulde se wyth their eyes, Ꟶ heare wyth their eares, and vnderstande with their hertes, and shuld be conuerted, and I shuld heale them.
Be it knowen therfore vnto you, that thys saluacyon of God is sent to the gentyls, and they shall heare it.
And when he had sayde these wordes, the Iewes departed from him and had greate despycions amonge them selues.
And Paul dwelt two yeares full in hys lodgynge, and receaued all that cam in vnto hym,
preachinge the kyngdome of God, and teachynge those thynges whych concerne the Lorde Iesus wyth all confydence, no man forbyddyng hym.
Paul the seruaunt of Iesus Chryst called to the office of an Apostle put a parte for the Gospell of God
whych he had promysed afore by hys Prophetes in the holy scriptures
of hys sonne, whych was borne of the seed of Dauid after the flesshe:
and hath bene declared to be the sonne of God wt power, after the sprete that sanctifyeth, sence the tyme that Iesus Chryst oure Lorde rose agayne from deeth
by whom we haue receaued grace Ꟶ Apostleshyp, that obedience myght be geuen vnto the fayth in hys name amonge all heathen,
of whose nombre you be, the electe of Iesu Chryst.
To all you that be at Rome, beloued of God and sayntes by electyon. Grace be wt you and peace from God oure father, Ꟶ from the Lorde Iesus Chryst.
Fyrst verely I thanke my God thorow Iesus Chryst for you all, that youre fayth is spoken of in all the worlde.
For God is my wytnes (whom I serue. Wyth my sprete in the Gospell of hys sonne) that wythout ceasynge I make mencyon of you prayinge allwayes in my prayers,
that by some meane, at the last (one tyme or other) a prospesperous iorney (by the wyll of God) myght fortune me, to come vnto you.
For I longe to se you, that I myght bestowe amonge you some spyrituall gyfte, to strength you withall:
that is, that I myght haue consolacyon together wyth you, through the commen fayth whych both ye and I haue.
I wolde that ye shuld knowe (brethren) how that I haue often tymes purposed to come vnto you but haue bene let hitherto, to haue some frute also amonge you, as among other of the Gentyls.
I am detter both to the Grekes and to the vngrekes, to the learned and to the vnlearned.
So that (as moch as in me is) I am redy to preach the Gospell to you that are at Rome also.
For I am not asshamed of the Gospell of Chryst, because it is the power of God vnto saluacion to euery one that beleueth, to the Iewe fyrst, Ꟶ also to the Gentyle.
For by it is the ryghtewesnes of God opened from fayth to fayth.
As it is written the iust shall lyue by fayth. For the wrath of God apeareth from heauen agaynst all vngodlynes and vnryghtewesnes of men, whych withholde the trueth in vnrightewesnes:
seynge that it whych maye be knowen of God, is manyfest amonge them because God hath shewed it vnto them.
For hys inuisyble thinges (that is to saye hys eternall power ad godhed) are sene, for as moch as they are vnderstande by the workes from the creacyon of the worlde: So that they are wythout excuse
because that when they knewe God, they glorifyed hym not as God, nether were thankfull but wexed full of vanities in theyr imaginacions, and theyr folysh hert was blynded.
When they counted them selues wyse, they became fooles
and turned the glory of the immortall God, vnto an ymage, made not onely after the symilitude of a mortall man but also of byrdes, Ꟶ fourefoted beastes Ꟶ of creping beastes.
Wherfore, God gaue them vp, to vnclennes, thorow the lustes of their awne heartes to defyle their awne bodyes amonge them selues:
whych chaunged hys truthe for a lye. and worshypped and serued the thinges that be made, more than hym that made them, which is to be praysed for euer. Amen.
Wherfore, God gaue them vp vnto shamefull lustes: For euen their wemen dyd chaunge the naturall vse in to that whych is agaynst nature.
And lyke wyse also the men, lefte the natural vse of the woman, and brent in their lustes one wyth another, men wyth men wrought fylthynes, and receaued to them selues the rewarde of theyr erroure, as it was accordynge.
And as they regarded not to knowe God euen so God delyuered them vp vnto a lewde mynde, that they shulde do those thynges whych were not comly,
beyng full of all vnryghteousnesse, fornicacyon, wyckednes, coueteousnes, malicyousnes, full of enuye morther, debate, disceyte, euyll condicyoned, whysperers,
backbyters, haters of God, dysdaynfull, proude, boasters, bringers vp of euyll thynges, disobedyent to father and mother,
wythout vnderstandynge, couenaunte breakers, vnlouynge, trucebreakers, vnmercyfull.
Which men, though they knew the ryghtewesnes of God, how that they which commyt soche thynges, are worthy of deeth, not only do the same but also haue pleasure in them that do them.
Therfore art thou inexcusable. O man, whosoeuer thou be that iudgest For in that same wherin thou iudgest another thou condemnest thy selfe. For thou that iudgest, doest euen the same selfe thynges.
But we are sure, that the iudgement of God is accordynge to trueth, agaynst them whych commyt soch thynges.
Thynkest thou thys, O thou man that iudgest them whych do soche thynges, and doest euen the very same thy selfe, that thou shalt escape the iudgement of God?
Ether despysest thou the ryches of hys goodnes, and pacyence and longe sufferaunce, not knowyng that the kyndnes of God leadeth the to repentaunce?
But thou after thy stubburnesse, and herte that cannot repent, heapest vnto thy selfe wrath agaynst the daye of vengeaunce, when shalbe opened the ryghtewes iudgement of God,
which wyll reward euery man accordynge to hys dedes:
that is to saye, prayse, honoure and immortalite, to them whych contynue in good doyng; and seke immortalite.
But vnto them that are rebelles, and that do not obey the trueth, but folowe vnryghteousnes, shall come indignacyon and wrath,
tribulacyon and anguysshe vpon the soule of euery man that doth euyll: of the Iewe fyrst, and also of the Gentyle.
To euery man that doth good, shall come prayse, and honoure, and peace, to the Iewe fyrst, and also to the Gentyll.
For ther is no respecte of parsonnes, with God. For whosoeuer hath synned wythout lawe,
shall also perysshe without lawe. And as many as haue synned in the lawe, shalbe iudged by the lawe.
For in the syght of God, they are not ryghteous which beare the lawe: but the doers of the lawe shalbe iustifyed.
For whan the Gentyls which haue not the lawe, do of nature the thynges contayned in the lawe: then they hauynge not the lawe, are a lawe vnto them selues,
which shew the dede of the lawe wrytten in theyr hertes: whyll theyr conscience beareth wytnes vnto them, and also theyr thoughtes, accusynge one another or excusynge,
at the daye when the Lord shall iudge the secretes of men by Iesus Christ, accordynge to my Gospell.
Beholde, thou art called a Iewe, and trustest in the lawe, and makest thy boast of God,
and knowest his wyll, and alowest the thynges that be excellent, and art infourmed by the lawe:
and beleuest that thou thy selfe art a gyde of the blynde, a lyght of them which are in darcknes,
an infourmer of them which lacke discrecyon, a teacher of the vnlearned, which hast that ensample of knowledge, Ꟶ of the truthe by the lawe.
Thou therfore which teachest another, teachest not thy selfe Thou preachest, a man shulde not steale: yet thou stealest.
Thou that sayst, a man shuld not commyt aduoutry, breakest wedlocke. Thou abhorrest ymages, and yet robbest God of his honoure.
Thou that makest thy boast of the lawe, thorow breakynge the lawe dishonourest God.
For the name of God is euyll spoken of amonge the Gentyls, thorow you as it is wrytten.
For circumcisyon verely auayleth, yf thou kepe the lawe. But yf thou be a breaker of the lawe, thy circumcisyon is turned to vncircumcisyon.
Therfore, yf the vncircumcised kepe the ryght thynges contayned in the lawe, shall not his vncircumcisyon be counted for circumcisyon?
And shall not vncircumcisyon which is by nature (yf it kepe the lawe) iudge the, whych beynge vnder the letter and circumcisyon, doest transgresse the lawe?
He is not a Iewe, which is a Iewe outwarde. Nether is it circumcisyon, which is outwarde in the flesshe.
But he is a Iewe which his hyd wythin, and the circumcisyon of the herte is the true circumcisyon, whych consisteth in the sprete and not in the letter: whose prayse is not of men, but of God.
What preferment then hath the Iewe? or what aduauntageth circumcisyon?
Surely verye moch. Fyrst because that vnto them were commytted the wordes of God.
What then though some of them dyd not beleue? shall theyr vnbeleue make the promes of God without effecte?
God forbyd Let God be true, and euery man a lyar, at it is wrytten: that thou myghtest be iustifyed in thy sayinges, and ouercome, when thou art iudged.
But yf oure vnryghtewesnes make the ryghtewesnes of God more excellent: what shall we saye? Is God vnryghteous, which taketh vngeaunce? I speake after the maner of men:
God forbyd. For how then shall God iudge the worlde?
For yf the trueth of God appeare more excellent thorow my lye, vnto his prayse, why am I hence forth iudged as a synner:
and not rather (as men speake euyll of vs, and as some affyrme that we saye) let vs do euyll, that good maye come therof. Whose damnacyon is iuste.
What then? Are we better then they? No, in no wyse. For we haue all ready proued, how that both Iewes and Gentyls are all vnder synne,
as it is wrytten. there is none ryghteous, no not one:
there is none that vnderstandeth, there is none that seketh after God:
they are all gone out of the waye, they are all vnprofytable, ther is none that doeth good, no not one.
Theyr throte is an open sepulcre, with theyr tounges they haue disceaued: the poyson of aspes is vnder theyr lyppes.
Whose mouth is full of curssynge and bytternes.
Their fete are swyfte to shed bloud.
Destruccyon and wretchednes are in theyr wayes,
and the waye of peace haue they not knowen.
There is no feare of God before theyr eyes.
We knowe that what thynges soeuer the lawe sayth, it sayth it to them which are vnder the lawe. That all mouthes maye be stopped, Ꟶ that all the worlde maye be subdued to God,
because that by the dedes of the lawe ther shall no flesshe be iustifyed in hys syght. For by the lawe commeth the knowledge of sinne.
But now is the ryghtewesnes of God declared wythout the lawe, for asmoch as it is alowed by the testimonye of the lawe and of the Prophetes.
The ryghtewesnes of God, commeth by the fayth of Iesus Christ, vnto all and vpon all them that beleue. Ther is no dyfference:
for all haue synned, and are destitute of the glorye of God:
but are iustifyed frely by his grace, through the redempcyon that is in Christ Iesu,
whom God hath set forth to be the obtayner of mercy thorow fayth, by the meanes of hys bloude, to declare hys ryghteousnes, in that he forgeueth the synnes that are passed, whych God dyd suffre,
to shewe at thys tyme hys ryghtewesnes, that he might be counted iust, and the iustifyar of hym whych beleueth on Iesus.
Where is then thy reioysynge? It is excluded. By what lawe? of workes? Naye: but by the lawe of fayth.
Therfore we holde, that a man is iustifyed by fayth without the dedes of the lawe:
Is he the God of the Iewes onely? Is he not also the God of the Gentyls? Yes, euen of the Gentyls also.
For it is God only which iustifyeth the circumcisyon that is of fayth, and vncircumcisyon thorow fayth
Do we then destroye the lawe thorow fayth? God forbyd. But we rather maintayne the lawe.
What shall we saye then, that Abraham oure father (as pertaynynge to the flesshe) dyd fynde?
If Abraham were iustyfyed by dedes, then hath he wherin to reioyce: but not wt God.
For what sayth the scripture? Abraham beleued God, and it was counted vnto him for ryghtewesnes.
To hym that worketh, is the rewarde not reckned of fauoure, but of dutye.
To hym that worketh not, but beleueth on him that iustifyeth the vngodly, is his fayth counted for ryghtewesnes.
Euen as Dauid describeth the blessedfulnes of that man, vnto whom God imputeth ryghtewesnes wythout dedes.
Blessed are they, whose vnryghtewesnes are forgeuen, and whose synnes are couered
Blessed is that man, to whom the Lorde wyll not impute synne.
Came this blessednes then vpon the vncircumcisyon, or vpon the circumcisyon also? For we saye, that fayth was rekened to Abraham for ryghtewesnes.
How was it then rekened? whan he was in the circumcisyon? or whan he was in the vncircumcysyon? Not in the tyme of circumcisyon: but when he was yet vncircumcised.
And he receaued the sygne of circumcisyon, as a seale of the ryghtewesnes of fayth, whych he had yet beynge vncircumcysed, that he shulde be the father of all them that beleue, though they be not circumcised, that ryghtewesnes myght be imputed to them also:
and that he myght be father of circumcisyon, not vnto them onely whych came of the circumcised, but vnto them also that walke in the steppes of the fayth that was in oure father Abraham, before the tyme of circumcisyon.
For the promes (that he shuld be the heyre of the worlde) happened not to Abraham or to his seed thorow the lawe: but thorow the ryghtewesnes of fayth.
For yf they whych are of the lawe, be heyres, then is fayth but vayne and the promes of none effecte.
Because the lawe causeth wrath. For where no lawe is, there is no transgressyon.
Therfore by fayth is the inheritaunce geuen, that it myght come of fauoure: that the promes myght be sure to all the seed. Not to them onely whych are of the lawe: but to them also which are of the fayth of Abraham, which is the father of vs all.
(As it is wrytten: I haue made the a father of many nacyons) euen before God, whom he beleued, whych restoreth the deed vnto lyfe: and calleth those thynges whych be not, as though they were.
Whych Abraham, contrary to hope, beleued in hope, that he shulde be the father of many nacyons, accordynge to that whych was spoken:
euen so shall thy seed be. And he faynted not in the fayth, nor yet consydered his awne body whych was now deed, euen when he was almost an hondred yeare olde: nether yet that Sara was past chyldeberinge.
He stackered not at the promes of God thorow vnbelefe: but became stronge in fayth, and gaue God the prayse,
beynge full certifyed, that he whych had promised the same was able also to make it good.
And therfore was it reckened to hym for ryghtewesnes.
Neuertheles it is not wrytten for hym onely, that it was reckened to hy
but also for vs, to whom it shalbe counted so that we beleue on hym, that raysed vp Iesus oure Lorde from the deed:
whych was delyuered for oure synnes, and was raysed agayne for oure iustificacyon.
Because therfore that we are iustifyed by fayth, we are at peace with God, thorow oure Lorde Iesus Christ:
by whom also it chaunsed vnto vs to be brought in thorow fayth, vnto thys grace, wherin we stande, and reioyce in hope of the glory of God.
Not that onely: but also we reioyce in tribulacyons: knowyng that tribulacyon bryngeth pacience,
pacience bryngeth experience, experience bryngeth hope.
And hope maketh not ashamed: because the loue of God is sheed abroad in oure hertes, by the holy ghost whych is geuen vnto vs.
For when we were yet weake, accordyng to the tyme, Christ dyed for vs whych were vngodly:
Yet scace wyll eny man dye for a ryghtewes man. Parauenture for a good man durst a man dye.
But God setteth out his loue toward vs, seynge that whyll we were yet synners Christ dyed for vs.
Moch more then now (we that are iustifyed by hys bloud) shall be saued from wrath thorow hym.
For yf when we were enemyes, we were reconcyled to God by the deeth of hys sonne: moch more, seynge we are reconcyled, we shalbe preserued by hys lyfe.
Not onely this, but we also ioye in God by the meanes of oure Lorde Iesus Christ, by whom we haue now optayned the attonment.
Wherfore, as by one man, synne entred into the worlde, and deeth by the meanes of synne.
Euen so deeth also went ouer all men, in so moch as all we haue synned. For euen vnto the lawe was synne in the worlde, but synne is not imputed, whan ther is no lawe:
neuerthelesse deeth raygned from Adam to Moses, euen ouer them also that had not synned wyth lyke transgression as dyd Adam: which beareth the similitude of him that was to come.
But the gyfte is not lyke as the synne. For yf thorow the synne of one, many be deed: moche more plenteous vpon many was the grace of God Ꟶ gyfte by grace; whych was of one man Iesus Christ.
And the gyfte is not ouer one synne: as deeth cam thorow one synne of one that synned. For damnacyon came of one synne vnto condemnacyon: but the gyft came to iustify from many synnes.
For yf by the synne of one, deeth raygned by the meanes of one: moch more they (whych receaue aboundance of grace and of the gyfte of ryghtewesnes) shall raygne in lyfe by the meanes of one (that is to saye) Iesus Christ.
Lyke wyse then as by the synne of one there sprang vp euell on all men to condemnacyon: euen so by the ryghteousnes of one, spryngeth good vpon all men to the ryghteousnes of lyfe.
For as by one mannes disobedience many became synners: so by the obedience of one, shall many be made ryghteous.
But the lawe in the meane tyme entred in, the synne shulde encreace. Neuerthelater where aboundance of synne was, there was more plenteousnes of grace.
That as synne had raygned vnto deeth, euen so myght grace raygne thorow ryghtewesnes, vnto eternall lyfe, by the helpe of Iesu Christ.
What shall we saye then? Shall we contynue in synne, that there maye be aboundance of grace?
God forbyd. How shall we that are deed as touchyng synne, lyue eny lenger therin?
Knowe ye not that all we whych are baptysed into Iesu Christe are baptysed to dye wyth him?
We are buryed then with him by baptyme, for to dye: that lyke wyse as Christ was raysed vp from deeth by the glorye of the father, euen so we also shulde walke in a newe lyfe.
For yf we be graft in deeth lyke vnto hym: euen so shall we be partakers of the resurreccyon:
knowyng thys, that oure olde man is crucifyed with hym also, that the body of sinne myght vtterly be destroyed, that hence forth we shuld not be seruauntes vnto synne.
For he that is deed, is iustifyed from synne.
Wherefore yf we be deed wt Christ, we beleue, that we shall also lyue with hym:
knowyng, that Christ beyng raysed from deeth, dyeth nomore. Deeth hath nomore power ouer hym.
For as touchynge that he dyed, he dyed concernynge synne once. And as touchynge that he lyueth, he lyueth vnto God.
Lykewyse consydre ye also, that ye are deed as touchyng synne, but are alyue vnto God thorow Iesus Christ oure Lorde
Let not synne raygne therfore in youre mortall bodye, that ye shulde ther vnto obey by the lustes of it.
Nether geue ye youre membres as instrumentes of vnryghtewesnes vnto synne: but geue ouer your selues vnto God as they that of deed, are alyue. And geue ouer youre members as instrumentes of ryghtewesnes vnto God.
For synne shall not haue power ouer you. Because ye are not vnder the lawe, but vnder grace.
What then? Shall we synne, because we are not vnder the lawe: but vnder grace? God forbyd.
Knowe ye not, how that to whom soeuer ye commit youre selues as seruauntes to obey, hys seruauntes ye are to whom ye obey: whether it be of synne vnto deeth, or of obedience vnto ryghtewesnes?
God be thanked, that though ye were the seruauntes of synne, ye haue yet obeyed with herte vnto the rule of the doctryne, that ye be brought vnto.
Ye are then made fre from synne, and are become the seruauntes of ryghtewesnes.
I speake grosly, because of the infirmytie of youre fleshe. As ye haue geuen youre members seruauntes to vnclennes and to iniquitye, (from one iniquitye to another) euen so now geue ouer youre members seruauntes vnto ryghtewesnes, that ye maye be sanctifyed.
For when ye were the seruauntes of synne, ye were voyde of ryghtewesnes.
What frute had ye then in those thynges, wherof ye are now asshamed. For the ende of those thynges, is deeth.
But now are ye delyuered from synne, Ꟶ made the seruauntes of God, and haue youre frute to be sanctifyed, and the ende euerlastynge lyfe.
For the rewarde of synne is deeth. but eternall lyfe is the gyfte of God, thorow Iesus Christ oure Lorde.
Knowe ye not brethren (I speake to them that knowe the lawe) how that the lawe hath power ouer a man, as longe as it endureth.
For the woman whych is in subiecyon to a man, is bounde by the lawe to the man, as longe as he lyueth. But yf the man be deed, she is loosed from the lawe of the man,
So then yf whyle the man lyueth she couple her selfe with another man, she shalbe counted a wedlocke breaker. But yf the man be deed, she is fre from the lawe of the husband, so that she is no wedlocke breaker, though she couple her selfe with another man.
Euen so ye also (my brethren) are deed concernynge the lawe by the body of Chryst, that ye shulde be coupled to another (I meane to him that is rysen agayne from deeth) that we shuld brynge forth frute vnto God.
For when we were in the flesshe, the lustes of synne whych were stered vp by the lawe, raygned in oure members, to brynge forth frute vnto deeth.
But now are we delyuered from the lawe, and deed vnto it wher vnto we were in bondage, that we shuld serue in a new conuersacyon of the sprete, and not in the olde conuersacyon of the letter.
What shall we saye then? is the lawe synne? God forbyd: neuertheles I knew not synne, but by the lawe. For I had not knowne what lust had meant, excepte the lawe had sayd, thou shalt not lust.
But synne toke an occasyon by the meanes of the commaundement and wrought in me all manner of concupiscence. For verely without the lawe, synne was deed.
I once lyued wythout lawe. But when the commaundement came, synne reuiued, and I was deed.
And the very same commaundement, whych was ordeyned vnto lyfe, was founde to be vnto me an occasyon of deeth.
For synne toke occasyon by the meanes of the commaundement, and so disceaued me, Ꟶ by the same slewe me.
Wherfore the lawe is holy, and the commaundement holy, and iust and good.
Was that then which was good, made deeth vnto me? God forbyd. Naye it was synne: that sinne might appeare (by it which was good) to worke deeth in me: that synne by the commaundement myght be out of measure synfull.
For we knowe, that the lawe is spirituall: but I am carnall solde vnder synne,
because I alowe not that whych I do. For what I wold, that do I not: but what I hate, that do I.
If I do now that whych I wolde not, I consente vnto the lawe that it is good.
So then now, it is not I that do it, but synne that dwelleth in me.
For I knowe, that in me (that is to saye in my flesshe) dwelleth no good thinge. For, to wyll is present with me: but I fynde no meanes to performe that whych is good.
For the good that I wolde, do I not: but the euyll whych I wolde not, that do I.
Yf I do that I wolde not, then is it not I that do it, but synne that dwelleth in me.
I fynde then by the lawe, that when I wolde do good, euyll is present wyth me.
For I delyte in the lawe of God, after the inward man.
But I se another lawe in my membres, rebellynge agaynst the lawe of my mynde, and subduynge me vnto the lawe of synne, whych is in my members.
O wretched man that I am: who shall delyuer me from thys body subdued vnto deeth?
I thanke God thorow Iesus Christ oure Lorde. So then, wyth the mynde I serue the lawe of God, but wyth the flesshe the lawe of synne.
Ther is then no damnacyon to them whych are in Chryst Iesu, whych walke not after the flesshe, but after the sprete.
For the lawe of the sprete of lyfe thorow Iesus Christ, hath made me fre from the lawe of synne, and deeth.
For what the lawe could not do (in as moch as it was weake because of the flesshe) that performed God, and sent hys sonne in the similitude of synfull flesshe,
and by synne dampned synne in the flesshe: that the ryghtewesnes of the lawe, myght be fulfylled in vs, which walke not after the flesshe, but after the sprete.
For they that are carnall, are carnally mynded. But they that are spirytuall, are gostly mynded.
To be carnally mynded, is deeth. But to be spiritually mynded, is lyfe and peace.
Because that the flesshly mynde is enemyte agaynst God: for it is not obedyent to the lawe of God, nether can be.
So then they that are in the flesshe, cannot please God.
But ye are not in the flesshe, but in the sprete: yf so be that the sprete of God dwell in you. If eny man haue not the spryte of Chryst, the same is none of hys.
If Chryst be in you, the body is deed because of synne: but the spryte is lyfe for ryghtewesnes sake.
Wherfore, yf the spryte of hym that raysed vp Iesus from deeth, dwell in you: euen he that raysed vp Chryst from deeth, shall quycken youre mortall bodyes, because of hys sprete that dwelleth in you.
Therfore brethren, we are detters, not to the flesshe,
to lyue after the fleshe. For yf ye lyue after the fleshe, ye shal dye. But yf ye (thorowe the sprete) do mortyfye the dedes of the body, ye shall lyue.
For as many as are led by the sprete of God,
they are the sonnes of God. For ye haue not receaued the sprete of bondage to feare eny mor are, but ye haue receaued the sprete of adopcyon, wherby we crye: Abba father.
The same sprete certyfyeth oure sprete that we are the sonnes of God.
If we be sonnes, then are we also heyres, the heyres I meane of God, Ꟶ heyres anexed with Chryst yf so be that we suffer with hym, that we maye be also glorified together with hym.
For I suppose that the afflyccyons of thys lyfe, are not worthy of the glory, which shalbe shewed vpon vs.
For the feruent desyre of the creature abydeth, lokyng, when the sonnes of God shall appere,
because the creature is subdued to vanyte, agaynst the wyll therof, but for his will which hath subdued the same in hope.
For the same creature shalbe delyuered from the bondage of corrupcyon, into the gloryous libertye of the sonnes of God.
For we knowe, that euery creature groneth with vs also, and trauayleth in payne, euen vnto thys tyme.
Not onely it, but we also which haue the fyrst frutes of the spryte, morne in oure selues also, and wayte for the adopcyon euen the delyueraunce of oure bodye.
For we are sauyd by hope. But hope that is sene, is no hope. For how can a man hope for that, which he seyth?
But and yf we hope for that we se not, then do we wt pacience abyde for it.
Lyke wyse, the sprete also helpeth oure infirmyties. For we knowe not what to desyre as we ought: but the sprete maketh intercessyon for vs, with gronynges which cannot be expressed.
And he that searcheth the hertes knoweth, what is the meanynge of the spryte: for he maketh intercercessyon for the sayntes according to the pleasure of God.
We knowe that all thynhes worke for the best vnto them that loue God, which also are called of purpose.
For those which he knewe before, he also ordeyned before, that they shulde be lyke fassyoned vnto the shape of hys sonne, that he myght be the fyrst begotten sonne amonge many brethren.
Moreouer, whom he appoynted before, them also he called. And whom he hath called, them also he iustyfyed: and whom he iustyfyed, them he also gloryfyed.
What shall we then saye to these thinges? yf God be on oure syde, who can be agaynst vs?
which spared not hys awne sonne, but gaue him for vs all: how can it be, that with hym he shulde not geue vs all thynges also?
Who shall laye eny thynge to the charge of Goddes chosen; it is God that iustyfyeth:
who is he that can condempne? it is Chryst which dyed, yee, rather which is rysen agayne, which is also on the ryght hande of God, and maketh intercessyon for us.
Who shall seperate vs from the loue of God? shall tribulacyon? or angusshe? or persecucyon? other honger? ether nakednesse? ether parell? ether swearde?
As it is written: for thy sake are we kylled all daye longe, and are counted as shepe apoynted to be slayne.
Neuerthelesse, in all these thynges we ouercome thorowe hym that loued vs.
For I am sure, that nether deeth, nether lyfe, nether Angels, nor rule, nether power, nether thynges present, nether thynges to come,
nether heygth, nether loweth, nether eny other creature shal be able to departe vs from the loue of God, which is in Christ Iesu oure Lorde.
I saye the trueth in Chryst, and lye not, (my conscience also bearing me wytnes by the holy ghost)
that I haue gret heuynes, Ꟶ contynuall sorowe in my hert.
For I haue wysshed my selfe to be cursed from Chryst, for my brethren (my kynsmen as pertaynynge to the flesshe)
which are the Israelites. To whom pertayneth the adopcyon, and the glorye, and the couenauntes and the lawe that was geuen, and the seruyce of God, and the promyses:
whose also are the fathers, and they of whom (as concernynge the flesshe) Christ came, which is God in all thynges to be praysed for euer Amen.
I speake not these thynges, as though the wordes of God had take none effecte. For they are not all Israelites, which are of Israell:
nether are they all chyldren strayght waye, that are the seed of Abraham. But in Isaac shall thy seed be called:
that is to saye: they which are the chyldren of the flesshe, are not the children of God. But they which be the chyldren of promes, are counted the seede.
For this is a worde of promes, about thys tyme wyll I come, and Sara shall haue a sonne.
Not onely thys, but also Rebecca was wt chylde by one, euen by oure father Isaac.
For yer the chyldren were borne, when they had nether done good nether bad (that the purpose of God by eleccyon, myght stande) it was sayde vnto her, not by the reason of workes, but by the caller:
the elder shall serue the younger.
As it is wrytten: Iacob haue I loued, but Esau haue I hated.
What shall we saye then? is there eny vnrightewesnes with God? God forbyd.
For he sayth to Moses: I wyll shewe mercy to whomsoeuer I shewe mercy: and wyll haue compassyon,
on whomsoeuer I haue compassyon. So lyeth it not then in a mans wyll or runnynge, but in the mercye of God.
For the scripture sayth vnto Pharao: euen for thys same purpose haue I stered the vp, to shewe my power on the, and that my name myght be declared thorow out all the worlde.
So hath he mercye on whom he wyll, and whom he wyll, he maketh harde herted.
Thou wylt saye then vnto me: why then blameth he vs yet? For who hath bene able to resist his wyll?
But O man, what art thou, which disputest with God? Shall the worcke saye to the worke man: why hast thou made me on this fassyon?
Hath not the potter power ouer the claye, euen of the same lompe to make one vessel vnto honoure, and another vnto dishonoure?
Euen so, God willyng to shewe hys wrath, and to make his power knowen suffered wyth longe pacyence the vessels of wrath, ordeyned to damnacyon,
and to declare the ryches of hys glory on the vessels of mercye, which he had prepared vnto glorye:
whom also he called, not of the Iewes onely, but also of the gentyls.
As he sayth also to Osee? I wyll call them my people which were not my people: and her beloued which was not beloued, (and her to haue optayned mercy, that had not optayned mercy)
And it shall come to passe, that in the place where it was sayde vnto them: ye are not my people: there shall they be called the chyldren of the lyuynge God.
But Esay cryeth concerning Israel though the nombre of the chyldren of Israel be as the sonde of the see, yet the remnaunt shall be saued
For he fynyssheth the word verely, and maketh it short in ryghtewesnes. For a short worde wil God make on erth.
And as Esay sayd before: except the Lorde of Saboth had left vs seede, we had bene made as zodoma, and had bene lykened to Gomorra.
What shall we saye then? We saye, that the gentyls which folowed not ryghtewesnes, haue ouertaken ryghtewesnes: euen the ryghtewesnes which cometh of fayth.
Contrary wyse, Israel which folowed the lawe of rightwesnes could not attaine to the lawe of ryghtewsnes.
Wherfore? euen because they sought it not by fayth: but as it were by the workes of the lawe. For they haue stombled at the stombylynge stone.
As it is wrytten: Behold, I put in Syon a stomblynge stone, Ꟶ a rocke that men shalbe offended at. And whosoeuer beleueth on hym, shall not be confounded.
Brethren, my hertes desyre Ꟶ prayer to God for Israelis, that they myght be saued.
For I beare them recorde, that they haue a feruent mynde to God warde, but not according to knowledge.
For they beynge ignoraunt of Goddes ryghtewesnes, and goynge aboute to stablysshe theyr awne ryghtewesnes, haue not bene obedient vnto the ryghtewesnes of God.
For Christ is the fulfyllyng of the lawe, to iustyfye all that beleue.
For Moses wrytteth of the ryghtewesnes which cometh of the lawe, how that the man whych doth the thynges of the lawe, shall lyue therby.
But the ryghtewesnes which cometh of fayth, speaketh on thys wyse: Saye not thou in thyne hert. who shall ascende into heauen (that is euen to fetch Chryst downe from aboue.)
Other who shall descende into the depe? (that is euen to fetch vp Christ agayne from deeth)
But what sayth he? The worde is nye the, euen in thy mouth and in thyne herte. Thys same is the worde of fayth, which we preache.
For yf thou knowledge with thy mouth that Iesus is the Lorde, Ꟶ beleue in thyne hert, that God raysed hym vp from deeth, thou shalt be safe.
For to beleue wt the hert iustyfyeth: and to knowledge with the mouth, maketh a man safe.
For the scrypture sayth: whosoeuer beleueth on hym, shall not be confounded.
There is no difference betwene the Iewe and the Gentill. For one is Lord of all, which is ryche vnto all that call vpon him.
For whosoeuer doth call on the name of the Lord, shalbe safe.
How then shall they call on hym, on whom they haue not beleued? how shall they beleue on hym, of whom they haue not hearde? how shall they heare, without a preacher?
And how shall they preache except they be sent? As it is written: how beautyfull are the fete of them which brynge tydynges of peace, and brynge tydynges of good thynges.
But they haue not all obeyed to the Gospell. For Esay sayth: Lorde, who hath beleued oure sayinges?
So then fayth cometh by hearynge, and hearynge cometh by the worde of God.
But I aske: haue they not herde? No dout, their sounde went out into all landes: and their wordes into the endes of the worlde.
But I demaunde, whether Israel dyd knowe or not? Fyrst Moses sayth: I will prouoke you to enuy, by them that are no people: by a folysihe nacion I wyll anger you.
Esay after that, is bolde and sayeth: I am founde of them, that sought me not: I am manyfest vnto them, that asked not after me.
But agaynst Israell he sayth: all daye longe haue I stretched forth my handes vnto a people that beleueth not, but speaketh agaynst me.
I saye then: hath God cast awaye hys people? God forbyd. For euen I also am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the trybe of Beniamin,
God hath not cast awaye his people, which he knewe before. Wote ye not, what the scripture sayth of Helias, how he maketh intercession to God agaynst Israell, saying:
Lorde, they haue kylled thy Prophetes, and dygged downe thyne alters: and I am lefte alone, and they seke my lyfe.
But what sayth the answere of God vnto hym? I haue reserued vnto my selfe seuen thousande men, which haue not bowed the knee to the ymage of Ball.
Euen so also at thys tyme is ther a remanaunt lefte accordynge to the eleccyon of grace.
If it be of grace, then is it not now of workes. For then grace is nomore grace. But If it be of workes, then is it now no grace. For then were deseruynge nomore deseruynge.
What then? Israel hath not obtayned that which he seketh: but the eleccyon hath obtayned it. The remnaunt are blynded
accordynge as it is written. God hath geuen them the sprete of vnquyetnes: eyes that they shuld not se, Ꟶ eares that they shuld not heare, euen vnto this daye.
And Dauid sayth: Let their table be made a snare to take them with all, and an occasyon to fall, and a reward vnto them.
Let theyr eyes be blynded that they se not: and bowe thou downe their backe allwaye.
I saye then: haue they therfore stombled, that they shuld vtterly fall awaye together. God forbyd: but thorowe theyr fall is saluacyon happened vnto the Gentyls, for to prouoke them withall.
Wherfore yf the fall of them be the ryches of the worlde, and the mynisshynge of them the ryches of the gentyls: How moch more their perfectnesse?
I speake to you gentyls, in as moch as I am the Apostle of the gentyls, I wyll magnify myne office,
yf by any meane I maye prouoke them which are my flesshe, and myght saue some of them.
For yf the castynge awaye of them, be the reconcylynge of the world: what shall the receauynge of them be, but lyfe agayne from deeth?
For yf one pece be holy, the whole heepe is holy. And yf the rote be holy, the braunches shalbe holy also.
Though some of the braunches be broken of, and thou beynge a wylde olyue tree, wast graft in among them, and made partaker of the rote and fatnes of the olyue tree,
boast not thy selfe agaynst the braunches. For yf thou boast thy selfe, thou bearest not the rote, but the rote the.
Thou wilt saye then: the braunches are broken of that I myght be graft in.
Thou sayest well: because of vnbeleue they were broken of, and thou stodest stedfast in fayth.
Be not hye mynded, but feare: for seynge that God spared not the naturall braunches, take hede, lest it come to passe that he spare not the also.
Beholde therfore the kyndnes and rygorousnes of God: on them which fell, rygorousnes. but towardes the, kyndnes: yf thou continue in hys kyndnes. Or els thou shalt be hewen of,
and they agayne yf they byde not styll in vnbelefe, shalbe graffed in agayne. For God is of power to graffe them in agayne.
For yf thou wast cut out of a naturall wylde olyue tree, and wast graffed contrary to nature in a true olyue tree: how moch more shall the naturall braunches be graffed in their awne olyue tree agayne.
I wolde not that this secrete shulde be hyd from you my brethren (lest ye shuld be wyse in youre awne consaytes) that partly blyndnes is happened in Israell, vntyll the fulnes of the gentyls be come in:
and so all Israel shalbe saued. As it is wrytten. There shall come out of Syon he that doth delyuer, and shall turne awaye vngodlynes from Iacob.
And thys is my couenaunt vnto them, when I shall take awaye their synnes.
As concernynge the gospell they are enemies for youre sakes: but as touchyng the eleccyon they are loued for the fathers sakes.
For verely, the gyftes and callynge of God are soch, that it cannot repent hym of them:
for loke, as ye in tyme passed haue not beleued God, yet haue now obtained mercy thorow their vnbelefe:
euen so now haue they not beleued the mercy which is happened vnto you: that they also maye obtayne mercy.
For God had wrapped all nacyons in vnbeleue, that he myght haue mercy on all.
O the depnes of the ryches both of the wysdome and knowledge of God: how vnsercheable are his iudgementes, Ꟶ his wayes past fyndynge out;
For who hath knowen the mynde of the Lorde? Or who hath bene hys counseller?
other who hath geuen vnto hym fyrst, and he shalbe recompensed agayne?
For of hym, and thorow hym, and for hym are all thynges: To hym be glorye for euer. Amen.
I beseche you therfore brethren, by the mercyfulnes of God, that ye make yor bodies a quycke sacryfice, holy Ꟶ acceptable vnto God: which is youre resonable seruynge of God
Ꟶ fassyon not youre selues lyke vnto this worlde: but be ye chaunged in youre shape, by the renuyng of your mynde, that ye maye proue what thynge that good, and acceptable, and perfaycte wyll of God is.
For I saye (thorowe the grace that vnto me geuen is) to euery man amonge you, that noman stonde hye in his owne conceate, more then it becommeth hym to esteme of him selfe: but so iudge of hym selfe, that he be gentle and sober, accordynge, as God hath dealte to euery man the measure of fayth.
For as we haue many membres in one body, and all members haue not one office:
so we beynge many, are one body in Chryst, and euery man among oure selues, one anothers members.
Seynge that we haue diuers gyftes accordynge to the grace that is geuen vnto vs: yf eny man haue the gyft of prophesye, let him haue it that it be agreyng vnto the fayth.
Let hym that hath an office wayte on his office. Let him that teacheth take hede to hys doctryne.
Let hym that exhorteth, geue attendaunce to his exhortacion. If eny man geue, let hym do it with synglenes. Let hym that ruleth, do it wit diligence. If eny man shewe mercy, let hym do it with cherfulnes.
Let loue be without dissimulacion Hate that which is euyll Ꟶ cleaue vnto that which is good.
Be kynd one to another wich brotherly loue. In geuynge honoure, go one before another.
Be not slouthfull in the busynes which ye haue in hande. Be feruent in the sprete. Applye youre selues to the tyme.
Reioyce in hope. Be pacient in tribulacion. Continue in prayer.
Distribute vnto the necessite of the sayntes: be readie to harboure.
Blesse them which persecute you: blesse (I saye) and course not.
Be mery with them that are mery. Wepe also with them that wepe.
Be of lyke affeccion one towardes another. Be not hye mynded: but make youre selues equall to them of the lower sorte. Be not wyse in youre awne opynyons.
Recompence to no man euyll for euyll. Prouyde afore hande thynges honeste in the syght of all men.
If it be possyble, (as moch as is in you) lyue peaceably with all men.
Dearly beloued, auenge not youre selues, but rather geue place vnto wrath. For it is wrytten: vengeaunce is myne, I wyll rewarde, sayth the Lorde.
Therfore, yf thyne enemy honger, fede him: yf he thyrst, geue hym dryncke. For in so doyng thou shalt heape coles of fyre on hys heade.
Be not ouercome of euyll, but ouercome euyll, with goodnes:
Let euery soule submyt hym selfe vnto the auctoryte of the hyer powers. For there is no power but of God.
The powers that be, are ordeyned of God. Whosoeuer therfore resysteth power, resysteth the ordinaunce of God. But they that resyst, shall receaue to them selfe damnacyon.
For rulers are not fearfull to them that do good, but to them that do euyll. Wylt thou be without feare of the power? Do well then: and so shalt thou he praysed of the same.
For he is the mynyster of God, for thy welth. But and yf thou do that which is, euyll, then feare: for he beareth not the sweard for nought: for he is the mynister of God, to take vengeaunce on hym that doth euyll.
Wherfore, ye must nedes obeye, not onely for feare of vengeaunce: but also because of conscience.
And euen for this cause paye ye tribute. For they are Goddes mynysters, seruinge for the same purpose.
Geue to euery man therfore hys duetye: tribute to whom tribute belongeth: custome, to whom custome is due: feare, to whom feare belongeth: honoure, to whom honoure pertayneth.
O we nothynge to eny man: but thys, that ye loue one another. For he that loueth another hath fulfylled the lawe.
For these commaundementes. Thou shalt not commytt aduoutry: thou shalt not kyll: thou shalt not steale: thou shalt not beare false wytnes: thou shalt not lust, and so forth (yf there be eny other commaundement) it is all comprehended in thys sayinge, Namely: Loue thyne neyghbour as thy selfe.
Loue hurteth not his neyghbour. Therfore is loue the fulfyllinge of the lawe.
This also, we knowe the season howe that it is tyme that we shulde now awake out of slepe. For now is oure saluacyon nearer, then when we beleued.
The nyght is passed, the daye is come nye. Let vs therfore cast awaye the dedes of darcknes, and let vs put on the Armoure of lyght.
Let vs walke honestly as it were in the daye lyght: not in eatynge Ꟶ drynckynge, nether in chamburyng and wantannes, nether in stryfe Ꟶ enuyinge:
but put ye on the Lorde Iesus Chryst. And make not prouisyon for the fleshe, to fulfyll the lustes of it.
Hym that is weake in the fayth, receaue, not in disputynge and troublynge hys conscience.
One beleueth that he maye eate all thynge. Another whych is weake, eateth earbes.
Let not hym that eateth, despise hym that eateth not. And let not him whych eateth not, iudge him that eateth. For God hath receaued him.
What art thou that iudgest another mannes seruaunt whether he stande or fall that pertayneth vnto hys awne master: ye, he shall be holden vp, that he maye stande. For God is able to make hym stande.
This man putteth difference bitwene daye Ꟶ daye. Another man counteth all dayes alyke. Let euery mans mynde satisfye him selfe.
He that obserueth the daye, doeth it vnto the Lorde. And he that doth not obserue the daye, doeth it for the Lorde also. He that eateth, doth it to please the Lorde, for he geueth God thankes.
And he that eateth not, eateth not, to please the Lorde withall, and geueth God thankes.
For none of vs lyueth for hym selfe, and no man dyeth for hym selfe. For yf we lyue, we lyue vnto the Lorde. And yf we dye, we dye vnto the Lord. Whether we lyue therfore, or dye, we are the Lordes.
For Christ therfore dyed, and rose agayne, and reuyued, that he myght be Lorde of deed and quycke.
But why doest thou then iudge thy brother? Other, why doest thou despise thy brother? We shalbe all brought before the iudgement seate of Christ.
For it is written: as truely as I lyue sayth the Lorde: all knees shall bowe to me, and all tonges shall geue prayse to God.
So shall euery one of vs geue accomptes of hym selfe to God.
Let vs not therfore iudge one another eny more. But iudge thys rather, that no man put a stomblynge blocke, or an occasyon to fall in hys brothers waye.
For I knowe, and am full certifyed by the Lorde Iesus, that ther is nothynge comen of it selfe: but vnto hym that iudgeth it to be comen: to hym is it comen.
If thy brother be greued wyth thy meate, nowe walkest thou not charitablye. Destroye not hym wyth thy meate, for whom Chryst dyed.
Cause not youre treasure to be euyll spoken of.
For the kyngdome of God is not meate and drynke: but ryghtwesnes, and peace and ioye in the holy ghost.
For he that in these thinges serueth Chryst, pleaseth God, and is commended of men.
Let vs therfore folowe those thinges which make for peace, and thynges wherwith one maye edifye another.
Destroye not the worke of God for a lytell meates sake. All thinges are pure: but it is euyll for the man: which eateth wyth hurte of conscience.
It is good nether to eate flesshe, nether to drinke wyne nether eny thynge, wherby thy brother stombleth, ether falleth, or is made weake.
Hast thou fayth? haue it wyth thy selfe before God. Happy is he, that condempneth not hym selfe, in the thynge whych he aloweth.
For he that maketh conscience, is dampned yf he eate: because he eateth not of fayth. For whatsoeuer is not of fayth, that same is synne.
We whych are stronge ought to beare the fraylnes of them, whych are weake, and not to stonde in oure awne consaytes.
Let euery man please hys neyghbour vnto hys welth and edifyinge.
For Christ pleased not him selfe: but as it is written. The rebukes of them which rebuked the, fell on me.
Whatsoeuer thinges are written afore tyme, they are written for our learnynge, that we thorow pacience and comforte of the scriptures, myght haue hope.
The God of pacyence and consolacyon, graunt you, to be lyke mynded one towardes another, after the ensample of Chryst Iesu:
that ye all agreynge together maye wyth one mouth prayse God the father of oure Lorde Iesus Chryst.
Wherfore, receaue ye one another, as Chryst receaued vs, to the prayse of God.
And thys I saye, that Iesus Chryst was a mynister of the circumcisyon for the trueth of God, to conferme the promyses made vnto the fathers:
that the gentyls myght prayse God for hys mercy, as it is wrytten. For this cause I will prayse the amonge the gentyls, and synge vnto thy name.
And agayne he sayth: reioyse ye gentyles wyth hys people.
And agayne, prayse the Lorde all ye gentyls, and laude hym all ye nacyons together.
And agayne Esay sayth: ther shalbe the rote of Iesie, and he that shall ryse to raygne ouer the gentyls: in hym shall the gentyls trust.
The God of hope fyll you wyth all ioye and peace in beleuyng: that ye maye be ryche in hope, thorow the power of the holy ghost.
I my selfe am full certifyed of you (my brethren) that ye also are full of goodnes, Ꟶ fylled with all knowledge, willinge to exhorte one another.
Neuerthelesse (brethren) I haue some what more boldly wrytten vnto you, partely to put you in remembraunce, thorow the grace that is geuen me of God,
that I shuld be the minister of Iesu Christ amonge the Gentyls, Ꟶ shuld minyster the Gospell of God, that the offeryng of the gentyls myght be acceptable, Ꟶ sanctified by the holy ghost.
I haue therfore wherof I maye reioyse thorow Chryst Iesu, in those thinges which pertayne to God.
For I dare not speake of eny of those thynges, whych Chryst hath not wrought by me, to make the Gentyls obedient, with worde and dede,
in myghty sygnes Ꟶ wonders, by the power of the sprete of God: so that from Ierusalem Ꟶ the coastes rounde aboute vnto Illyrycum, I haue fylled all countres with the Gospell of Christ.
So haue I enforsed my selfe to preache the Gospell, not where Chryst was named, lest I shulde haue bylt on another mannes foundacyon:
but as it is written. To whom he was not spoken of, they shall se: Ꟶ they that hearde not, shall vnderstande.
For this cause I haue bene ofte let that I could not come vnto you:
but nowe, seynge I haue nomore to do in these countrees, and also haue bene desyrous many yeares to come vnto you,
whensoeuer I take my iorney into spayne, I wyll come to you. For I trust to se you in my iorney, and to be brought on my waye thither warde by you, after that I haue somwhat enioyed your acquaintaunce.
Now go I vnto Ierusalem, and minister vnto the saynctes.
For it hath pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certayne distribucyon vpon the poore saynctes, whych are at Ierusalem.
It hath pleased them verely, and their detters are they. For yf the Gentyls be made partetakers of their spirituall thynges, their dutie is to minyster vnto them in bodyly thinges.
When I haue performed this, and haue brought them this frute sealed, I wyll come backe agayne by you into Spayne.
I am sure that when I come vnto you I shall come with aboundaunce of the blessynge of the Gospell of Chryst.
I beseche you brethren for oure Lord Iesus Christes sake, and for the loue of the sprete, that ye helpe me in my busynes with youre prayers to God for me,
that I maye be delyuered from them which beleue not in Iewry: Ꟶ that this my seruice, which I haue to do at Ierusalem, maye be accepted of the saynctes,
that I maye come vnto you with ioye, by the will of God, and maye with you be refresshed.
The God of peace be wyth you all. Amen.
I commende vnto you Phebe, oure syster (which is a minyster of the congregacion of Cenchrea)
that ye receaue her in Christ, as it becommeth sainctes, and that ye assyst her in what soeuer busynes she neadeth of youre ayde. For she hath suckered many, and myne awne selfe also.
Grete Prisca and Aquila my helpers in Christ Iesu,
whych haue for my lyfe layde downe their awne neckes. Unto whom not I onely geue thankes, but also all the congregacions of the Gentyls.
Lyke wyse, grete the congregacion that is in their house. Salute my welbeloued Ephenetes, which is the fyrst frute of Achaia in Christ.
Grete Mary which bestowed moch labour on vs.
Salute Andronicus and Iunia my cosyns, and presoners with me also: which are well taken amonge the Apostles, Ꟶ were in Christ before me.
Grete Amplias my beloued in the Lorde.
Salute Urban oure helper in Christ, Ꟶ Stachys my beloued.
Salute Appelles approued in Christ. Salute them, which are of Aristobolus housholde.
Salute Herodion my kynsman. Grete them that be of the housholde of Narcissus, whych are in the Lorde.
Salute Triphena and Triphosa, whych labour in the Lorde. Salute the beloued Persis, which laboured moch in the Lorde.
Salute Rufus chosen in the Lorde, and his mother and myne.
Grete Asyncritus, Phlegon, Herman, Patrobas, Mercurius, and the brethren which are wyth them.
Salute Philologus and Iulia, Nereus and his syster, and Olympha, Ꟶ all the saynctes which are with them.
Salute one another wyth an holy kysse. The congregacions of Christ salute you.
I beseche you brethren, marke them which cause diuisyon Ꟶ geue occasions of euyll, contrary to the doctrine, which ye haue learned: Ꟶ auoyde them.
For they that are suche, serue not the Lorde Iesus Christ, but their awne bellyes, Ꟶ with swete and flatterynge wordes, deceaue the hertes of the innocentes.
For your obedience is gone abroade vnto all men. I am glad therfore no dout, of you. But yet I wolde haue you wyse vnto that which is good, Ꟶ to be innocente as concernynge euyll.
The God of peace shall treade Satan vnder youre fete shortly. The grace of oure Lorde Iesu Christ be with you.
Tymotheus my worke felowe, Ꟶ Lucius, and Iason, Ꟶ Sosipater my kynsmen, salute you,
I Tertius salute you, which wrote thys epistle in the Lorde.
Gayus myne hoste Ꟶ the hoste of all the congregacion, saluteth you. Erastus the treasorer of the cytie, saluteth you. And Quartus a brother saluteth you.
The grace of our Lord Iesu Chryst be with you all. Amen.
To him that is of power to stablisshe you, according to my Gospell, Ꟶ preaching of Iesus Christ in vtterynge of the mistery whych was kept secret sence the worlde beganne,
but now is opened by the scriptures of the prophetes at the commaundement of the euerlastynge God, to stere vp obedience to the fayth, publysshed amonge all nacions:
To the same God, which alone is wyse, be prayse thorow Iesus Chryst for euer. Amen.
Paul called an Apostle of Iesus Christ, thorowe the will of God, and brother Softenes.
Unto the congregacyon of God whych is at Corynthum. To them that are sanctifyed by Christ Iesu, called saynctes, with all that call on the name of oure Lorde Iesus Chryst in euery place, ether of theirs or of oures.
Grace be vnto you and peace from God oure father, Ꟶ from the Lorde Iesus Christ.
I thanke my God allwayes on youre behalfe, for the grace of God, whych is geuen you by Iesus Christ,
that in all thynges ye are made ryche by hym, in all vtteraunce Ꟶ in all knowlegde,
by the which thinges the testimony of Iesus Christ was confermed in you,
so that ye are behynde in no gyfte, waytinge for the appearyng of oure Lord Iesus Christ,
which shall also strenght you vnto the ende, that ye maye be blamelesse in the daye of oure Lorde Iesus Christ.
God is faythfull, by whom ye are called vnto the fellyshyppe of hys sonne Iesus Christ our Lord.
I beseche you brethren by the name of oure Lord Iesus Christ, that ye all speake one thinge, and that there be no dissencion amonge you: but that ye maye be a whole body: of one mynde and of one meanynge.
For it is shewed vnto me (my brethren) of you, by them which are of the house of Cloe, that ther is stryfes amonge you.
I speake of the same that euery one of you sayeth: I holde of Paul: I holde of Apollo: I holde of Cephas: I holde of Christ.
Is Christ deuyded? Was Paul crucifyed for you? ether were ye baptysed in the name of Paul?
I thanke God, that I baptysed none of you, but Crispus and Gaius:
lest eny shuld saye, that I had baptysed in myne awne name.
I baptised also the house of Stephana. Furthermore knowe I not, whether I baptised eny man or no.
For Christ sent me not to baptyse, but to preache the Gospell, not wt wysdome of wordes, lest the crosse of Christ shulde haue bene made of none effecte.
For the preaching of the crosse, is to them that perisshe, foolishnes: but vnto vs which are saued it is the power of God.
For it is wrytten: I will destroye the wysdome of the wyse, and wyll cast awaye the vnderstandynge of the prudent.
Where is the wyse? Where is the scrybe? Where is the disputer of this worlde?
Hath not God made the wysdome of this worlde foolishnes? For after that the worlde thorowe wysdome knewe not God, in the wysdome of God, it pleased God thorowe foolyshnes of preachynge, to saue them that beleue.
For the Iewes require a sygne, and the Grekes seke after wysdome.
But we preache Christ crucifyed, vnto the Iewes an occasyon of fallynge, and vnto the Grekes foolysihnes:
but vnto them whych are called both of the Iewes Ꟶ Grekes, we preache Christ the power of God and the wysdome of God.
For the foolishnes of God, is wyser then men: and the weakenes of God is stronger then men.
Brethren, ye se your callynge, how that not many wyse men after the flesshe, not many myghty, not many of hye degre, are called:
But God hath chosen the folisshe thynges of the worlde, to confounde the wyse. And God hath chosen the weake thynges, of the worlde, to confounde thynges whych are myghtye.
And vyle thynges of the worlde, Ꟶ thinges which are despised, hath God chosen, yee and thinges of no reputacyon, for to brynge to nought thynges of reputacyon,
that no flesshe shulde reioyce in hys presence.
And of hym are ye, in Chryst Iesu, whych of God is made vnto vs, wysdome, Ꟶ rightwesnes, and sanctifyinge, and redempcyon.
That accordynge as it is written: he which reioyseth, shulde reioyce in the Lorde.
And I brethren (when I came to you) came not in gloriousnes of wordes, or of wysdome, shewynge vnto you the testimony of God.
Nether shewed I my selfe that I knewe eny thynge amonge you, saue Iesus Christ, euen the same that was crucifyed.
And I was among you in weaknes, and in feare, and in moche tremblynge.
And my wordes and my preachynge was not wt entysynge wordes of mannes wysdome: but in shewynge of the sprete and of power,
that your fayth shuld not stande in the wysdome of men, but in the power of God.
We speake of wysdome amonge them that are perfecte: not the wysdome of this world, nether of the rulars of this worlde (whych go to nought)
but we speake the wysdome of God, whych is in secrete Ꟶ lyeth hyd, which God ordeyned before the worlde, vnto oure glory:
which wysdome none of the rulars of this worlde knewe. For had they had knowlege, they wold not haue crucifyed the Lorde of glory.
But as it is written. The eye hath not sene, and the eare hath not heard, nether haue entred into the hert of man, the thynges which God hath prepared for them that loue hym.
But God hath opened them vnto vs by his sprete. For the sprete searcheth all thinges, ye the botome of Goddes secretes.
For what man knoweth the thinges of a man: saue the sprete of man which is wt in him? Euen so the thynges of God knoweth no man, but the sprete of God.
And we haue not receaued the sprete of the worlde: but the sprete which commeth of God, for to knowe the thynges that are geuen to vs of God:
which thynges also we speake (not wt wordes that mannes wysdome teacheth, but wt wordes whych the holy ghost doth teache) makyng spirituall comparisons of spretuall thinges.
The naturall man perceaueth not the thinges that belonge to the sprete of God. For they are but folyshnes vnto him. Nether can he perceaue them, because they are spretually examined.
But he that is spretual, discusseth all thynges: yet he him selfe is iudged of no man.
For who hath knowen the mynde of the Lord, other who shall informe hym? But we vnderstande the mynde of Chryst.
And I coulde not speake (vnto you brethren) as vnto spretuall: but as vnto carnall, euen as vnto babes in Christ.
I gaue you mylke to drynke, and not meate. For ye then were not stronge, nether are ye as yet. For ye are yet carnall.
As longe verely as ther is amonge you enuyinge, Ꟶ strife Ꟶ sectes: are ye not carnall, Ꟶ walke after the maner of men?
For whyle one sayth: I holde of Paul, Ꟶ another: I am of Apollo, are ye not carnall?
What is Paul? What thynge is Apollo? Onely ministers are they by whom ye beleued, euen as the Lorde gaue euery man grace.
I haue planted, Apollo watred: but God gaue the encreace.
So then, nether is he that planteth eny thyng, nether he that watreth, but God that geueth the encreace.
He that planteth and he that watreth, are one. Euery man yet shall receaue hys rewarde, accordynge to his laboure.
For we are Goddes labourers, ye are Goddes husbandrye, ye are Goddes buyldyng:
Accordynge to the grace of God geuen vnto me, as a wyse buylder haue I layde the foundacyon. And another bylt theron. But let euery man take hede, how he byldeth vpon.
For another foundacyon can no man laye, then it that is layde, whych is Iesus Christ.
If eny man buylde on this foundacyon, golde, syluer, precyous stones, tymber, haye or stoble:
euery mannes worcke shall appeare. For the daye shall declare, whych shalbe shewed in fyre. And the fyre shall trye euery mannes worcke, what it is.
If eny mannes worcke that he hath bylt vpon, byde, he shall receaue a rewarde.
If eny mannes worcke burne, he shall suffre losse, but he shalbe safe hym selfe: neuertheles, yet as it were thorowe fyre.
Knowe ye not, that ye are the temple of God, Ꟶ how that the sprete of God dwelleth in you?
If eny man defyle the temple of God, hym shall God destroye. For the temple of God, is holy, whych temple ye are.
Let no man deceaue him selfe. If eny man seme wyse to hym selfe amonge you, let hym become a foole in this worlde, that he maye be wyse.
For the wysdom of thys worlde is folyshnes with God. For it is wrytten: he compaseth the wyse in theyr craftynes.
And agayne: God knoweth the thoughtes of the wyse, that they be vayne.
Therfore, let no man reioyce in men. For all thynges are youres,
whether it be Paul, ether Apollo, ether Cephas: whether it be the worlde, ether lyfe, ether deeth, whether they be present thynges, or thynges to come: all are youres:
and ye are Chrystes, and Christ is Goddes.
Let a man this wyse esteme vs, euen as the minysters of Christ, and stewards of the secretes of God.
Furthermore it is required of the stewardes, that a man be founde faythfull.
Wyth me is it but a very small thynge, that I shuld be iudged of you, ether of mans iudgement. No I iudge not myne awne selfe.
For I knowe nought by my selfe: yet am I not therby iustifyed. It is the Lorde that iudgeth me.
Therfore iudge nothinge before the tyme vntyll the Lorde come, whych wyll lyghten thinges that are hyd in darcknes, and open the counsels of the hertes. And then shall euery man haue prayse of God.
These thynges (brethren) I haue for an ensample described in myne awne person, Ꟶ in Apollos, for youre sakes, that ye myght learne by vs, that noman counte of hym selfe beyonde that which is aboue wrytten: that one swell not agaynst another for eny mans cause.
For who preferreth the? What hast thou, that thou hast not receaued? If thou haue receaued it, why reioysest thou, as though thou haddest not receaued it?
Nowe ye are full: nowe ye are made ryche: ye raygne as kinges without vs: and I wolde to God ye dyd raygne, that we myght raygne with you.
For me thynketh, that God hath set forth vs (which are the last Apostles) as it were men appoynted to deeth. For we are a gasynge stocke vnto the worlde, and to the Angels, and to men.
We are fooles for Christes sake, but ye are wyse thorowe Chryst. We weake, but ye are stronge. Ye are honorable, but we are despysed.
Euen vnto this tyme we honger and thyrst, and are naked, and are boffeted with fystes, and haue no certayne dwellynge place,
Ꟶ laboure, worckynge wt oure awne handes. We are reuyled, and yet we blesse. We are persecuted, and suffer it.
We are euyll spoken of, Ꟶ we praye. We are made as it were the fylthines of the worlde, the ofscowrynge of all thynges, euen vnto thys daye.
I wryte not these thynges, to shame you: but as my beloued sonnes I warne you.
For though ye haue ten thousande instructours in Chryst: yet haue ye not many fathers. In Chryst Iesu I haue begotten you thorow the Gospell.
Wherfore, I desyre you to folowe me.
For thys cause haue I sent vnto you Tymotheus, which is my deare sonne, and faythfull in the Lorde, whych shall put you in remembraunce of my wayes, that I haue in Chryst, euen as I teach euery where in all congregacions.
Some swell, as though I wold come nomore at you.
But I wyll come to you shortely yf God wyll: Ꟶ will know, not the wordes of them which swell but the power:
for the Kyngdome of God is not in wordes, but in power.
What wyll ye? Shall I come vnto you with a rodde, or els in loue and in the sprete of softnesse?
There goeth a commen sayinge that ther is fornicacion amonge you, and soch fornicacyon, as is not named amonge the gentyls: that one shuld haue hys fathers wyfe.
And ye swell, and haue not rather sorowed, that he which hath done thys dede, myght be put from amonge you.
For I verely as absent in body, but present in sprete, haue determined allready (as though I were present) concernynge hym that hath done this dede,
in the name of oure Lord Iesu Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my sprete wt you, with the power of the Lorde Iesus Chryst
to delyuer hym vnto Satan, for the destruccyon of the flesshe, that the sprete maye be saued in the daye of the Lorde Iesus.
Youre reioysynge is not good: knowe ye not, that a lytle leuen sowreth the whole lompe of dowe?
Pourge therfore the olde leuen that ye maye be newe dowe, as ye are swete breed. For Christ oure passeouer is offered vp for vs.
Therfore, let vs kepe holy daye, not with olde leuen, nether with the leuen of malicyousnes Ꟶ wickednes: but with the swete breed of purenes and trueth.
I wrote vnto you in a pistle, that ye shuld not company wyth fornicatours.
And I meant not at all of the fornicatours of this world, ether of the coueteous, or extorsyoners, ether the ydolaters: for then must ye nedes haue gone out of the world.
But now I dyd write vnto you, that ye company not together, yf eny that is called a brother, be a fornicator, or coueteous, or a worshypper of ymages, ether a raylar, ether a dronckard, or an extorcionar: wyth hym that is soche, se that ye eate not.
For what haue I to do, to iudge them which are without. Do ye not iudge them that are within?
Them that are without, God iudgeth. Put awaye the euell from amonge you.
Darre one of you hauynge busynes wyth another, go to lawe vnder the wycked, Ꟶ not rather vnder the saynctes?
Do ye not knowe, that the saynctes shall iudge the worlde? If the worlde shalbe iudged by you: are ye not good inough to iudge small trifles?
knowe ye not, howe that we shall iudge the angels? Howe moche more, maye we iudge thinges that pertayne to the lyfe?
If ye haue iudgementes of worldely matters, take then whych are despysed in the congregacyon, and make them iudges.
This I saye to youre shame. Is ther vtterly no wyse man amonge you? What not one at all, that can iudge betwene brother and brother,
but one brother goeth to lawe wt another: and that vnder the vnbeleuers?
Nowe therfore, there is vtterly a faute amonge you, because ye go to lawe one wyth another. Why rather suffer ye not wronge? why rather suffre ye not your selues to haue harme?
naye, ye youre selues do wronge, and robbe: Ꟶ that the brethren.
Do ye not knowe, how that the vnryghteous shall not inheret the kyngdome of God? Be not deceaued. For nether fornicatours, nether worshyppers of ymages, nether aduoutrers, nether weaklynges, nether abusers of them selues wyth mankynde,
nether theues, nether couetouse, nether dronkardes, nether cursed speakers, nether pyllers, shall inheret the kyngdome of God.
And soch were some of you, but ye are wasshed: but ye are sanctifyed: but ye are iustifyed by the name of the Lorde Iesus, Ꟶ by the sprete of oure God.
I maye do all thynges, but all thynges are not profytable. I maye do all thynges: but I will be brought vnder no mans power.
Meates are ordeyned for the belly, Ꟶ the belly for meates: but God shall destroye both it and them. Let not the body be applyed vnto fornicacyon, but vnto the Lorde, and the Lorde vnto the body.
God hath raysed vp the Lorde, and shall rayse vs vp by hys power.
Ether knowe ye not, that youre bodyes are the membres of Christ? shall I nowe take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbyd.
Do ye not knowe, that he whych coupleth hym selfe wt an harlot, is become one body. For two (sayth he) shalbe one flesshe.
But he that is ioyned vnto the Lorde is one sprete.
Fle fornicacion. Euery synne that a man doth, is without the body. But he that is a fornicator, synneth against his awne body.
Ether knowe ye not, how that youre bodyes are the temple of the holy ghost, which dwelleth in you, whom ye haue of God, and how that ye are not youre awne?
For ye are dearly bought. Therfore glorifye God in youre bodyes, and in youre spretes, which are Goddes.
As concernynge the thynges wherof ye wrote vnto me: it is good for a man, not to touche a woman.
Neuerthelesse, to a voyde whordome let euery man haue hys wyfe: and let euery woman haue her husbande.
Let the husbande geue vnto the wyfe due beneuolence. Lykewyse also the wyfe vnto the husbande.
The wyfe hath not power of her awne body: but the husbande. And lykewyse the husbande hath not power of his awne body: but the wyfe.
Wythdrawe not youre selues one from another, except it be with consent for a tyme, for to geue youre selues to fastynge and prayer. And afterwarde come together agayne, lest Satan tempte you for youre incontinencie.
This I saye of fauoure, and not of commaundement.
For I wolde that all men were as I my selfe am: but euery man hath his proper gyfte of God, one after this manner, another after that.
I saye vnto them that be vnmaryed and wyddowes: it is good for them, yf they abyde euen as I do.
But and yf they cannot abstayne, let them mary. For it is better to mary, then to burne.
Unto the maryed commaunde, not I, but the Lord: Let not the wyfe be separated from the husband.
If she separate her selfe, let her remayne vnmaryed, or be reconciled vnto her husbande agayne. And let not the husbande put awaye his wyfe from him.
To the remnaunt speake I, not the Lorde If eny brother haue a wyfe that beleueth not, yf she be content to dwell with him, let hym not put her awaye.
And the woman whych hath to her husbande an infidell, Ꟶ consent to dwell wyth her, let her not put hym awaye.
For the vnbeleuynge husbande is sanctified by the wyfe, Ꟶ the vnbeleuinge wyfe is sanctifyed by the husbande. Or els were your chyldren vncleane: but nowe are they holye.
But Ꟶ yf the vnbeleuynge departe, let him departe. A brother or a syster is not in subieccyon to soche. But God hath called vs in peace.
For how knowest thou (o woman) whether thou shalt saue thy husbande or no? Other howe knowest thou (o man) whether thou shalt saue thy wyfe or no?
but euen as God hath distributed to euery man. As the Lorde hath called euery man, so let hym walke: and so ordeyn I in all congregacyons.
If eny man be called beynge circumcised, let him not adde vncircumcisyon. If eny be called vncircumcised, let hym not be circumcised.
Circumcisyon is nothynge, and vncircumcisyon is nothinge: but the kepynge of the commaundementes of God.
Let euery man abyde in the same callinge, wherin he was called.
Art thou called a seruaunt? care not for it. Neuerthelesse yf thou mayst be fre, vse it rather.
For he that is called in the Lorde, beynge a seruaunt, is the Lordes freman. Lykewyse he that is called beynge fre, is Christes seruaunt.
Ye are dearly bought, be not ye the seruauntes of men.
Brethren, let euery man wherin he is called, therin abyde wyth God.
As concernynge virgins, I haue no commaundement of the Lorde: yet geue I counsell, as one that hath obtayned mercye of the Lord, to be faythfull.
I suppose therfore that it is good for the present necessite. For it is good for a man so to be.
Art thou bounde vnto a wyfe? seke not to be losed. Art thou loosed from a wyfe? seke not a wyfe.
But and yf thou marye a wyfe, thou hast not synned. Lykewyse, yf a virgyn mary, she hath not synned. Neuerthelesse soche shall haue trouble in their flesshe: but I fauoure you.
This saye I brethren, the tyme is shorte. It remayneth, that they whych haue wyues, be as though they had none:
and they that wepe, be as though they wept not: and they that reioyce, be as though they reioyced not: Ꟶ they that bye, be as though they possessed not:
and they that vse this worlde, be as though they vsed it not. For the fassyon of thys worlde goeth awaye.
I wolde haue you without care. He that is vnmaryed, careth for the thynges that belong to the Lord, howe he maye please the Lord.
But he the hath maryed a wyfe careth for the thinges that are of the worlde, howe he maye please his wyfe.
There is difference betwene a virgin Ꟶ a wife. The syngle woman careth for the thinges that are of the Lorde, that she maye be holy both in bodye Ꟶ also in sprete. Agayne: she that is maryed, careth for the thinges that pertayne to the worlde, how she maye please her husbande.
This speake I for youre profet, not to tangle you in a snare: but that ye maye folowe it which is honest Ꟶ comly, Ꟶ that ye maye cleaue vnto the Lorde without separacion.
If eny man thynke that it is vncomly for his virgin, yf she passe the tyme of maryage, and yf so nede require, let him do what he lysteth, he synneth not: let them be coupled in mariage.
Neuerthelesse, he that purposeth surely in his herte, hauynge no nede: but hath power ouer his awne will: Ꟶ hath so decreed in his hert, that he will kepe his virgin, doth well. So then, he that ioyneth his virgin in mariage doth well.
But he that ioyneth not his virgin in mariage, doth better.
The wyfe is bounde to the mariage, as longe as her husband lyueth. If her husband dye, she is at libertie to mary with whom she will, onely in the Lorde.
But she is happier, yf she so abyde, after my iudgement. And I thinke verely, that I haue the sprete of God.
As touchyng thinges offred vnto ymages, we are sure that we all haue knowledge. Knowledge maketh a man swell: but loue edifyeth.
If eny man thynke that he knoweth eny thing, he knoweth nothyng yet as he ought to knowe.
But yf eny man loue God, the same is knowen of him.
As concernyng the eatyng of those thynges that are offred vnto ydols, we are sure, that the ymage is nothing in the worlde and that ther is none other God, but one.
And though ther be that are called Goddes, whether in heauen other in erth (as ther be Goddes many, and Lordes many)
yet vnto vs is there but one God, which is the father, of whom are all thinges, Ꟶ we for him Ꟶ one Lord Iesus Christ, by whom are all thinges, and we by him.
But euery man hath not knowledge. Some hauing conscience because of the ymage, vntill thys houre, eate as a thinge offered vnto ymages: Ꟶ so their conscience beinge weake is defyled.
But meate maketh vs not acceptable to God. Nether yf we eate, are we the better. Nether yf we eate not, are we the worsse.
But take hede, lest by any meanes this libertie of yours be an occasion of falling to them that are weake.
For yf some man se the which hast knowledge, syt Ꟶ eate of meate offred vnto ymages, shall not the conscience of him which is weake, be boldened to eate those thynges, which are offered to ymages.
And so thorow thy knowledge shall the weake brother perysshe, for whom Christ dyed.
When ye synne so agaynst the brethren, Ꟶ wounde their weake conscience, ye synne agaynst Christ.
Wherfore yf meate hurt my brother, I will neuer eate flesshe lest I shulde offende my brother.
Am I not an Apostle? am I not fre? haue I not sene Iesus Christ oure Lorde?
Are ye not my worke in the Lorde? If I be not an Apostle vnto other, yet am I vnto you. For the seale of myne Apostleshyppe are ye in the Lord.
Myne answer to them that aske me, is this.
Haue we not power to eate and to dryncke?
Haue we not power to leade about a woman a syster, as well as other Apostles, and as the brethren of the Lorde, and Cephas?
Ether onely I and Barnabas haue not power thys to do?
Who goeth a warfare eny tyme at hys awne cost? who planteth a vineyarde, and eateth not of the frute therof? Or who fedeth a flocke and eateth not of the mylcke of the flocke?
Saye I these thynges after the maner of men? Sayth not the lawe the same also?
For it is wrytten in the lawe of Moses. Thou shalt not mosell the mouth of the oxe that treadeth oute the corne. Doth God take thought for oxen?
Sayth he it not alltogether for oure sakes? For oure sakes no doute this is written: that he whych eareth shulde eare in hope Ꟶ that he whych throssheth in hope, shulde be partaker of hys hope.
If we sowe vnto you spirituall thynges, is it a great thynge yf we reape youre bodely thynges?
If other be partakers of thys power ouer you, wherfore are not we rather? Neuerthelesse we haue not vsed this power: but suffre all thinges, lest we shulde hinder the Gospell of Chryst.
Do ye not knowe, howe that they which minister aboute holy thinges lyue of the sacrifyce? They which wayte of the temple, are partakers of the temple.
Euen so also dyd the Lord ordayne: that they whych preach the Gospell, shulde lyue of the Gospell.
But I haue vsed none of these thinges. Neuertheles I wrote not these thinges, that it shuld be so done vnto me. For it were better for me to dye, then that eny man shuld take this reioysinge from me.
For yf I preach the Gospell, I haue nothynge to reioyce of. For necessyte is put vnto me. But wo is it vnto me, yf I preach not the Gospell.
If I do it wt a good will, I haue a reward. But yf I do it against my will, an office is committed vnto me.
What is my reward then? Uerely that when I preach the Gospell, I make the Gospell of Christ fre, that I misuse not myne auctorite in the Gospell.
For though I be fre from all men, yet haue I made my selfe seruaunt vnto all men, that I myght wynne the moo.
Unto the Iewes, I became as a Iewe, to wynne the Iewes. To them that were vnder the lawe, was I made as though I had bene vnder the lawe, to wynne them that were vnder the lawe.
To them that were wythout lawe, became I as though I had bene wythout lawe (when I was not without lawe as perteyning to God, but vnder the lawe of Chryst) to wynne them that were wythout lawe.
To the weake became I as weake, to wynne the weake: In all thinges I fasshyoned my selfe to all men, to saue at the least waye some.
And this I do for the gospels sake, that I myght haue my parte therof.
Perceaue ye not, howe that they which runne in a course, runne all, but one receaueth the rewarde? So runne, that ye maye obtayne.
Euery man that proueth masteries, abstayneth from all thynges. And they do it to obtayne a crowne that shall perysshe: but we to obtayne an euerlasting crowne.
I therfore so runne, not as at an vncertayne thyng. So fyght I, not as one that beateth the ayer:
but I tame my body, Ꟶ brynge it into subieccyon, lest by anye meanes it come to passe, that whan I haue preached to other, I my selfe shulde be a cast awaye.
Brethren, I wolde not that ye shulde be ignoraunt, howe that our fathers were all vnder the cloude, and all passed thorowe the see,
and were all baptysed vnder Moses in the cloude and in the see:
and dyd all eate of one spirituall meate
and dyd all dryncke of one maner of spirituall dryncke. And they drancke of that spirituall rocke that folowed them, whych rocke was Chryst.
But in many of them had God no delyte: For they were ouerthrowen in the wyldernes.
These weare ensamples to vs that we shuld not lust after euyll thynges, as they lusted.
And that ye shuld not be worshyppers of ymages, as were some of them, accordynge as it is wrytten: The people sate downe to eate Ꟶ drincke, Ꟶ rose vp to playe.
Nether let vs be defyled wt fornicacyon, as some of them were defyled wyth fornicacyon, Ꟶ fell in one daye .xxiij. thousand.
Nether let vs tempte Christ, as some of them tempted, Ꟶ were destroyed of serpentes.
Nether murmure ye, as some of them murmured, Ꟶ were destroyed of the destroyer.
All these thynges happened vnto them for ensamples, but are wrytten to put vs in remembraunce, whom the endes of the worlde are come vpon.
Wherfore, let him that thynketh he stondeth, take hede, lest he fall.
Ther hath none other temptacyon taken you, but soche as foloweth the nature of man. But God is faythfull whych shall not suffer you to be tempted aboue youre strength: but shall in the myddes of the temptacyon make awaye, that ye maye be able to beare it.
Wherfore my deare beloued, fly from worshyppynge of ymages.
I speake as vnto them whych haue discrecyon, iudge ye what I saye.
Is not the cupp of blessynge which we blesse, partakynge of the bloude of Christ?
is not the breed whych we breake, partetakynge of the body of Chryst? because that we (though we be many) yet are one breed Ꟶ one bodye, in as moche as we all are partakers of one bred.
Behold Israel after the flessh. Are not they which eate of the sacrifyce, partakers of the temple?
What saye I then? that the ymage is eny thynge? or that it whych is offered to ymages, is eny thynge?
Nay, but thys I saye: that the thynges whych the gentyls offer, they offer to deuyls, and not to God. I wolde not that ye shulde haue felloshyppe wyth the deuyls.
Ye can not dryncke of the cup of the Lorde, and of the cup of deuyls. Ye cannot be the partakers of the Lordes table, and of the table of deuelles.
Ether do we prouoke the Lord? Are we stronger then he? I maye do all thynges, but all thynges are not expedient.
I maye do all thynges, but all thynges edifye not.
Let no man seke that whych is hys awne: but let euery man seke that whych belongeth to another:
Whatsoeuer is solde in the flesshe market, that eate, and aske no questyon for conscyence sake.
For the erth is the Lordes, and all that therin is.
If eny of them whych beleue not, byd you to a feast, and ye be disposed to go, whatsoeuer is sett before you, eate, askynge no questyon for conscience sake.
But and yf eny man saye vnto you: thys is offred vnto ymages, eate not of it for hys sake that shewed it, and for conscience sake. The erth is the Lordes and all that therin is.
Conscience I saye, not thyne, but of the other. For why is my liberte, iudged of another mannes conscience?
For yf I take my parte with thankes, why am I euyll spoken of, for that thynge wherfore I geue thankes?
Whether therfore ye eate or dryncke, or whatsoeuer ye do, do all to the prayse of God.
Se that ye geue none occasyon of euyll, nether to the Iewes, nor yet to the gentyls, nether to the congregacyon of God:
euen as I please all men in all thynges, not sekynge myne awne profet, but the profet of many, that they myght be saued.
Be ye the folowers of me, as I am the folower of Christ.
I commende you brethren, that ye remember me in all thynges, and kepe the ordinaunces, euen as I delyuered them to you.
But I wolde haue you to knowe, that Christ is the heed of euery man. And the man is the womans heed. And God is Christes heed.
Euery man prayinge or prophesyinge hauing eny thynge on his heed, shameth his heed.
Euery woman that prayeth or prophesyeth bare headed, dishonesteth hyr head. For that is euen all one, as yf she were shauen.
If the woman be not couered, let her also be shoren. If it be shame for a woman to be shorne or shauen, let her couer her heed.
A man ought not to couer his heed, for as moch as he is the ymage and glory of God. But the woman is the glory of the man.
For the man is not of the woman: but the woman of the man.
Nether was the man created for the womans sake: but the woman for the mannes sake.
For this cause ought the woman to haue power on her heed, for the angels sakes:
Neuerthelesse, nether is the man with out the woman. nether the woman without the man in the Lorde.
For as the woman is of the man, euen so is the man: by the woman: but all of God.
Iudge in youre selues, whether it be comly that a woman praye vnto God bare heeded.
Doth not nature it selfe teach you, that it is a shame for a man,
yf he haue longe heere: and a prayse to a woman: yf she haue longe heer. For hyr heer is geuen her to couer her withall.
If any man luste to stryue, we haue no soch custome, nether the congregacyons of God.
This I warne you of, and commende not, that ye come not together after a better maner, but after a worsse.
For fyrst of all when ye come together in the congregacion, I heare that there is dyssencyon amonge you: and I partely beleue it.
For ther must be sectes amonge you, that they which are perfect amonge you, myght be knowen
When ye come to gether therfore into one place, the Lordes supper can not be eaten. For euery man begynneth afore to eate his awne supper.
And one is hongry, and another is droncken. Haue ye not houses to eate and to drincke in?
Despyse ye the congregacion of God, and shame them that haue not? What shall I saye vnto you? shal I prayse you? In this prayse I you not.
That which I delyuered vnto you, I receaued of the Lorde. For the Lorde Iesus the same nyght, in which he was betrayed, toke breed:
and whan he had geuen thankes, he brake it and sayde: Take ye, and eate: this is my body, whych is broken for you. This do ye in the remembraunce of me.
After the same maner also he toke the cup, when supper was done, sayinge: This cuppe is the new testament in my bloude. Thys do as oft as ye dryncke it, in remembraunce of me.
For as often as ye shall eate this breed, and drincke this cup: ye shall shewe the Lordes deeth tyll he come.
Wherfore, whosoeuer, shall eate of this bread, or dryncke of the cup of the Lorde vnworthely, shalbe gyltye of the body and bloud of the Lorde.
But let a man examen him selfe, and so let him eate of the breed, and drincke of the cup.
For he that eateth or dryncketh vnworthely, eateth and dryncketh his awne damnacyon, because he maketh no difference of the Lordes body.
For this cause many are weake and sycke amonge you, and many slepe.
For If we had iudged oure selues, we shuld not haue bene iudged.
But when we are iudged of the Lorde, we are chastened, that we shulde not be damned with the worlde.
Wherfore my brethren when ye come together to eate, tary one for another.
If any man honger, let him eate at home, that ye come not together vnto condemnacyon. Other thynges will I set in order, when I come.
Concernynge spirituall thinges (brethren) I wolde not haue you ignoraunt.
Ye knowe that ye were gentyls, Ꟶ went youre wayes vnto domme ymages, euen as ye were led.
Wherfore I declare vnto you, that no man speakyng by the sprete of God, defyeth Iesus. Also no man can saye that Iesus is the Lorde, but by the holy ghost.
Ther are diuersites of gyftes, yet but one sprete.
And ther are differences of administracyons, and yet but one Lorde.
And ther are dyuers maners of operacyons, and yet but one God whych worcketh all in all.
The gyfte of the sprete is geuen to euery man, to edifye withall,
For to one is geuen thorow the spirite the vtteraunce of wisdome. To another is geuen the vttraunce of knowledge by the same sprete.
To another is geuen fayth, by the same sprete. To another the gyftes of healinge by the same sprete.
To another power to do miracles. To another prophesye. To another iudgement to discerne spretes. To another diuers tonges. To another the interpretacyon of tonges:
But these all worketh euen the selfe same sprete, diuidynge to euery man a seuerall gyfte, euen as he wyll.
For as the body is one, and hath many membres, and all the membres of one body though they be many, yet are but one bodye, euen so is Christ.
For by one sprete are we all baptysed to make one body, whether we be Iewes or Gentyls, whether we be bonde or fre, and haue all droncke of one sprete.
For the body is not one member, but many.
If the fote saye: I am not the hande, I am not of the body: is he therfore not of the body?
And yf the eare saye, I am not the eye, I am not of the body: is he therfore not of the body?
If all the body were an eye, where were then the eare? If all were hearynge: where were the smellynge?
But nowe hath God set the membres euery one seuerally in the body as it hath pleased him.
If they were all one member: where were the bodye?
Nowe are there many membres, yet but one body.
And the eye can not saye vnto the hande: I haue no nede of the. Agayne, the heed can not saye to the fete: I haue no nede of you.
Yee rather a great deale those membres of the body which seme to be more feble, are necessary.
And vpon those membres of the body which we thinke leest honest, put we more honestye on. And oure vngoodlye partes haue more beautye on.
For oure honest membres nede it not: But God hath so disposed the body, Ꟶ hath geuen the more honoure to that parte whych lacked,
lest there shulde be eny stryfe in the body: but that the membres shuld indifferently care one for another. And yf one member suffer, all suffer with him.
yf one member be had in honour, all membres be glad also.
Ye are the body of Christ, and membres one of another.
And God hath also ordeyned in the congregacyon, fyrst Apostles, secondarely prophetes, thrydly teachers, then them that do myracles: after that, the gyftes of healyng, helpers, gouerners, diuersitye of tonges.
Are all Apostles? Are all Prophetes? Are all teachers? Are all doars of miracles?
Haue all the gyftes of healinge? Do all speake with tonges? Do all interprete?
Couet after the best gyftes. And yet shewe I vnto you a more excellent waye.
Though I spake with the tonges of men and of angels, and haue no loue. I am euen as sounding brasse, or as a tynklinge cymball.
And though I coulde prophesy, and vnderstode all secretes, and all knowledge: yee yf I haue all fayth, so that I can moue mountayns oute of their places, and yet haue no loue, I am nothynge.
And though I bestowe all my goodes to fede the poore, and though I geue my body euen that I burned, and yet haue no loue, it profyteth me nothynge.
Loue suffreth longe, and is curteous. Loue enuyeth not. Loue doth not frowardly, swelleth not, dealeth not dishonestly
seketh not her awne, is not prouoked to anger, thynketh no euyll,
reioyseth not in iniquyte: but reioyseth in the trueth,
suffreth all thynges, beleueth all thynges, hopeth all thynges, endureth all thynges.
Though that prophesyinges fayle, other tonges cease, or knowledge vanysshe awaye, yet loue falleth neuer awaye.
For oure knowledge is vnperfect, and oure prophesyinge is vnperfect.
But when that whych is perfect, is come, then that whych is vnperfect, shall be done awaye.
When I was a chylde, I spake as a chylde, I vnderstode as a chylde, I ymagined as a chylde. But assone as I was a man, I put awaye chyldeshnes.
Nowe we se in a glasse, euen in a darcke speakyng: but then shall we se face to face. Nowe I knowe vnperfectly: but then shall I knowe euen as I am knowen.
Nowe abydeth fayth, hope, and loue, euen these thre: but the chefe of these is loue.
Labour for loue, and couet spretuall gyftes: but most chefly that ye maye prophesye.
For he that speaketh with the tonge, speaketh not vnto men, but vnto God. For no man heareth hym: Houbeit in the sprete he speaketh mysteries.
But he that prophesieth, speaketh vnto men for their edifyinge, for their exhortacion and for their comforte.
He that speaketh with the tonge, proffiteth him selfe: he that prophesieth, edifyeth the congregacion
I wolde that ye all spake with tonges: but rather that ye prophesied. For greater is he that prophesyeth, then he that speaketh with tonges, except he expounde it: that the congregacion maye haue edifying.
Now brethren, yf I come vnto you speakynge with tonges: what shall I profet you, excepte I speake to you, other by reuelacyon or by knowledge, or by prophesyinge, or by doctryne?
Moreouer, when thinges without lyfe geue sounde (whether it be a pype or an harpe) except they make a destruccyon in the soundes, how shall it be knowen what is pyped or harped?
For yf the trompe geue an vncertayne voyce, who shall prepare him selfe to the warre?
Euen so lykewyse when ye speake with tonges, excepte ye speake wordes that haue significacyon, howe shall it be vnderstande what is spoken? For ye shall but speake in the ayer.
Many kyndes of voyces are in the world, and none of them are without significacion.
If I knowe not what the voyce meaneth, I shalbe vnto him that speaketh, an alient: and he that speaketh, shalbe an alient vnto me.
Euen so ye (for as moche as ye couet spretuall gyftes) seke, that ye maye excell, vnto the edifyinge of the congregacyon.
Wherfore, let him that speaketh with tonge, praye, that he maye interpret also.
For If I praye with tonge, my sprete prayeth, but my vnderstonding doth no good.
What is it then? I will praye with the sprete, and will praye with the vnderstonding. I will synge with the sprete, and will synge with the vnderstonding.
For ells, when thou blessest with the sprete, how shall he that occupieth the rowme of the vnlearned, saye Amen, at thy geuynge of thankes, seynge he vnderstandeth not. what thou sayest?
Thou verely geuest thankes well, but the other is not edified.
I thanke my God that I speake with tonges more then ye all.
Yet had I leuer in the congregacion, to speake fyue wordes with my vnderstonding to the informacion of other rather then ten thousand wordes with the tonge.
Brethren, be not ye chyldren in wytte. Howbeit, as concernyng maliciousnes, be children: but in witte be perfect.
In the lawe it is written with sondrie tonges, and with sondrye lyppes will I speake vnto this people, and yet for all that, will they not heare me, sayth the Lorde.
Wherfore tonges are for a sygne, not to them that beleue: but to them that beleue not. Contrary wyse, prophesyinge serueth not for them that beleue not: but for them which beleue.
If therfore, when all the congregacyon is come together, and all speake with tonges, ther come in they that are vnlearned, or they which beleue not: will they not saye, that ye are out of youre wittes?
But and yf all prophesye, and ther come in one that beleueth not, or one vnlearned, he is rebuked of all men, Ꟶ is iudged of euery man,
Ꟶ so are the secretes of his hert opened, and so falleth he downe on his face, and worshyppeth God, Ꟶ sayth, that God is in you of a trueth.
How is it then brethren? As oft as ye come together, euery one of you hath a songe, hath a doctrine, hath a tonge, hath a reuelacyon, hath an interpretacyon. Let all thinges be done vnto edifyinge:
If eny man speake with tonge, let it be by two or at the most by thre, and that by course, and let another interprete it.
But yf ther be no interpreter, let him kepe sylence in the congregacyon, and let him speake to him selfe and to God.
Let the prophetes speake two, or thre, Ꟶ let the other iudge.
If eny reuelacyon be made to another that sytteth by, let the fyrst holde his peace.
For ye maye al prophesy one by one, that all maye learne, and that all maye haue comforte.
And the spretes of the prophetes are in the power of the Prophetes.
For God is not causer of stryfe: but of peace, as in all congregacions of the saynctes.
Let youre wemen kepe sylence in the congregacions. For it is not permitted vnto them to speake: but to be vnder obedience, as sayth the lawe.
If they wyll learne eny thynge, let them aske their husbandes at home. For it is a shame for wemen, to speake in the congregacion.
Spronge the worde of God from you? Ether came it vnto you onely?
If eny man thynke him selfe to be a prophet, ether spirituall: let him knowe, what thynges I wryte vnto you. For they are the commaundementes of the Lorde.
But and yf eny man be ignoraunt, let him be ignoraunt.
Wherfore brethren, couet to prophesye, and forbyd not to speake with tonges.
let all thynges be done honestly and in order
Brethren, as pertaynynge to the gospell whych I preached vnto you, whych ye haue also accepted, and in the whych ye contynue,
by the which also ye are saued: I do you to wit, after what maner I preached vnto you, yf ye kepe it, except ye haue beleued in vayne.
For fyrst of all I delyuered vnto you, that which I receaued: how that Christ dyed for our synnes, agreynge to the scriptures:
And that he was buried, and that he arose agayne the thirde daye accordyng to the scriptures:
Ꟶ that he was sene of Cephas, then of the twelue.
After that was he sene of moo then fyue hundred brethren at once: of whych many remayne vnto this daye, Ꟶ many are fallen a slepe.
After that appeared he to Iames, then to all the Apostles.
And last of all he was sene of me, as of one that was borne oute of due tyme.
For I am the least of the apostles, which am not worthy to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the congregacyon of God.
But by the grace of God, I am that I am. And his grace which is in me, was not in vayne: But I labored moare aboundauntly then they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which is with me
therfore whether it were I or they, so we preach, Ꟶ so haue ye beleued.
If Christ be preached how that he rose from the deed: how saye some amonge you, that ther is no resurreccyon of the deed:
If there be no rysynge agayne of the deed then is Christ not rysen agayne.
If Christ be not rysen agayne, then is oure preaching in vayne, and your fayth is also in vayne.
Ye and we are founde false wytnesses of God. For we haue testifyed of God, how that he raysed vp Christ: whom he raysed not vp, yf it be so that the deed ryse not agayne.
For yf the deed ryse not agayne, then is Christ not rysen agayne.
If it be so that Christ rose not agayne, then is youre fayth in vayne, and ye are yet in youre synnes.
Therfore they whych are fallen a slepe in Christ, are perysshed.
If in this lyfe onely we beleue on Christ, then are we of all men most miserable.
But now is Christ rysen from the deed, Ꟶ become the fyrst frutes of them that slept.
For by a man came deeth, and by a man came the resurreccyon of the deed.
For as by Adam all dye: euen so by Christ, shall all be made alyue,
but euery man in his awne order. The fyrst is Christ, then they that are Christes at his commynge.
Then commeth the ende, when he hath delyuered vp the kyngdome to God the father, when he hath put downe all rule and all auctorite Ꟶ power.
For he must raygne tyll he haue put all his enemyes vnder his fete.
The last enemye that shalbe destroyed, is deeth
For he hath put all thynges vnder his fete. But when he sayth all thynges are put vnder him, it is manifest that he is excepted, which dyd put all thynges vnder him.
When all thynges are subdued vnto him, then shall the sonne also him selfe be subiect vnto him, that put all thynges vnder him, that God maye be all in all.
Els what do they, whych are baptised ouer the deed yf the deed ryse not at all? Why are they then baptised ouer them?
Yee and why stonde we all waye then in ieoperdy?
By oure reioysinge which I haue in Christ Iesu oure Lorde, I dye dayly.
That I haue fought with beastes at Ephesus after the maner of men, what auauntageth it me, yf the deed ryse not agayne: Let vs eate and dryncke, for to morowe we shall dye.
Be not ye deceaued: euell wordes corrupte good maners.
Awake truely out of slepe, and synne not. For some haue not the knowledge of God: I speake this to youre shame.
But some man will saye: howe aryse the deed? wt what bodye shall they come?
Thou foole, that which thou sowest, is not quickened, except it dye.
And what sowest thou? Thou sowest not that body that shalbe: but bare corne (as of wheet, or of some other)
but God geueth it a body at his pleasure, to euery seed his awne body.
All flesshe is not one maner of flesshe: but ther is one maner of flesshe of men, another maner of flesshe of beastes, another of fysshes, Ꟶ another of byrdes.
Ther are also celestiall bodyes, Ꟶ ther are bodyes terrestriall. But the glory of the celestiall is one, Ꟶ the glory of the terrestriall is another.
Ther is one maner glory of the sonne, and another glory of the moone, Ꟶ another glory of the sterres. For one starre differeth from another in glory
So is the resurreccyon of the deed. It is sowen in corrupcion, it ryseth agayne in incorrupcyon.
It is sowen in dishonour, it ryseth agayne in honoure. It is sowen in weaknes, it ryseth agayne in power. It is sowen a naturall body, it ryseth agayne a spretuall body.
Ther is a naturall bodye, Ꟶ ther is a spretuall body:
as it is also written: the fyrste man Adam was made a lyuinge soule, and the last Adam was made a quyckening sprete.
Howbeit, that is not fyrst which is spirituall: but that which is naturall, and then that which is spretuall
The fyrst man is of the erth, erthy: the seconde man is the Lorde from heauen
As is the erthy, soche are they that are erthye. And as is the heuenly, soche are they that are heuenly.
And as we haue borne the ymage of the erthy, so shall we beare the ymage of the heauenly.
This saye I brethren the flesshe Ꟶ bloud cannot inheret the kyngdom of God. Nether doth corrupcyon inheret vncorrupcyon.
Beholde, I shewe you a mistery. We shall not all slepe: but we shall all be chaunged,
and that in a moment, in the twyncklynge of an eye by the last trompe. For the trompe shall blowe, and the deed shall ryse incorruptible, Ꟶ we shalbe chaunged.
For this corruptible must put on incorrupcyon: and this mortall must put on immortalite.
When this corruptible hath put on incorruption, and this mortall hath put on immortalite: then shalbe brought to passe the saying that is written:
Deeth is swalowed vp in victory: Deeth where is thy stynge? Hell where is thy victory?
The stynge of deeth is synne: and the strength of synne is the lawe.
But thankes be vnto God which hath geuen vs victory, thorowe oure Lord Iesus Christ.
Therfore my deare brethren, be ye stedfast and vnmouable, alwayes ryche in the worke of the Lorde, for as moch as ye knowe, how that youre labour, is not in vayne in the Lorde.
Concernyng the gatherynge for the sainctes, as I haue ordeyned in the congregacyons of Galacia, euen so do ye.
Upon some Saboth daye let euery one of you put a syde at home, and laye vp whatsoeuer is mete, that there be no gatherynges when I come.
When I am come, whomsoeuer ye shall alowe by youre letters, them wyll I sende, to brynge youre liberalyte vnto Ierusalem.
And yf it be mete that I go also, they shall go wt me.
I wyll come vnto you whan I go ouer to Macedonia. For I wyll go thorowe out Macedonia.
With you parauenture I wyll abyde a whyle: or els tary all wynter, that ye maye brynge me on my waye, whythersoeuer I go.
I wyll not se you now in my passage: but I trust to abyde a whyle with you, yf God shall suffre me.
I wyll tary at Ephesus, vntyll the fyftyeth daye.
For a greate dore and a frutefull is opened vnto me and ther are many aduersaryes.
If Timotheus come, se that he be with out feare with you. For he worketh the worcke of the Lorde, as I do:
let no man therfore despyse him. but conuaye hym forth in peace, that he maye come vnto me. For I loke for him with the brethren.
To speake of brother Apollo I greatly desyred him, to come vnto you with the brethren, but his mynde was not at all to come at this tyme. Howbeit, he wyll come, when he shall haue conuenient tyme.
Watche ye, stonde fast in the fayth, quyte you lyke men, be stronge.
Let all youre busynes be done with loue.
Brethren, ye knowe the house of Stephana how that they are the fyrst frutes of Achaia, and that they haue apoynted them selues to minister vnto the sainctes:
I beseche you that ye be obedient vnto soche, and to all that helpe and laboure.
I am glad of the commynge of Stephana Ꟶ Fortunatus and Achaicus: for that whych was lackinge vnto me on youre parte they haue supplied.
For they haue comforted my sprete Ꟶ youres. Loke therfore that ye knowe them that are soche.
The congregacyons of Asia salute you Aquila and Priscilla salute you moch in the Lorde, and so doeth the congregacyon that is in their house.
All the brethren grete you Grete ye one another with an holy kysse.
The salutacyon of me Paul with myne awne hande.
If eny man loue not the Lord Iesus Christ, the same be Anathema maranatha.
The grace of the Lord Iesus Christ be with you:
My loue be with you all in Christ Iesu. Amen.
Paul an apostle of Iesu christ by the wyll of God, and brother Timotheus. Unto the congregacyon of God, which is at Corinthum, with all the saynctes whych are in all Achaia
Grace be wyth you Ꟶ peace from God oure father, and from the Lorde Iesus Christ.
Blessed be God (the father of oure Lorde Iesus Christ) which is the father of mercy, Ꟶ the God of all comforte,
whych comforteth vs in all oure tribulacyon, in so moche that we are hable to comforte them whych are in any maner of trouble, with the same comforte, wherwith we oure selues are comforted of God.
For as the affliccyons of Christ are plenteous in vs, euen so is oure consolacyon plenteous by Christ.
Whether we be troubled for youre consolacyon and health, which saluacyon sheweth her power in that ye soffre the same affliccyons, which we also suffre: or whether we be comforted for youre consolacyon and saluacyon:
our hope also is stedfast for you: in as moche as we know, how that as ye are partetakers of the affliccyons, so shall ye be partakers also of the consolacyon.
Brethren, I wolde not haue you ignoraunt of oure trouble, which happened vnto vs in Asia. For we were greued out of measure passing strength, so greatly that we despayred euen of lyfe.
Also we receaued an answer of deeth in oure selues, that we shuld not put oure trust in our selues: but in God, whych rayseth the deed to lyfe,
and whych delyuered vs from so great a deeth: and doth delyuer. On whom we trust, that yet hereafter he wyll delyuer,
by the helpe of youre prayer for vs, that by the meanes of many persones, thankes maye be geuen of many on oure behalfe, for the gyfte geuen vnto vs.
For oure reioysinge is this, euen the testimony of oure conscience, that in synglenes and godly purenes, Ꟶ not in fleshly wysdom, but by the grace of God, we haue had oure conuersacyon in the world, and most of all to you wardes.
We wryte none other thynges vnto you, then that ye reade Ꟶ also knowe. Yee, and I trust ye shall fynde vs vnto the ende, euen as ye haue founde vs partly:
for we are youre reioysinge, euen as ye are oures in the daye of the Lord Iesus.
And in this confidence was I mynded fyrst to haue come vnto you, that I myght haue had one pleasure more with you,
and to passe by you into Macedonia, Ꟶ to haue come agayne out of Macedonia vnto you, and to be led forth of you towarde Iewrye.
Whan I thus wyse was mynded: dyd I vse lyghtnes? Or thynke I carnally those thynges which I thinke? that with me shuld be yee, yee, and naye naye.
God is faythfull: For oure preachyng to you, was not yee Ꟶ naye.
For Goddes sonne Iesus Christ which was preached amonge you by vs (euen by me and Siluanus and Timotheus) was not yee Ꟶ naye: but by hym it was yee:
For all the promises of God, by him are yee: and are in him Amen, vnto the lawde of God thorow vs.
For it is God, which stablyssheth vs with you in Christ and stondeth by vs, and hath annoynted vs,
whych hath also sealed vs, and hath geuen the ernest of the sprete in oure hertes.
I call God for a recorde vnto my soule that for to fauer you with all I came not eny more vnto Corynthum.
Not that we be Lordes ouer your fayth: but are helpers of youre ioye. For by fayth ye stande.
But I determined this in my selfe, that I wold not come agayne to you in heuynes.
For yf I make you sorye, who is it that shuld make me glad, but the same which is made sory by me?
And I wrote thys same vnto you, lest yf I came vnto you, I shuld take heuynes of them, of whom I ought to reioyce. Thys confidence haue I towarde you all, that my ioye is the ioye of you all.
For out of great affliccyon and anguysshe of hert. I wrote vnto you with many teares: not that ye shulde be made sory, but that ye myght perceaue the loue, whych I haue, most specially vnto you.
If eny man hath caused sorow, the same hath not made me sory, but partely: lest I shulde greue you all.
It is sufficient vnto the same man, that he was rebuked of many.
So that now contrary wyse, ye ought rather to forgeue him, and comforte him: lest that same persone shuld be swalowed vp wt ouer moch heuynes.
Wherfore, I exhorte you, that loue maye haue strength ouer him.
For this cause verely dyd I wryte, that I myght knowe the profe of you, whether ye shulde be obedient in all thynges.
To whom ye forgeue eny thynge, I forgeue also. For yf I forgaue eny thynge, to whom I forgaue it, for youre sakes forgaue I it, in the syght of Christ,
lest Satan shuld preuent vs. For his thoughtes are not vnknowen vnto vs.
When I was come to Troada for Christes Gospelles sake (and a dore was opened vnto me of the Lord)
I had no rest in my sprete, because I founde not Titus my brother: but toke my leaue of them, and went awaye into Macedonia.
Thankes be vnto God, which alwayes geueth vs the victorie in Christ, and openeth the sauer of his knowledge by vs in euery place.
For we are vnto God the swete sauoure of Christ, amonge them that are saued, and amonge them which perysshe.
To the one parte are we the sauour of deeth vnto deeth. And vnto the other part are we the sauour of lyfe vnto lyfe. And who is mete vnto these thinges?
For we are not as the most part are, which choppe and chaunge with the worde of God: but euen out of purenes, and by the power of God, in the syght of God, so speake we in Christ.
We begyn to prayse oure selues agayne, Nede we as some other, of Epistles of recommendacyon vnto you or letters of recommendacion from you?
Ye are oure epistle wrytten in oure hertes, which is vnderstande and red of all men,
for asmoch as ye declare that ye are the epistle of Christ, mynistred by vs and wrytten, not with ynke: but with the sprete of the lyuynge God not in tables of stone, but in flesshy tables of the hert.
Suche trust haue we thorow Christ to God ward,
not that we are sufficient of oure selues to thynke eny thyng, as of our selues: but yf we be able vnto any thinge the same commeth of God,
which hath made vs able to mynister the newe testament, not of the letter, but of the sprete. For the letter kylleth, but the sprete geueth lyfe.
If the ministracyon of deeth thorow the letters fygured in stones, was glorious, so that the chyldren of Israel coulde not beholde the face of Moses, for the glory of his countenaunce (whych glory is done awaye)
why shall not the ministracyon of the sprete be moch more gloryous?
For yf the ministringe of condemnacyon be glorious: moch more doth the ministracyon of ryghtewesnes exceade in glory.
For no dout that whych was there glorifyed, is not once glorifyed in respecte of this exceadynge glory.
For yf that which is destroyed was glorious, moch more that which remayneth, is glorious.
Seyng then that we haue soch trust, we vse great boldnes,
Ꟶ do not as Moses, which put a vayle ouer his face, that the chyldren of Israel shuld not se for what purpose that serued which is put awaye.
But their myndes were blinded. For vntyll this daye remayneth the same coueringe vntaken awaye in the lecture of the olde testament, whych vayle shalbe put awaye in Christ.
But euen vnto this daye when Moses is redde the vayle hangeth before their hertes.
Neuerthelesse when they tourne to the Lord, the vayle shalbe taken awaye.
The Lorde no dout is a sprete. And where the sprete of the Lord is, there is libertie.
But we all beholde in a myrroure the glorye of the Lorde with his face open, and are chaunged vnto the same similitude, from glory to glory, euen as of the sprete of the Lorde.
Therfore, seyng that we haue soch an offyce, euen as God hath had mercy on vs, we go not out of kynde:
but haue cast from vs the clokes of vnhonestye, and walke not in craftynes, nether handle we the worde of God disceatfully, but open the trueth, Ꟶ reporte oure selues to euery mannes conscience in the syght of God
If oure Gospell be yet hyd, it is hyd amonge them that are lost,
in whom the God of this world hath blynded the myndes of them which beleue not, lest the lyght of the gospell of the glory of Christ (whych is the ymage of God) shulde shyne vnto them.
For we preache not our selues, but Christ Iesus to be the Lorde, and oure selues youre seruauntes, for Iesus sake.
For it is God, that commaunded the lyght to shyne out of darcknes, which hath shyned in oure hertes, for to geue the lyght of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Iesus Christ.
But we haue this treasure in erthen vessels, that the excellency of the power myght be Gods, and not oures.
We are troubled on euery syde, yet are we not without shyft. We are in pouertie: but not vtterly without somwhat.
We suffre persecucion: but are not forsaken therin. We are cast downe: neuerthelesse we perysshe not.
We all wayes beare aboute in the bodye, the dyinge of the Lorde Iesus, that the lyfe of Iesu myght also appeare in oure bodye.
For we which lyue, are alwayes delyuered vnto deeth for Iesus sake, that the lyfe also of Iesu myght appere in oure mortall flesshe
So then, deeth worketh in vs, but lyfe in you.
But seynge that we haue the same sprete of fayth (accordynge as it is wrytten: I beleued, and therfore haue I spoken.) We also beleue, and therfore speake
For we knowe, that he which raysed vp the Lorde Iesus, shall rayse vp vs also by the meanes of Iesus, Ꟶ shall sett vs with you.
For all thynges do I for youre sakes that the plenteous grace by thanckes geuen of many, maye redounde to the prayse of God.
Wherfore, we are not weried, But though oure vtwarde man peryshe, yet the inwarde man is renewed daye by daye.
For oure tribulacyon which is momentany and lyght. prepareth an excedinge Ꟶ an eternall wayght of glorye vnto vs,
while we loke not on the thynges which are sene, but on the thynges whych are not sene. For the thynges whych are sene, are temporall: but thynges whych are not sene, are eternall.
For we knowe that yf oure erthy mancion of this dwellyng were destroyed, we haue a byldinge of God, an habitacyon not made with handes, but eternall in heauen.
For therfore syghe we, desyring to be clothed with oure mansion which is from heauen:
so yet, yf that we be founde clothed, Ꟶ not naked.
For we that are in this tabernacle, syghe Ꟶ are greued because we wold not be vnclothed, but wolde be clothed vpon, that mortalite myght be swalowed vp of lyfe.
He that hath ordeyned vs for this thynge, is God: which very same hath geuen vnto vs the ernest of the sprete.
Therfore, we are alwaye of good cheare, and knowe, that as longe as we are at home in the body, we are absent from God.
For we walke in fayth, not after outward appearaunce.
Neuerthelesse, we are of good comforte, and had leuer to be absent from the body, and to be present with God.
Wherfore, whether we be at home or from home, we endeuoure oure selues, to please him.
For we must all appeare before the iudgement seate of Christ, that euery man maye receaue the workes of hys body accordynge to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad.
Seynge then that we knowe, how the Lorde is to be feared, we fare fayre wyth men. For we are knowen well ynough vnto God. I trust also that we are knowen in youre consciences.
For we prayse not oure selues agayne vnto you, but geue you an occasyon to reioyce of vs, that ye maye haue some what against them, whych reioyce in the face, and not in the herte.
For yf we be to feruent, to God are we to feruent. Or If we kepe measure, for youre cause kepe we measure.
For the loue of Christ constrayneth vs, because we thus iudge, that yf one dyed for all, then were all deed,
and he dyed for all: that they whych lyue, shuld not hence forth lyue vnto them selues, but vnto him whych dyed for them, Ꟶ rose agayne.
Wherfore, hence forth knowe we no man after the flesshe. In so moch though we haue knowen Christ after the flesshe, now yet hence forth knowe we him so nomoare.
Therfore yf eny man be in Christ, he is a newe creature Olde thynges are passed awaye, beholde, all thinges are become new.
Neuerthelesse, all thynges are of God, whych hath reconcyled vs vnto him selfe by Iesus Christ, and hath geuen to vs the offyce to preache the attonement.
For God was in Christ, and made agrement betwene the worlde and him selfe, Ꟶ imputed not their synnes vnto them, and hath commytted to vs the preachynge of the attonement.
Now then are we messengers in the rowme of Christ euen as though God dyd beseche you thorow vs. So praye we you in Christes stede, that ye be reconcyled vnto God:
for he made him to be synne for vs, which knewe no synne, that we by his meanes shulde be that ryghtewesnes, which before God is alowed.
We also as helpers exhorte you that ye receaue not the grace of God in vayne.
For he sayth: I haue heard the in a tyme accepted: and in the daye of saluacyon, haue I suckered the. Beholde, now is that accepted tyme: beholde, now is that daye of saluacyon.
Lett vs geue no occasyon of euyll, that in oure offyce be founde no faute:
but in all thynges let vs behaue oure selues as the minysters of God. In moch pacience, in affliccyons, in necessitees in anguysshes,
in strypes, in presonmentes: in stryfes: in laboures, in watchynges, in fastynges,
in purenes, in knowledge, in longe suffring, in kyndenes, in the holy ghost, in loue vnfayned,
in the worde of trueth, in the power of God, by the armoure of ryghtewesnes of the ryght hande Ꟶ on the lyfte
be honoure and dishonoure: be euyll reporte Ꟶ good reporte: as desceauers, and yet true,
as vnknowen, and yet knowen: as dyinge, and beholde, we lyue: as chastened, and not kylled:
as sorowing, Ꟶ yet alwaye merye: as poore, and yet make many ryche: as hauinge nothyng, Ꟶ yet possessyng all thynges.
O ye Corynthyans, oure mouth is open vnto you. Oure hert is made large:
ye are in no strayte in vs, but are in a strayte in youre awne bowelles:
I promyse vnto you lyke reward, as vnto chyldren.
Set your selues at large, and beare not ye the yoke wt the vnbeleuers. For what fellyship hath ryghtewesnes with vnryghtewesnes? Or what company hath lyght wt darknes?
Or what concorde hath Christ with Beliall? Ether what parte hath he that beleueth, with an infidell?
Or how agreeth the temple of God with Images for ye are the temple of the lyuinge God, as sayde God? I wyll dwell amonge them, Ꟶ walcke amonge them, and wylbe their God: Ꟶ they shalbe my people.
Wherfore come out from amonge them, and separate youre selues from them (sayth the Lorde) and touche none vncleane thynge: so wyll I receaue you,
and wylbe a father vnto you, and ye shalbe my sonnes Ꟶ daughters, sayth the Lorde allmyghty.
Seynge that we haue soche promyses (dearely beloued) lett vs clense oure selues from all filthynes of the flesshe and sprete, and growe vp to full holynes wyth the feare of God.
Understand vs we haue hurte no man: we haue corrupte no man: we haue defrauded no man.
I speake not this to condemne you: for I haue shewed you before, that ye are in oure hertes to dye Ꟶ lyue with you:
I am very bolde ouer you, I reioyce greatly in you. I am fylled with comforte, and am exceadynge ioyouse in all oure tribulacyon.
For when we were come into Macedonia oure flesshe had no rest, but we were troubled on euery syde. Outwarde was fyghtyng, inward was feare.
Neuerthelesse God that conforteth the abiecte, conforted vs by the commynge of Titus.
And not by his commynge onely: but also by the consolacyon which we receaued of you: when he tolde vs youre desyre, youre feruent mynde for me: so that I reioyced the more.
For though I made you sory with a letter, I repent not: though I dyd repent. For I perceaue, that the same epistle made you sorye, though it were but for a ceason.
But I nowe reioyce, not that ye were sory, but that ye so sorowed that ye repented. For ye sorowed godly: so that in nothynge ye were hurte by vs.
For godly sorowe causeth repentaunce vnto saluacyon, not to be repented of, contrary wyse, worldely sorowe causeth deeth.
For beholde, what diligence this godly sorowe that ye toke, hath wrought in you: yee it caused you to cleare yourselues. It caused indignacyon, it caused feare, it caused desire. it caused punisshment. For in all thynges ye haue shewed your selues, that ye were cleare in that matter.
Wherfore, though I wrote vnto you, I dyd it not for his cause that had done the hurt, nether for his cause that was hurte: but that youre good mynde for vs might appeare amonge you in the syght of God.
Therfore, we are comforted, because ye are comforted; yee, and exceadingly the more ioyed we, for the ioye that Titus had: because hys sprete was refresshed of you all.
I am therfore not nowe ashamed, though I boasted my selfe to hym of you. For as all thynges which we spake vnto you are true, euen so, oure boastynge that I made vnto Titus is founde true.
And his inwarde affeccion is founde aboundant towarde you, whan he remembreth the obedience of you all howe wt feare Ꟶ tremblinge ye receaued hym.
I reioyce that I maye be bolde ouer you in all thinges.
I certifye you brethren, of the grace of God which was geuen in the congregacyons of Macedonia,
howe that the aboundaunce of theyr reioysynge is, that they are tryed with moche tribulacyon. And though they were exceadynge poore, yet haue they geuen exceading rychely, and that in singlenesse.
For to theyr powers, I beare them recorde, yee, Ꟶ beyonde theyr power, they were wyllynge of theyr awne accorde,
and prayed vs with great instaunce, that we wolde receaue their benefyte, and suffre them to be partetakers with other in minystrynge to the saynctes.
And thys they dyd, not as we loked for: but gaue their awne selues fyrst to the Lord, and after vnto vs by the wyll of God:
so that we coulde not but desyre Titus, to accomplysshe the same beniuolence amonge you also, euen as he had begonne.
Nowe therfore, as ye are riche in all parties, in fayth, in worde, in knowledge, in all feruentnes, and in loue, which ye haue to vs: euen so, se that ye be plenteous in thys beniuolence also.
This saye I, not commaundynge: but because of feruentnes, I do alowe the vnfaynednesse of youre loue towarde other men.
For ye knowe the liberalytie of oure Lord Iesus Christ, that though he was ryche, yet for youre sakes he became poore that ye, thorowe hys pouertye, myght be made ryche.
And I geue councell hereto. For thys is expedient for you, which beganne, not to do onely, but also to wyll a yeare ago.
Nowe therfore, performe the thynge which ye beganne to do: that as there was in you a redynes to will, euen so, ye maye performe the dede of that which ye haue.
For yf there be fyrst a wyllynge mynde, it is accepted accordynge to that a man hath, and not accordynge to that he hath not.
It is not my mynde that other be sett at ease, and ye brought into combraunce:
but that ther be egalnes nowe at this tyme: and that your aboundance maye sucker their lacke: and that theyr aboundance maye supply youre lacke:
that there maye be equalyte, agreynge to that which is wrytten: He that had moche, had not the more aboundance: Ꟶ he that had a litle, had neuer the lesse.
Thankes be vnto God, which put the same good mynde for you in the herte of Titus,
which accepted the requeste: yee, rather he was so well wyllinge, that of his awne accorde, he came vnto you.
We haue sente with hym the brother, whose laude is in the gospell thorowout all the congregacyons:
and not that onelye, but is also chosen of the congregacions to be a felowe with vs in oure iorney, concerning this beniuolence that is ministred by vs vnto the prayse of the same Lorde, and to stere vp youre prompte mynde.
For thys we exchewe, that eny man shuld rebuke vs in this plenteous distrybucyon, that is ministred by vs
and make prouisyon for honest thinges: not onely in the syght of the Lorde: but also in the syght of men.
We haue sent wt them a brother of oures, whom we haue ofte tymes proued dilygent in many thynges: but nowe moch more diligent.
The greate confidence which I haue in you, hath caused me thys to do: partelye for Titus sake which is my felowe and helper as concernyng you: partely because of other which are our brethren, and the messengers of the congregacyons, Ꟶ the glory of Christ.
Wherfore, shewe ye vnto them the proffe of youre loue, and of oure boastynge of you in the syght of the congregacyons.
Of the ministrynge to the saynctes, it is but superfluous for me to wryte vnto you:
for I knowe the redynes of your mynde, wherof I boast my selfe vnto them of Macedonia, that Achaia was prepared a yeare ago: and your ensample hath prouoked many.
Neuerthelesse, yet haue I sent these brethren, lest our boasting which I make of you shulde be in vayne, in thys behalfe, that ye (as I haue sayde) maye prepare your selues:
lest parauenture yf they of Macedonia come with me, and finde you vnprepared, we (I wyll not saye ye) shulde be ashamed in thys matter of boastynge.
Wherfore, I thought it necessarye to exhorte the brethren, to come before hande vnto you, and to prepare youre good blessynge promysed afore, that it myght be ready, so that it be a blessynge, and not a defraudynge.
This yet I saye: he which soweth lytell, shal reape lytell: Ꟶ he that soweth (in geuyng) largelye and frelye, shall reape plenteouslye:
And let euery man do, accordinge as he hath purposed in hys herte, not groudgyngly, or of necessyte. For God loueth a chearfull geuer.
God is able to make you riche in all grace that ye in all thynges hauynge sufficyent vnto the vtmost, maye be riche vnto all maner of good workes,
as it is wrytten: He hath sparsed abroade, and hath geuen to the poore, hys ryghtewesnesse remayneth for euer.
He that minystreth seed vnto the sower, minystre breed also for fode: and multyplye youre seede, and increase the frutes of youre ryghtewesnesse,
that on all partes, ye maye be made ryche into all synglenes, which causeth thorowe vs, that thankes are geuen vnto God.
For the offyce of thys minystracion, not onely supplyeth the nede of the saynctes: but also is aboundaunt herin, that for thys laudable minystringe, thankes might be geuen to God of many,
which prayse God for the obedience of youre consentynge to the Gospell of Christ, and for youre synglenesse in distrybutyng to them, and to all men,
and in theyr prayers for you, which longe after you, for the aboundaunt grace of God in you.
Thankes be vnto God, for hys vnspeakeable gyfte.
I Paul my selfe beseche you by the mekenesse Ꟶ softenesse of Christ, which whan I am present amonge you, am of no reputacyon: but am bolde towarde you beynge absent.
I beseche you, that I nede not to be bolde whan I am presente, with that same boldnesse, wherewith I am supposed to haue bene bolde, agaynst some, which repute vs as though we walked carnally.
For though we walke in the flesshe, yet we do not warre flesshly.
For the weapens of oure warrefare are not carnall thynges, but thynges myghty in God, to cast downe stronge holdes,
wherewith we ouerthrowe councels and euery hye thynge that exalteth it selfe agaynst the knowledge of God, and brynge into captiuyte all ymaginacion to the obedience of Christ,
Ꟶ are ready to take vengeaunce on all disobedience, when your obedience is fulfylled.
Loke ye on thinges after the vtter appearaunce? If any man trust in hym selfe, that he is Christes, lett hym consyder thys agayne of him selfe, that as he is Christes, euen so, are we Christes.
For though I boaste my selfe somwhat more of oure auctorite (which the Lorde hath geuen vs to edifye, and not to destroye you) it shall not be to my shame:
lest I shulde seme as though I wente aboute to make you afrayede with letters.
For the epistles (sayth he) are sore, and stronge: but hys bodelye presence is weake, and hys speache rude.
Lett hym that is soche thynke on thys wyse: that as we are in wordes by letters, when we are absent, soche are we in dedes, when we are present.
For we cannot fynde in our hertes to make oure selnes of the nomber of them, or to compare oure selues to them, which prayse them selues. Neuerthelesse, whyle they measure them selues wt them selues, and compare them selues with them selues, they vnderstande nought.
But we will not reioyce aboue measure: but accordynge to the measure of the rule, which God hath distributed vnto vs, a measure to reache euen vnto you.
For we stretch not out our selues beyonde measure, as though we reached nott vnto you. For euen to you also haue we come wt the gospell of Christ,
and we boast not our selues out of measure of other mennes labours: Yee, and we hope it wyll come to passe, that when your faith is increased amonge you, we shalbe magnifyed accordynge to oure measure, more largely,
and that I shall preache the Gospell in those regions which are beyonde you: Ꟶ not to boast of those thynges, which by another mans measure are prepared allready.
But let him that reioyseth, reioyse in the Lorde.
For he that prayseth hym selfe, is not alowed but he whom the Lorde prayseth.
Wold to God, ye could haue suffred me a lytell in my folyshnes: yee, ye do also forbeare me.
For I am gelous ouer you wt godly gelousye: For I haue coupled you to one man, that ye shulde make your selues a chaste virgin vnto Christ.
But I feare lest it come to passe that as the serpent begyled Eue thorowe hys subteltye, euen so your wittes shulde be corrupte from the synglenes that ye had toward Christ.
For yf he that commeth preache another Iesus then hym whom we preached: or yf ye receaue another sprete then that which ye haue receaued, ether another Gospell then that ye haue receaued, ye might right well haue bene content.
For I suppose that I was not behynde the chefe Apostles.
But though I be rude in speakinge, yet I am not so in knowledge. Howbeit amonge you, we haue bene well knowen to the vtmost what we are in all thinges.
Dyd I therin synne, because I submytted my selfe, that ye might be exalted: Ꟶ because I preached to you the Gospell of God fre?
I robbed other congregacyons, Ꟶ toke wages of them, to do you seruyce.
And when I was present wt you, Ꟶ had nede I was chargeable to no man: for that which was lackynge vnto me, the brethren which came from Macedonia, supplied, and in all thinges I kept my selfe so that I shuld not be chargeable to any man, and so wyll I kepe my selfe.
If the trueth of Christ be in me, thys reioysyng shall not be taken from me in the regions of Achaia.
Wherfore? Because I loue you not? God knoweth.
Neuertheles, what I do, that wyll I do, to cut awaye occasyon from them which desyre occasion: that they might be founde lyke vnto vs, in that wherin they reioyce.
For soch fals apostles are disceatfull workers, and fassy on them selues lyke vnto the apostles of Christ.
And no maruayle: for Satan him selfe is chaunged into the fassyon of an angell of light.
Therfore it is no great thynge though hys mynisters fassyon them selues, as though they were the ministers of ryghtewesnes: whose ende shalbe accordyng to theyr dedes.
I saye agayne, lest eny man thynke that I am folysshe: or els euen nowe take ye me as a foole, that I also maye boast my selfe a lytell.
That I speake, I speake not after the Lorde: but as it were folyshly, in thys matter of boastinge.
Seynge that many reioyce after the flesshe, I wyll reioyce also.
For ye suffre foles gladly, seynge ye youre selues are wyse.
For ye suffre yf a man bryng you into bondage, yf a man deuoure, yf a man take yf a man exalte him selfe, yf a man smyte you on the face.
I speake as concerning rebuke, as though we had bene weake, Howbeit, wherinsoeuer eny man dare be bolde (I speake folyshly) I dare be bolde also.
They are Ebrues, euen so am I. They are Israelites, euen so am I. They are the seede of Abraham, euen so am I.
They are the mynisters of Chryst (I speake as a foole) I am more. In labours more aboundante: In strypes aboue measure: In preson more plenteouslye: In deeth ofte.
Of the Iewes fyue tymes receaued I euery tyme .xl. strypes saue one.
Thryse was I beaten wt roddes, I was once stoned, I suffered thryse shypwracke. Nyght and daye haue I bene in the deepe see.
In iorneying often: in parels of waters: in parels of robbers: in ieopardyes of myne awne nacyon: in ieopardyes among the hethen: in parels in the citie: in parels in wildernes: in parels in the see: in parels amonge false brethren:
in laboure Ꟶ trauayle: in watchinges often: in honger and thyrst: in fastynges often: in colde and nakednes:
besyde the thinges which outwardly happen vnto me. I am combred daylye, and do care for all congregacyons.
Who is weake, and I am not weake? who is offended, Ꟶ I burne not?
If I must nedes boast, I wyll boaste of the thynges that concerne myne infirmyties.
The God Ꟶ father of oure Lorde Iesus Christ, which is blessed for euermore knoweth that I lye not.
In the cytie of Damascon the gouerner of the people vnder king Aretas, layd watch in the cytie of the Damascens, and wold haue caught me,
and at a windowe was I let doune in a basket thorowe the wall, and so scaped I hIs handes.
Doutles, it is not expedient for me to boast, I wyll come to visyons and reuelacions of the Lord,
I knowe a man in Christ aboue fourtene yeares ago (whyther he were in the body, I cannot tell, or whyther he were out of the body, I cannot tell, God knoweth) howe that he was taken vp into the thyrde heauen.
And I knowe the same man (whither in the body or out of the body, I cannot tell, God knoweth)
howe that he was taken vp into Paradyse, and hearde secret wordes, which no man can vtter.
Of thys man wyll I boast, but of my selfe wyll I not boast, except it be of myne infirmityes
For though I wolde boast, I shall not be a foole: for I wolde saye the trueth. Neuerthelesse, I spare you: lest any man shulde thinke of me, aboue that which he seeth me to be, or that he heareth of me.
And lest I shulde be exalted out of measure thorowe the excellencye of the reuelacions: there was gyuen vnto me vnquyetnes thorowe the flesshe, euen the messenger of Satan to buffet me, because I shulde not be exalted out of measure.
For this thynge besought I the Lorde thryse, that it might departe from me.
And he sayde vnto me: my grace is sufficient for the. For my strength is made parfect thorow weaknes. Uery gladly therfore wyll I reioyce of my weaknes, that the strength of Christ maye dwell in me.
Therfore, haue I delectacion in infirmityes, in rebukes, in necessities, in persecucyons, in anguysshes for Chrystes sake. For when I am weake, then am I stronge.
I am become a foole in boasting my selfe. Ye haue compelled me: for I ought to haue bene commended of you. For in nothynge was I inferior vnto the chefe apostles, though I be nothing,
yet the tokens of an apostle were wrought amonge you with all pacyence, and signes and wonders, and myghty dedes.
For what is it, wherin ye were inferyors vnto other congregacions, except it be herin, that I was not chargeable vnto you. Forgeue me thys wronge.
Beholde, nowe the thyrde tyme I am ready to come vnto you: and yet wyll I not be chargeable vnto you. For I seke not youres, but you. For the chyldren ought not to laye vp for the fathers and mothers, but the fathers and mothers for the chyldren.
I wyll very gladly bestowe, and wylbe bestowed for youre soules, though the more I loue you; the lesse I am loued agayn.
But be it, that I was not chargeable vnto you: neuertheles, when I was crafty, I toke you with gyle.
Dyd I pyll you by any of them, whom I sent vnto you?
I desyred Titus, Ꟶ with hym I sent a brother. Dyd Titus defraude you of any thyng? walked we not in one sprete? Walked we not in lyke steppes?
Agayne, thynke you that we excuse our selues vnto you? we spake in Christ in the syght of of God: but we do all thinges (dearly beloued) for youre edifyinge.
For I feare, lest it come to passe, that yf I come, I shall not fynde you soch as I wolde: Ꟶ that I shalbe founde vnto you soch as ye wolde not. I feare, lest ther be amonge you debates, enuyinges, wrath, stryfes, bakbytynges, whysperinges, swellynges, Ꟶ sedicyons
And that when I come agayne, God brynge me lowe amonge you, and I be constrayned to bewayle many of them which haue synned allready, Ꟶ haue not repented of the vncleanes, fornicacyon, and wantonnes, whiche they haue commytted.
Nowe come I the thyrd tyme vnto you: in the mouth of two or thre witnesses shal euery worde be stablysshed.
I tolde you before, Ꟶ tell you before: and as I sayd when I was present with you the seconde tyme, so wryte I nowe beynge absent, to them which in tyme past haue synned, Ꟶ to all other: that yf I come agayne, I wyll not spare,
seynge that ye seke experience of Christ which speaketh in me, which among you is not weake but is myghtye in you.
For though he was crucifyed in weaknes, yet liueth he thorowe the power of God. And we (no doute) are weake in hym: but we shall lyue with hym: by the myght of God amonge you.
Examen your selues, whether ye are in the fayth or not. Proue youre awne selues. Knowe ye not your awne selues, howe that Iesus Christ is in you? excepte ye be castawayes,
I trust ye shall knowe that we are not castawayes.
I desyre before God that ye do none euyll, not that we shulde seme commendable: but that ye shuld do that which is honeste: Ꟶ let vs be counted as castawayes.
We can do nothinge agaynst the trueth: but for the trueth.
We are glad when we ar weake, and ye stronge. This also we wysshe for, euen youre perfectnesse.
Therfore wryte I these thinges beynge absent, lest whan I am present, I shulde vse sharpenesse, accordynge to to the power which the Lorde hath geuen me to edifye, and not to destroye.
Finallye brethren, fare ye well, be parfect, be of good conforte, be of one mynde, lyue in peace, and the God of loue and peace shalbe with you.
Grete one another in an holy kysse.
All the saynctes salute you.
The grace of oure Lord Iesus Christ, and the loue of God, and the felyshyppe of the holy ghost be with you all. Amen.
Paul an apostle, not of men, nether by man: but by Iesus Christ, and by God the father, which raysed him vp from deeth:
and all the brethren which are with me. Unto the congregacions of Galacia.
Grace be with you, and peace from God the father, Ꟶ from oure Lorde Iesus Christ,
which gaue hym selfe for our synnes to delyuer vs from thys present euyll worlde, accordynge to the wyll of God oure father,
to whom be prayse for euer and euer. Amen.
I maruayle, that ye are so soone turned (from Christ which called you by grace) vnto another Gospe
which is nothinge elles, but that there be some which trouble you, Ꟶ intende to peruerte the Gospell of Christ.
Neuerthelesse, though we oure selues, or an angell from heauen, preache any other Gospell vnto you, then that which we haue preached vnto you, let him be acursed.
As we said before, so saye I nowe agayne, yf eny man preache eny other Gospell vnto you, then that ye haue receaued, lett hym be acursed.
Do I now perswade men, or God? Other do I seke to please men? For yf I had hythereto studyed to please men, I were not the seruaunt of Christ.
I certifye you brethren, that the Gospell which was preached of me, was not after the maner of men.
For I nether receaued it, ner learned it of man, but by the reuelacyon of Iesus Christ.
For ye haue hearde of my conuersacyon in tyme past, in the Iewes waye, howe that beyonde measure, I persecuted the congregacyon of God, and spoyled it,
and preuayled in the Iewes waye aboue many of my companions in myne awne nacyon beynge a very feruent mayntener of the tradicyons of the elders.
But when it pleased God, which seperated me from my mothers wombe, and called me here unto by hys grace,
for to declare hys sonne by me, that I shulde preache hym amonge the Heathen: immediatly I commened not of the matter with flessh Ꟶ bloude,
nether returned to Ierusalem, to them which were apostles before me: but went my wayes into Arabia, and came agayne vnto Damasco.
Then after thre yeare, I returned to Ierusalem to se Peter, and abode with hym fyftene dayes.
Other of the apostles sawe I none, saue Iames the Lordes brother.
The thinges therfore which I wryte vnto you: beholde, before God I lye not.
After that I came into the coastes of Siria and Cilicia,
and was vnknowen as touchinge my person vnto the congregacions of Iewry, which were in Christ.
But thys they hearde onely, that he which persecuted vs in tyme past, nowe preacheth the fayth, which before he destroyed.
And they glorified God in me.
Then fouretene yeares thereafter, I went vp agayne to Ierusalem with Barnabas, and toke Titus with me.
I went vp also by reuelacyon, and commened with them of the Gospell which I preache amonge the Gentyls (but specially) with them which were counted chyefe, leest I shulde runne or had runne in vayne.
Also Titus which was wt me, though he were a greke, yet was not compelled to be circumcised:
and that because of incommers beynge false brethren, which came in preuely to spye out oure libertye which we haue in Christ Iesu, that they myght bringe vs in to bondage.
To whom we gaue no rowme, no not for the tyme (by waye of subieccyon) because that the trueth of the Gospell myght contynue with you.
Of them which semed to be somwhat, what they were in tyme passed it make the no matter to me. God loketh on the outwarde appearaunce of no man. Neuertheles they which semed greate, added nothynge to me.
But contrary wyse, when they sawe that the gospell ouer the vncircumcision was committed vnto me, as the gospell ouer the circumcisyon was commytted vnto Peter.
For he that was myghty in Peter in the Apostleshyppe ouer the circumcisyon, the same was myghty in me amonge the Gentyls.
When they perceaued the grace that was geuen vnto me, then Iames, Cephas and Iohn, which semed to be pyllers, gaue to me and Barnabas the ryght handes of that felowshyppe, that we shulde be Apostles among the Heythen, and they in the circumcisyon:
onely that we shuld remember the poore. Wherin also I was diligent to do the same.
But when Peter was come to Antioche I withstode him openly, because he was worthy to be blamed.
For yer that certayne cam from Iames, he dyd eate with the Gentyls. But when they were come, he withdrue and separated hym selfe from them, fearynge them which were of the circumcisyon.
And the other Iewes dissembled as well as he: in so moche that Barnabas also was brought into their symulacion.
But when I sawe that they went not the right waye after the trueth of the Gospell, I sayde vnto Peter before them all: yf thou beynge a Iewe, lyuest after the maner of the Gentyls, and not as do the Iewes: why causest thou the Gentyls to lyue as do the Iewes?
For we which are Iewes by nature, and not synners of the Gentyls,
knowe that a man is not iustifyed by the dedes of the lawe, but by the fayth of Iesus Christ: And we haue beleued on Iesus Chryst, that we might be iustifyed by the faith of Christ, and not by the dedes of the lawe: because by the dedes of the lawe no flesshe shalbe iustifyed.
If whyle we seke to be made ryghtewes by Christ, we our selues are founde synners, is then Christ the minyster of synne? God forbyd.
For yf I buylde agayne the thynges which I destroyed, then make I my selfe a trespasser.
For I (thorowe the lawe) haue bene deed to the lawe, that I myght lyue vnto Christ.
I am crucified wt Christ. Neuertheles I lyue: yet nowe not I, but Christ lyueth in me. The lyfe which I nowe lyue in the flesshe, I lyue by the fayth of the sonne of God which loued me, and gaue hym selfe for me.
I despyse not the grace of God. For yf ryghtewesnes come of the lawe, then Christ is deed in vayne.
O ye folysshe Galathyans: who hath bewitched you, that ye shulde not beleue the trueth? To whom Iesus Christ was described before the eyes and amonge you crucifyed.
This only wold I learne of you whether ye receaued the spirite by the dedes of the lawe or by the preaching of the fayth?
Are ye soche fooles, that after ye haue begonne in the sprete, ye nowe ende in the flesshe?
So many thynges ye haue suffred in vayne, yf it be also in vayne.
Moreouer, he that minystreth to you the sprete, and worketh myracles amonge you, doeth he it thorowe the dedes of the lawe, or by preachyng of the fayth?
Euen as Abraham beleued God, Ꟶ it was ascribed to hym for ryghtewesnesse.
Ye knowe therfore, that they which are of fayth, the same are the chyldren of Abraham.
For the scripture seinge afore hande, that God wold iustifye the Hethen thorowe fayth, shewed before hande glad tydynges vnto Abraham sayinge: In the shall all nacyons be blessed.
So then, they which be of fayth, are blessed with faythfull Abraham.
For as many as are of the dedes of the lawe, are subiecte to the curse. For it is written: cursed be euery one that contynueth not in all thinges which are written in the boke of the lawe to fulfyll them.
That no man is iustifyed by the lawe in the syght of God, it is euydent. For the iuste shall lyue by fayth.
The lawe is not of fayth: but the man that fulfylleth the thinges shal lyue in them.
Christ hath deliuered vs from the curse of the lawe, in as moche as he was made accursed for vs: For it is written: cursed is euery one, that hangeth on tree,
that the blessynge of Abraham myght come on the Gentyls thorowe Iesus Christ, that we myght receaue the promes of the sprete thorowe fayth.
Brethren, I speake after the maner of men. Though it be but a mans testament. Yet yf it be alowed, no man despyseth it: or addeth eny thynge thereto.
To Abraham and hys seede were the promyses made. He sayth not in the seedes, as many: but in thy seede, as of one, which is Christ.
Thys I saye, that the lawe which beganne afterwarde, beyonge foure hundred and thyrtye yeares, doeth not disanull the testament, that was comfermed afore of God vnto Christ ward, to make the promes of one effecte.
For yf the inheritaunce come of the lawe, it commeth not nowe of promesse. But God gaue it vnto Abraham by promes.
Wherfore then serueth the lawe? It was added because of transgression (tyll the seed came, to whom the promes was made) and it was ordeyned by angels in the hand of a mediator.
A mediator is not a mediator of one, but God is one.
Is the lawe then agaynst the promes of God? God forbyd. For yf there had bene a lawe geuen which coulde haue geuen lyfe: then no doute ryghtewesnes shulde come by the lawe.
But the scripture concluded all thinges vnder synne, that the promes by the fayth of Iesus Christ shulde be geuen vnto them that beleue.
But before that fayth came, we were kepte vnder the lawe, and were shut vp vnto the fayth which shulde afterwarde be declared.
Wherfore, the lawe was oure scolemaster vnto Christ, that we shulde be iustifyed by fayth.
But after that fayth is come, we are no lenger vnder the scolemaster.
For ye are all chyldren of God, because ye beleue in Christ Iesu.
For all ye that are baptised haue put on Christ.
There is no Iewe, nether Gentyll: there is nether bonde, ner fre: there is nether man, ner woman. For ye are all one in Christ Iesu.
If ye be Christes, then are ye Abrahams seede, and heyres accordynge to the promes.
And I saye, that the heyre (as longe as he is a chylde) differth not from a seruaunt, though he be Lord of all,
but is vnder tuters and gouerners, vntyll the tyme that the father hath appoynted.
Euen so we also, when we were chyldren, were in bondage vnder the ordynaunces of the worlde.
But when the tyme was full come, God sent hys sonne, made of a woman, and made bonde vnto the lawe,
to redeme them which were bonde vnto the lawe: that we (thorowe eleccion) might receaue the inheritaunce that belongeth vnto the naturall sonnes.
Because ye are sonnes, God hathe sent the sprete of hys sonne into oure hertes, cryinge: Abba father.
Wherfore nowe, thou art not a seruaunt: but a sonne. If thou be a sonne, thou arte also an heyre of God, thorowe Christ.
Notwithstandynge, when ye knewe not God, ye dyd seruice vnto them which by nature are no Goddes.
But nowe after that ye haue knowen God (yee rather are knowen of God) how is it that ye tourne agayn vnto the weake and beggarly ordinaunces, wherunto agayne ye desyre afresshe to be in bondage?
Ye obserue dayes, and monethes, and tymes, and yeares.
I am in feare of you, lest I haue bestowed on you laboure in vayne.
Brethren, I besech you, be ye as I am: for I am as ye are. Ye haue not hurt me at all.
Ye knowe how thorowe infirmitie of the flesshe, I preached the Gospell vnto you at the fyrst.
And my temptacyon which was in the flesshe, ye despysed not, nether abhorred: but receaued me as an angell of God: euen as Christ Iesus.
What is then youre felicyte? for I beare you record, that yf it had bene possible ye wolde haue plucked out your awne eyes, and haue geuen them to me.
Am I therfore become your enemye, because I tell you the trueth?
They are gelous ouer you amysse. Yee, they intende to exclude you, that ye shuld be feruent to them ward.
It is good allwayes to be feruent in a good thinge, and not onely whan I am present with you.
My lytell chyldren, of whom I trauayle in byrth agayne, vntill Christ be fasshyoned in you,
I wolde I ware with you now, and coulde chaunge my voyce: for I stande in a doubte of you.
Tell me: ye that desyre to be vnder the lawe, do ye not heare of the lawe?
For it is wrytten, that Abraham had two sonnes the one by a bonde mayde, the other by a fre woman.
Yee, and he which was borne of the bonde woman, was borne after the flesshe: but he which was of the fre man, was borne by promesse.
Which thynges are spoken by an allegorye. For these are two testamentes the one from the mounte Syna, which gendreth vnto bondage, which is Agar.
For mounte Syna is Agar in Arabia, and bordreth vpon the cytie, which is nowe called Ierusalem, and is in bondage with her chyldren.
But Ierusalem, which is aboue, is fre: which is the mother of vs al.
For it is written. Reioyce thou baren, that bearest no chyldren: breake forth and crye, thou the trauaylest not. For the desolat hath many moo chyldren, then she which hathe an husbande.
Brethren, we are after Isaac, the children of promes.
But as then he that was borne after the flesshe, persecuted hym that was borne after the sprete, euen so is it nowe.
Neuerthelesse, what sayth the scripture: put awaye the bonde woman and her sonne. For the sonne of the bonde woman shall not be heyre with the sonne of the fre woman.
So then brethren, we are not chyldren of the bonde woman: but of the fre.
Stande fast therfore in the liberty wherwith Christ hath made vs fre, and wrappe not youre selues agayne in the yoke of bondage.
Beholde, I Paul saye vnto you, that yf ye be circumcised, Christ shall proffyte you nothynge at all.
I testyfye agayne to euery man which is circumcised, that he is bonde to kepe the whole lawe.
Christ is become but in vayne vnto you. As many of you as are iustifyed by the lawe are fallen from grace.
We loke for, and hope in the sprete to be iustifyed thorowe fayth.
For in Iesu Christ, nether is circumcisyon any thynge worth, nether yet vncircumcysion but faith which worketh by loue.
Ye dyd runne well: who was a let vnto you, that ye shulde not beleue the trueth?
Euen the counsell which came not of hym that calleth you.
A lytell leuen doth leuen the whole lompe of dowe.
I haue trust towarde you in the Lorde, that ye shalbe none otherwyse minded. But he that troubleth you, shall beare his iudgement whatsoeuer he be.
Brethren, yf I yet preach circumcisyon, why do I then yet suffre persecucyon? Then is the slaunder of the crosse ceased.
I wolde to God, they were separated from you, which trouble you:
Brethren, ye were called into libertye: only let not youre libertye be an occasion vnto the flesshe: but by loue serue one another.
For all the lawe is fulfylled in one worde, which is this: thou shalt loue thyne neyghboure as thy selfe.
If ye byte and deuoure one another: take hede, lest ye be lykewyse consumed one of another.
I saye: walke in the sprete, and fulfyll not the lust of the flesshe.
For the flesshe lusteth contrary to the sprete, and the sprete contrary to the flesshe. These are contrarye one to the other, so that ye cannot do whatsoeuer ye wolde.
But and yf ye be led of the sprete, then are ye not vnder the lawe.
The dedes of the flesshe are manyfeste, which are these: aduoutery, fornicacion, vnclennes, wantannes,
worshypping of ymages, witchcraft, hatred, variaunce, zele, wrathe, stryfe, sedicyons, sectes,
enuyinge, murther, dronkennes, glottonye, and soche lyke: of the which I tell you before as I haue told you in tyme past, that they which commyt soch thinges shall not be inheritours of the kyngdome of God.
Contrarely, the frute of the sprete is, loue, ioye, peace, longe sufferinge, gentylnes, goodnes, faythfulnes,
mekenes, temperauncye. Agaynst suche there is no lawe.
They trulye that are Christes, haue crucifyed the flesshe with the affeccions and lustes.
If we lyue in the sprete, let vs walke in the sprete.
Let vs not be desirous of vayne glorye, prouokinge one another, enuying one another.
Brethren, if a man also be taken in eny faute, ye which are spirituall, helpe to amende hym in the sprete of meaknes: consyderinge thy selfe, lest thou also be tempted.
Beare ye one anothers burthen, and so fulfyll the lawe of Christ.
For yf any man seme to him selfe that he is somwhat, when in dede he is nothinge, the same, deceaueth his awne mynd.
Let euery man proue his awne worke, and then shall he haue reioysinge onelye in hys awne selfe, Ꟶ not in another.
For euery man shall beare his awne burthen.
Let hym that is taught in the worde, minister vnto him that teacheth him in all good thinges.
Be not deceaued, God is not mocked. For whatsoeuer a man soweth, that shall he also reape.
For he that soweth in his flesshe, shall of the flesshe reape corrupcyon. But he that soweth in the sprete, shall of the sprete reape lyfe euerlastynge.
Let vs not be wery of well doinge. For when the tyme is come, we shall reape without werynesse.
Whyle we haue therfore tyme, lett vs do good vnto all men, and specially vnto them which are of the housholde of fayth.
Ye se howe large a letter I haue wrytten vnto you with myne awne hande.
As many as desire with vtwarde apperaunce to please carnally, the same constrayne you to be circumcised, onely lest they shulde suffre persecutyon for the crosse of Christ.
For they them selues which are circumcysed, kepe not the lawe, but desyre to haue you circumcysed, that they myght reioyce in youre flesshe.
God forbyd that I shulde reioyce, but in the crosse of oure Lorde Iesu Christ, wherby the worlde is crucifyed vnto me, Ꟶ I vnto the worlde.
For in Christ Iesu nether circumcysion auayleth eny thynge at all: nor vncircumcision: but a newe creature.
And as many as walke accordynge to thys rule, peace be on them and mercy, Ꟶ vpon Israell, that pertayneth to God.
From hence forth, let no man put me to busynes. For I beare in my body the markes of the Lorde Iesu.
Brethren, the grace of oure Lorde Iesu Christ be with youre sprete: Amen.
Paul an Apostle of Iesus Christ, by the wyll of God. To the saynctes which are at Ephesus, and to them which beleue on Iesus Christ
Grace be with you, Ꟶ peace from God our father, and from the Lorde Iesus Christ.
Blessed be God the father of oure Lorde Iesus Christ, which hath blessed vs with all maner of spirituall blessyng in heuenly thinges by Christ
accordinge as he had chosen vs in hym, before the foundacions of the worlde were layde, that we shulde be holy, and without blame before hym, thorowe loue.
Which ordeyned vs before thorowe Iesus Christ to be heyres vnto hym selfe, accordinge to the good pleasure of hys wyll,
to the prayse of the glory of hys grace, wherwith he hath made vs accepted thorowe the beloued.
By whome we haue redempcyon thorowe his bloude, euen the forgeuenes of synnes, accordinge to the ryches of grace:
wherof he hath minystred vnto vs aboundantlye in all wisdome and prudence.
And hath opened vnto vs the mystery of hys wyll, accordynge to hys good pleasure, which he had purposed in hym selfe,
to haue it declared whan the tyme was full come, that he myght set vp all thynges perfectly by Christ (both the thynges which are in heuen, and the thynges which are in earth)
euen by hym by whom we are made heyres, and were therto predestinate accordynge to the purpose of hym by whose power all thynges are wrought accordinge to the purpose of hys awne wyll:
that we (which before beleued in Christ) shuld be vnto the prayse of hys glory.
In whom also we beleue, for asmoche as we haue hearde the worde of trueth, euen the Gospell of youre saluacyon: wherin, whan ye had beleued ye were sealed with the holy sprete of promes
which is the ernest of oure inheritaunce, for the recouerynge of the purchassed possessyon, vnto the prayse of hys glory.
Wherfore I also (after that I hearde of the fayth, which ye haue in the Lorde Iesu, Ꟶ loue vnto all the saynctes)
cease not to geue thankes for you, makynge mencyon of you in my prayers:
that the God of oure Lorde Iesus Chryst, the father of glory, maye geue vnto you the sprete of wysdome and reuelacyon, by the knowledge of him selfe,
and lyghten the eyes of youre myndes, that ye maye knowe what the hope is, where vnto he hath called you, and howe riche the glorye is of his inheritaunce vpon the saynctes,
and what is the excedinge greatnes of his power to vs warde, which beleue accordynge to the workynge of that his mighty power,
which he wrought in Christ, when he raysed him from the deed, and set him on his ryght hande in heauenly thinges,
aboue all rule, Ꟶ power, Ꟶ myght and dominion, and aboue euery name that is named, not in this worlde onely, but also in the worlde to come:
and hath put all thynges vnder his fete, and hath made him aboue all thinges the heed of the congregacyon,
which is his body and the fulnes of him, that fylleth all in all.
And you hath he quickened where as ye were deed in treaspasses and synnes,
in the which in tyme passed ye walked, accordyng to the course of this worlde, euen after the gouerner that ruleth in the ayer, the sprete that nowe worketh in the chyldren of vnbelefe
amonge whom we all had oure conuersacyon also in tyme past, in the lustes of oure flesshe, and fulfylled the wyll of the flesshe and of the mynde: and were by nature the chyldren of wrath, euen as well as other.
But God which is riche in mercy (for his greate loue wher with he loued vs,
euen when we were deed by synnes) quyckened vs together in Christ (by grace are ye saued)
and raysed vs vp together with hym and made vs sytte together with him amonge them of heauen in Christ Iesu.
That in tymes to come he myght shewe the exceadynge, ryches of hys grace, in kyndnes to vs warde thorowe Chryst Iesu.
For by grace are ye made safe thorow fayth, and that not of youre selues. It is the gyfte of God,
and commeth not of workes, lest eny man shulde boast him selfe
For we are his worckmanshyppe, created in Chryst Iesu vnto good workes, whiche God ordeyned, that we shulde walke in them.
Wherfore, remember that ye beynge in tyme passed gentyls in the flesshe, were called vncircumcisyon from that whych is called circumcisyon in the flesshe, which circumcision is made by handes:
remember (I saye) that at that tyme ye were without Chryst, beynge aliauntes from the comen welth of Israel, and straungers from the testamentes of the promes hauynge no hope, and beynge with out God in this worlde.
But nowe by the meanes of Christ Iesu, ye which somtyme were farre of, are made nye by the bloude of Chryst.
For he is oure peace, which hath made of both one, and hath broken downe the wall that was a stoppe betwene vs,
and hath also put awaye thorowe his flesshe, the cause of hatred, euen the lawe of commaundementes contayned in the lawe wrytten, for to make of twayne one newe man in hym selfe, so makynge peace,
and to reconcyle both vnto God in one body thorowe the crosse, Ꟶ slewe hatred therby:
and came, and preached peace to you which were a farre of, and to them that were nye.
For thorowe hym we both haue an intraunce, in one sprete vnto the father.
Now therfore, ye are not straungers, and foreyners: but citesyns with the sayntes Ꟶ of the housholde of God:
and are buylt vpon the foundacyon of the Apostles and Prophetes, Iesus Chryst him selfe beynge the heed corner stone,
in whom what buyldynge soeuer is coupled together, it groweth vnto an holy temple in the Lorde,
in whom ye also are buylt together, to be an habitacion of God thorowe the ghost.
For this cause, I Paul am a presoner of Iesus Chryst for you Hethen:
If ye haue hearde of the ministracyon of the grace of God which is geuen me to you warde.
For by reuelacion shewed he the mistery vnto me, as I wrote afore in feawe wordes
wherby when ye reade, ye maye vnderstand my knowledge in the mistery of Christ,
which mistery in tymes passed was not opened vnto the sonnes of men, as it is nowe declared vnto hys holy Apostles and Prophetes by the sprete:
that the Gentyls shulde be inheritours also, and of the same body, and partetakers of hys promes in Christ, by the meanes of the Gospell,
wherof I am made a mynyster, accordinge to the gyfte of the grace of God which is geuen vnto me after the workynge of hys power.
Unto me the least of all saynctes is this grace geuen, that I shulde preache amonge the Gentyls the vnsearcheable riches of Christ
and to make all men se, what the felyshyppe of the mystery is, which from the begynnynge of the worlde hath bene hyd in God which made all thinges thorow Iesus Christ:
to the intent, that nowe vnto the rulers and powers in heauenly thinges, myght be knowen by the congregacion, the manyfolde wysdome of God,
accordynge to the eternall purpose, which he wrought in Christ Iesu oure Lord,
by whom we haue boldnesse and entraunce with the confidence which is by the fayth of hym.
Wherfore I desyre, that ye faynt not because of my tribulacions that I suffre for youre sakes: which is youre prayse.
For this cause I bowe my knees vnto the father of oure Lorde Iesus Christ,
which is father ouer all that is called father in heauen and in erth,
that he wolde graunt you accordynge to the ryches of hys glorye, that ye maye be strengthed with might by his sprete in the inner man,
that Christ maye dwell in youre hertes by fayth, that ye beynge roted and grounded in loue,
myght be able to comprehende with all saynctes, what is the bredth and length, deepth and heygth:
Ꟶ to knowe the excellent loue of the knowledge of Christ that ye myght be fulfylled with all fulnes, which commeth of God.
Unto hym that is able to do exceadynge aboundantly aboue all that we aske or thynke accordynge to the power that worketh in in vs,
be prayse in the congregacyon by Christ Iesus, thorowe out all ages worlde without ende. Amen.
I therfore (which am a presonner of the Lordes) exhorte you, that ye walke worthy of the vocacyon wherwith ye are called,
with all lowlynes and mekenesse, with humblenes of mynde, forbearynge one another thorowe loue,
and be diligent to kepe the vnitie of the sprete thorowe the bonde of peace,
beynge one body, and one sprete, euen as ye are called in one hope of your callinge.
One Lorde, one fayth, one baptyme
one God and father of all, which is aboue all and thorowe all, and in you all.
Unto euery one of vs is geuen grace, accordynge to the measure of the gyfte of Chryst.
Wherfore he sayth: whan he went vp an hye, he ledde captiuitye captyue, and gaue gyftes vnto men.
That he ascended: what meaneth it? but that he also descended fyrst into the lowest partes of the erth?
He that descended, is euen the same also that ascended vp, aboue all heauens, to fulfyll all thynges.
And the very same made some Apostles, some Prophetes, some Euangelistes, some Shepherdes and Teachers:
to the edifyenge of the saynctes, to the worke and ministracyon, euen to the edifyinge of the body of Chryst,
tyll we all come to the vnitye of fayth, and knowledge of the sonne of God, vnto a perfecte man, vnto the measure of the full perfecte age of Chryst
That we hence forth shulde be nomore chyldren, wauerynge Ꟶ caryed aboute with euery wynde of doctrine, by the wylynes of men, thorowe craftynes, wherby they laye a wayte for vs to deceaue vs.
But let vs folowe the trueth in loue, and in all thynges growe in hym, which is the heed, euen Christ,
in whom yf all the body be coupled and knet together thorow out euery ioynt wherwith one ministreth to another (accordynge to the operacyon as euery parte hath hys measure) he increaseth the body, vnto the edifyinge of it selfe thorowe loue.
This I saye therfore, and testifye thorowe the Lorde, that ye hence forth walke not, as other Gentyls walke, in vanite of theyr minde,
whyle they are blinded in their vnderstandynge, beynge farre from a godly lyfe, by the meanes of the ignorancy that is in them, and because of the blyndnes of their hertes:
which beynge past repentaunce, haue geuen them selues ouer vnto wantannes, to worke all manner of vnclennes, euen with gredines.
But ye haue not so learned Christ.
If so be that ye haue hearde of him, and haue bene taught in him, as the trueth is in Iesu:
(as concernynge the conuersacyon in tyme past) to laye from you that olde man, which is corrupte, accordynge to the deceauable lustes.
To be renued also in the sprete of youre mynde,
and to put on that newe man, which after God is shapen in ryghte wesnes and true holynes.
Wherfore, put awaye lyinge, Ꟶ speake euery man truth vnto his neyghboure, for as moche as we are members one of another.
Be angrye, and synne not: let not the sunne go doune vpon youre wrath,
nether geue place vnto the backbyter.
Let hym that stole, steale nomore but let him rather laboure wt his handes the thynge which is good, that he maye geue vnto him that nedeth.
Let no fylthy communicacion procede out of youre mouth: but that which is good to edifye wt all, as oft as nede is that it maye minister grace vnto the hearers.
And greue not ye the holy sprete of God by whom ye are sealed vnto the daye of redempcyon.
Let all bitternes Ꟶ fearsnes Ꟶ wrath Ꟶ rorynge Ꟶ cursyd speakynge, be put awaye from you, with all maliciousnes.
Be ye courteouse one to another, mercyfull, forgeuynge one another, euen as God for Christes sake hath forgeuen you.
Be ye therfore folowers of God as deare chyldren,
and walke ye in loue euen as Christ loued vs, and gaue him selfe for vs an offerynge and a sacrifyce of a swete sauer to God
As for fornicacyon and all vnclennes, or coueteousnes let it not be once uamed amonge you, as it be commeth saynctes:
or fylthines or folysshe talkynge, or iestinge, which are not comly: but rather geuynge of thankes.
For thys ye knowe that no whormonger, ether vncleane person, or coueteous person, (which is a worshypper of ymages) hath eny inheritaunce in the kyngdome of Chryst and of God.
Let no man deceaue you with vayne wordes. For because of soche thynges commeth the wrath of God, vpon the chyldren of disobedience.
Be not ye therfore companyons of them.
Ye were somtyme darcknes, but nowe are ye lyght in the Lorde. Walke as children of lyght
(For the frute of the sprete consysteth in all goodnes, and ryghtewesnes and trueth.)
Searchynge what is acceptable vnto the Lorde.
And haue no fellyshyppe with the vnfrutefull workes of darcknes but rather rebuke them.
For it is shame euen to name those thynges which are done of them in secrete:
but all thynges, when they are brought forthe by the lyght, are manifeste. For whatsoeuer is manifeste, that same is lyght.
Wherfore he sayth: awake thou that slepest, and stonde vp from deeth, and Chryst shall geue the lyght.
Take hede therfore howe ye walke circumspectly: not as vnwyse, but as wyse men.
Wynnynge occasyon, because the dayes are euyll.
Wherfore, be ye not vnwyse, but vnderstande what the wyll of the Lorde is,
and be not droncke with wyne wherin is excesse: but be fylled with the sprete,
speakynge vnto youre selues in psalmes and hymnes, and spretuall songes, synginge and makyng melodie to the Lorde in youre hertes,
gyuynge thankes allwayes for all thynges, vnto God the father in the name of oure Lorde Iesus Chryst,
submittynge youre selues one to another in the feare of God.
Ye wemen, submit youre selues vnto youre awne husbandes, as vnto the Lorde.
For the husbande is the wyues heed, euen as Chryst is the heed of the congregacyon, and the same is he that ministreth saluacion vnto the body.
Therfore, as the congregacyon is in subieccyon to Chryst, lykewyse let the wyues also be in subieccyon to theyr husbandes in all thinges.
Ye husbandes, loue youre wyues, euen as Chryst also loued the congregacyon, and gaue hym selfe for it,
to sanctifye it, and clensed it in the fountayne of water thorow the worde,
to make it vnto him selfe a gloryous congregacyon, without spot or wrynckle, or eny soche thynge: but that it shulde be holy, and without blame.
So ought men to loue theyr wyues, as their awne bodyes. He that loueth hys wyfe, loueth hym selfe.
For no man euer yet hated hys awne flesshe: but noryssheth and cherissheth it, euen as the Lorde doth the congregacyon.
For we are members of his body, of his flesshe, and of hys bones.
For thys cause shall a man leaue father and mother, Ꟶ shall be ioyned vnto his wyfe, and of two shalbe made one flesshe.
Thys is a greate secrete, but I speake of Chryst and of the congregacyon.
Neuerthelesse, do ye so, that euery one loue hys wyfe euen as hym selfe, and let the wyfe reuerence her husbande.
Chyldren, obey youre fathers and mothers in the Lorde: for that is ryght
Honoure thy father and mother, (the same is the fyrst commaundement in the promes)
that thou mayst prospere, and lyue longe on the erth.
Ye fathers moue not youre chyldren to wrath: but brynge them vp thorowe the doctryne and informacyon of the Lorde.
Ye seruauntes, obeye them that are youre bodely masters, with feare Ꟶ tremblynge, euen with the synglenes of youre herte, as vnto Christ:
not doynge seruice vnto the eye, as they that go about to please men: but as the seruauntes of Christ, doynge the wyll of God from the herte
with good wyll, seruynge the Lorde, and not men.
Knowynge thys, that whatsoeuer good thynge eny man doeth, the same shall he receaue agayne of God, whether he be bonde or fre.
And ye masters, do euen the same thynges vnto them puttinge awaye threatenynges: Knowynge, that youre master also is in heauen, nether is ther eny respecte of person with hym.
Finally my brethren, be stronge thorowe the Lorde and thorowe the power of his myght.
Put on all the armoure of God, that ye maye stande agaynst the assautes of the deuyll.
For we wrestle not agaynst bloude and flesshe: but agaynst rule, agaynst power, agaynst worldy rulers, euen gouerners of the darcknes of thys worlde, agaynst spretuall craftynes in heauenly thynges.
Wherfore take vnto you the whole armoure of God, that ye maye be able to resyste in the euyll daye, and stande perfecte in all thinges.
Stande therfore, and youre loynes gyrd with the trueth, hauynge on the brest plate of ryghtewesnes,
Ꟶ hauynge shoes on youre fete, that ye maye be prepared for the Gospell of peace.
Aboue all, take to you the shylde of fayth, wherwith ye maye quenche all the fyrie dartes of the wycked.
And take the helmet of saluacyon, and the swearde of the sprete, which is the worde of God.
And praye all wayes with all maner of prayer and supplicacyon in the sprete: and watch ther vnto with all instance and supplycacyon for all saynctes
and for me, that vtteraunce maye be geuen vnto me that I maye open my mouth frely, to vtter the secretes of my Gospell
(wherof I am messenger in bondes) that therin I maye speake frely, as I ought to speake.
But that ye maye also knowe what condicyon I am in, and what I do, Tichicus the deare brother and faythfull mynyster in the Lorde, shall shewe you of all thynges,
whom I haue sent vnto you for the same purpose, that ye myght knowe what case we stande in, and that he myght comforte youre hertes.
Peace be vnto the brethren and loue with fayth, from God the father and from the Lorde Iesus Chryst.
Grace be with all them which loue oure Lorde Iesus Chryst syncerely. Amen.
Paul and Tymothe the seruauntes of Iesu Chryst. To all the saynctes in Chryst Iesu, which are at Philippos with the Bisshops and Deacons.
Grace be vnto you and peace from God oure father, and from the Lorde Iesus Chryst.
I thanke my God with all remembraunce of you
all wayes in all my prayers for you, and praye with gladnes:
because ye are come into the fellowshyppe of the Gospell from the fyrst daye vnto nowe
and am suerly certyfyed of thys, that he, which hath begonne a good worke in you, shall perfourme it vntyll the daye of Iesus Chryst,
as it becommeth me, so iudge I of you all, because I haue you in my herte: for asmoche as ye all are companyons of grace with me, euen in my bondes, and in the defendynge and stablisshynge of the Gospell.
For God is my recorde, howe greatly I longe after you all, from the very herte rote in Iesus Chryst.
And thys I praye, that youre loue maye increase yet more and more in knowledge, and in all vnderstandynge,
that ye maye accepte the thynges that are most excellent, that ye maye be pure, and soche, as offende no man vntyll the daye of Christ:
beynge fylled with the frute of ryghtewesnes, which cometh by Iesus Christ vnto the glory and prayse of God.
I wolde ye shulde vnderstonde (brethren) that the thynges which happened vnto me, chaunced vnto the greate furtheraunce of the Gospell:
So that my bandes in Christ, are manifeste thorowe out all the iudgement hall and in all other places:
In so moche that many of the brethren in the Lorde beynge encoraged thorowe my bandes, dare more boldly speake the worde without feare.
Some preache Chryst of enuie and stryfe, and some of good wyll,
The one parte preache Chryst of stryfe and not syncerely, supposynge to adde more aduersytie to my bandes.
Agayne the other parte preache of loue, because they knowe, that I am set to defende the Gospell.
What then? So that Chryst be preached anye maner of waye, whether it be by occasyon, or of true meaninge, I am glad therof, ye and wyll be glad.
For I knowe, that this shall chaunce to my saluacyon, thorowe youre prayer and ministrynge of the sprete of Iesu Chryst
accordinge to my expectacion, and hope, that in nothinge I shalbe ashamed: but that wyth all boldnesse, (as all wayes euen so nowe also) Christ shall be magnifyed in my body, whether it be thorowe lyfe, or thorowe deeth.
For Christ is to me lyfe, and deeth is to me auauntage.
If it chaunce me to lyue in the flesshe, that thinge is to me frutefull for the worcke, and what I shall chose I wote not.
For I am constrayned of these two thinges. I desyre to be loosed, Ꟶ to be wt Christ which is moche Ꟶ far better.
Neuerthelesse, to abyde in the flesshe is more nedfull for you,
And thys am I sure of, that I shall abyde, and continue with you all, for youre furtheraunce and ioye of youre fayth,
that youre reioysinge maye be the more aboundant thorowe Iesus Christ in me, by my commynge to you agayne.
Onely let youre conuersacyon be, as it be commeth the Gospell of Christ: that whether I come Ꟶ se you, or els be absent, I maye yet heare of youre condicyon, that ye contynue in one sprete, and in one soule, labourynge as we do, to mayntayne the fayth of the Gospell,
and in nothinge fearynge youre aduersaryes, which is to them a cause of perdicyon, but to you of saluacyon, Ꟶ that of God:
for vnto you it is geuen for Chryst, that not onely ye shulde beleue on hym: but also that ye shulde suffre for hys sake,
hauynge euen soche a fyght, as ye sawe in me, and nowe heare of me.
If ther be therfore eny consolacyon in Christ, yf ther be eny comforte of loue, yf ther by eny fellishyppe of the sprete, yf ther be eny compassion and mercy:
full fyll ye my ioye, that ye be lyke mynded, hauinge one loue, beynge of one accorde, and of one mynde,
that nothinge be done thorowe stryfe or of vayne glory, but in mekenes of mynde, let euery man esteme another better then hym selfe.
Loke not ye euery man on hys awne thinges, but euery man on the thinges that are other mens.
Let the same mynde be in you, that was also in Christ Iesu:
which whan he was in the shape of God, thought it no robbery to be equall with God
Neuerthelesse he made hym selfe of no reputacion, takynge on hym the shape of a seruaunte, and became lyke vnto men,
and was founde in his apparell as a man. He humbled him selfe, and became obedient vnto the deeth, euen the deeth of the crosse.
Wherfore, God also hath exalted him on hye, and geuen him a name which is aboue all names:
that in the name of Iesus euery knee shulde bowe, both of thinges in heauen and thynges in erth and thynges vnder the erth,
and that all tonges shulde confesse, that Iesus Christ is the Lorde, vnto the prayse of God the father.
Wherfore (my dearly beloued) as ye haue alwayes obeyed, not when I was present onely, but nowe moche more in myne absence, euen so worcke out youre awne saluacion with feare and tremblyng.
For it is God, which worketh in you, both the wyll and also the dede, euen of good wyll.
Do all thynge with out murmuringe, Ꟶ dysputynge,
that ye maye be soche as no man came complayne on: and vnfayned sonnes of God without rebuke, in the myddes of a croked and peruerse nacyon: amonge whom se that ye shyne as lyghtes in the worlde,
holdynge faste the worde of lyfe, that I maye reioyce in the daye of Chryst, howe that I haue not runne in vayne, nether haue laboured in vayne.
Yee and though I be offered vp vpon the offeringe Ꟶ sacrifyce of youre fayth: I reioyce and reioyce with you all.
For the same cause also do ye reioyce, and reioyce with me.
I trust in the Lorde Iesus, for to sende Timotheus shortly vnto you, that I also maye be of good comforte, when I knowe what case ye stande in.
For I haue no man that is so lyke mynded to me, which with so pure affeccyon wyll care for youre matters.
For all other seke theyr awne, and not the thynges which are Iesus Christes.
ye knowe the proffe of hym, howe that as a sonne with the father, so hath he with me bestowed hys seruice in the Gospell.
Hym therfore I hope to sende, assone as I knowe howe it wyll go with me.
I trust in the Lord, that I also my selfe shall come shortly.
But I supposed it necessary to sende brother Epaphroditus vnto you, my companion in laboure and felowe souldier, youre Apostell, which also ministreth vnto me at nede.
For he longed after you all, and was full of heuynes, because that ye had hearde saye, that he had bene sycke.
And no doute he was sicke, in somoch that he was nye vnto deeth. But God had mercy on him: and not on him onely, but on me also, lest I shulde haue sorowe vpon sorowe.
I sent hym therfore the more diligently: that when ye se hym, ye maye reioyce agayne, and that I maye be the lesse sorowfull.
Receaue him therfore in the Lorde with all gladnes, and make moche of soche:
because that for the worke of Chryst he went so farre, that he was nye vnto deeth, and regarded not hys lyfe: to fullfyll that, which was lackynge on youre parte to warde me.
Moreouer, (brethren) reioyce ye in the Lorde. It greueth me not to wryte one thynge often to you. For to you it is a sure thynge.
Beware of dogges, beware of euyll workers. Beware of dissensyon.
For we are circumcisyon, which serue God in the sprete, and reioyce in Chryst Iesu, and haue no confydence in the flesshe:
though I myght also reioyce in the flesshe. If eny other man thynketh that he hath wherof he might trust in the flesshe: I haue more:
beynge circumcysed the eyght daye, of the kynred of Israel, of the trybe of Beniamin an Ebrue borne of the Ebrues as concernynge the lawe, a Pharisaye:
as concernynge feruentnes, I persecuted the congregacyon, as touchynge the ryghtewesnes which is in the lawe, I was vnrebukable.
But the thynges that were vauntage vnto me, those I counted losse for Chrystes sake.
ye I thynke all thynges but losse for the excellencye of the knowledge of Chryst Iesu my Lorde. For whom I haue counted all thynge losse, and do iudge them but vyle, that I maye wynne Chryst,
and be founde in him not hauynge myne awne ryghtewesnes of the lawe: but that which is thorow the fayth of Chryst: euen the ryghtewesnes which commeth of God thorowe fayth:
that I maye knowe hym and the vertue of hys resurrecyon, and the fellowshyppe of hys passyons, whyle I am conformable vnto hys (deeth)
yf by eny meanes I myght attayne vnto the resurreccyon of the deed.
Not that I haue attayned vnto it all ready, or that I am all ready perfecte: but I folowe, yf that I maye comprehende that, wherin I am comprehended of Chryst Iesu.
Brethren, I counte not my selfe that I haue gotten it as yet, but this one thynge I saye: I forget those thinges which are behinde, Ꟶ endeuoure my selfe vnto those thinges which are before,
and (accordinge to the marke apoynted) I preace to the rewarde of the hye callynge of God thorowe Chryst Iesu.
Let vs therfore as many as be perfect, be thus wyse mynded, and yf ye be other wyse mynded, God shall open the same also vnto you.
Neuerthelesse vnto that which we haue attayned vnto, lett vs proceade by one rule, that we maye be of one accorde.
Brethren, be folowers together of me, and loke on them which walke euen so, as ye haue vs for an ensample.
For many walke (of whom I haue tolde you often and nowe tell you wepynge) that they are the enemies of the crosse of Christ,
whose ende is damnacion, whose God is theyr belly and glory to theyr shame, which are worldely mynded.
But oure conuersacyon is in heauen, from whence we loke for the saueoure, euen the Lorde Iesus Chryst,
which shall chaunge oure vyle bodie, that he maye make it lyke vnto hys glorious body, accordynge to the workynge, wherby he is able also to subdue all thynges vnto him selfe.
Therfore my brethren (dearly beloued and longed for) my ioye and crowne, so continue in the Lorde ye beloued.
I praye Euodias, and beseche Sintiches, that they be of one accorde in the Lord.
Yee and I beseche the faythfull yockefelowe, helpe the wemen which laboured with me in the Gospell, and with Clement also, and with other my laboure felowes whose names are in the boke of lyfe.
Reioyce in the Lord alwaye and agayne I saye reioyce.
Let youre softenes be knowen vnto all men: The Lorde is euen at hande.
Be carefull for nothynge: but in all prayer and supplicacyon let youre peticyons be manifeste vnto God with geuynge of thankes.
And the peace of God (which passeth all vnderstandynge) kepe youre hertes and myndes thorowe Christ Iesu.
Furthermore, brethren, whatsoeuer thinges are true, whatsoeuer thynges are honeste, whatsoeuer thinges are iust, whatsoeuer thynges are pure, whatsoeuer thynges are conuenient, whatsoeuer thinges are of honeste reporte: Yf ther be eny vertue, yf ther be eny prayse,
those same haue ye in youre mynde, which ye haue bothe learned Ꟶ receaued, hearde also and sene in me those thinges do, and the God of peace shalbe with you.
I reioyce in the Lord greatly, that nowe at the last youre care is reuyued agayne for me in that wherin ye were also carefull, but ye lacked oportunite.
I speake not because of necessite. For I haue learned in whatsoeuer estate I am, therwith to be content.
I knowe howe to be lowe and I knowe howe to excede. Euery where and in all thinges I am instructed, both to be full and to be hongrye, both to haue plenty and to suffre nede.
I can do all thinges thorowe Christ which strengtheneth me.
Not withstandynge ye haue well done, that ye bare parte wt me in my tribulacion.
Ye of Philippos knowe also that in the begynnynge of the Gospell, when I departed from Macedonia, no congregacyon bare parte with me, as concernynge geuynge Ꟶ receauinge, but ye onely.
For when I was in Thessalonica, ye sent once and afterward agayne vnto my necessite:
not that I desire gyftes: but I desyre aboundant frute on youre parte.
Neuertheles I receaued all, and haue plentie. I was euen fylled after that I receaued of Epaphroditus the thinges, which were sent from you, an odoure of a swete smell a sacrifyce accepted and pleasaunt to God.
My God shall supplye all youre nede thorow his gloryous riches by Iesu Christ.
Unto God Ꟶ oure father be prayse for euermore. Amen.
Salute all the saynctes in Christ Iesu. The brethren which are with me, greate you.
All the saynctes salute you, most of all they which are of the emperours housholde.
The grace of oure Lord Iesu Christ be with you all. Amen.
Paul an Apostle of Iesu Chryst by the wyll of God, and brother Timotheus.
To the saynctes which are at Colossa, and brethren that beleue in Chryst. Grace be vnto you and peace from God oure father, Ꟶ from the Lorde Iesu Christ.
We geue thankes to God the father of oure Lorde Iesus Christ alwayes for you in oure prayers.
For we haue hearde of your fayth in Christ Iesu, and of the loue which ye beare to all saynctes,
for the hopes sake which is layd vp in store for you in heauen, of which hope, ye herde before by the true worde of the Gospell,
which is come vnto you: euen as it, is frutefull as it is also amonge you, from the daye in the which ye hearde of it, and had experience in the grace of God thorowe the trueth,
as ye learned of Epaphra oure deare felowe seruaunt, which is for you a faythfull minister of Chryst,
which also declared vnto vs youre loue which ye haue in the sprete.
For this cause we also, sence that daye we herde of it, haue not ceasyd to praye for you, and to desyre, that ye myght be fulfylled with the knowledge of hys wyll, in all wysdome and spretuall vnderstandynge,
that ye myght walke worthy of the Lorde that in all thinges ye maye please beynge frutefull in all good workes, and encreasynge in the knowledge of God,
strengthed with all myght, thorowe hys glorious power, vnto all pacience and longe sufferynge with ioyfulnes
geuynge thankes vnto the father, which hath made vs mete to be partakers of the inheritaunce of saynctes in lyght,
Which hath delyuered vs from the power of derknes, and hath translated vs into the kyngdome of hys dere sone
by whom we haue redempcion thorowe his bloude euen the forgeuenes of sinnes
which is the ymage of the inuisyble God, fyrst begotten of all creatures.
For by him were all thynges created, that are in heuen, and that are in erth: visyble and inuisyble, whether they be maieste or lorde shyppe, ether rule or power. All thynges were creatyd by hym and for hym,
Ꟶ he is before all thynges, and by him all thynges haue theyr beynge.
And he is the heed of the body, euen of the congregacyon: he is the begynnynge and fyrst begotten of the deed, that in all thynges he myght haue the preeminence.
For it pleased the father, that in him shulde all fulnes dwell,
and by him to reconcyle all thinge vnto him selfe, and to set at peace by hym thorowe the bloude of hys crosse, both thynges in heauen and thinges in erth.
And you which were somtyme farre of and enemyes, because youre myndes were set in euyll worckes hath he nowe yet reconcyled
in the body of hys flesshe thorowe deeth, to make you holy, and vnblameable, Ꟶ without faut in hys awne syght,
yf ye contynue grounded and stablysshed in the fayth, and be not moued awaye from the hope of the Gospell, wherof ye haue herde, howe that it is preached amonge all creatures which are vnder heauen, wherof I Paul am made a mynyster.
Nowe ioye I in my sufferinges for you and fulfyll that which is behynde of the passyons of Christ in my flesshe, for hys bodies sake, which is the congregacyon:
wherof I am made a mynister, accordynge to the ordinaunce of God, which ordinaunce was geuen me vnto you warde to fullfyll the worde of God,
that mistery which hath bene hyd sence the worlde beganne, and sence the begynnynge of generacyons: but nowe is opened to his saynctes,
to whom God wolde make knowen what the gloryous ryches of thys mystery is amonge the Gentyls, which ryches is Chryst in you, the hope of glory,
whom we preache, warnynge all men, and teachynge all men in all wysdome, to make all men parfecte in Christ Iesu.
Wherin I also laboure and stryue, euen as farforth as his strength worketh in me myghtely.
For I wolde that ye knewe howe greate care that I haue for you and for them that are at Laodicia, and for as many as haue not sene my parson in the flessh,
that theyr hertes myght be comforted whan they are knet together in loue, and in all ryches of full vnderstandynge, for to knowe the mistery of God the father, and of Chryst,
in whom are hyd all the treasures of wysdome and knowledge.
Thys I saye, lest eny man shulde begyle you wt entysynge wordes.
For though I be absent in the flesshe, yet am I with you in the sprete, ioyinge and beholdynge youre order, and youre sted fast fayth in Chryst
As ye haue therfore receaued Christ Iesu the Lorde euen so walke ye in hym,
so that ye be rotyd and buylte in hym, and stablysshed thorow fayth, as ye haue learned: and therin be plenteous with geuynge thankes.
Beware, lest eny man spoyle you thorowe philosophy and disceatfull vanitie, after the tradicyon of men, and after the ordinaunces of the worlde, Ꟶ not after Christ.
For in hym dwelleth all the fulnes of the God heed bodely,
and ye are complete in him: which is the heed of all rule and power,
by whom also ye are circumcised with circumcisyon which is done with out handes, for asmoche as ye haue put of the synfull body of the flesshe thorowe the circumcisyon that is in Christ,
in that ye are buried with hym thorowe bapti me, in whom ye are also rysen agayne thorowe fayth, that is wrought by the operacyon of God which raysed him from deeth.
And ye whan ye weare deed thorowe synne and thorowe the vncircumcisyon of youre flesshe, hath he quyckned with him, and hath forgeuen vs all oure trespaces
and hath put out the hande wrytynge that was agaynst vs, contayned in the lawe written: and that hath he taken out of the waye, and hath fastened it to hys crosse,
and hath spoyled rule and power, and hath made a shewe of them openly, and hath triumphed ouer them in his awne person.
Let no man therfore trouble youre consience aboute meate and dryncke or for a pece of an holy daye, or of the newe mone, or of the Sabboth dayes,
which are shaddowes of thinges to come: but the body is in Chryst.
Let no man make you shote at a wronge marke, by the humblenes and holynes of angels, in the thynges which he neuer sawe, beynge causelesse puft vp with his flesshly mynde,
Ꟶ holdeth not the heed, wherof all the body by ioyntes and couples receaueth norisshment Ꟶ is knet together, and encreaseth with the increasynge that commeth of God.
Wherfore, yf ye be deed with Chryst from the ordinaunces of the worlde, why as though ye yet lyued in the worlde, are ye led with tradicions?
Touch not, tast not, handell not:
which all perisshe thorowe the very abuse: after the commaundmentes and doctrynes of men:
which thynges out wardly haue the similitude of wysdome by supersticion and humblenes of mynde, and by hurtynge of the body, and in that they do the flesshe no worshyppe vnto the nede therof.
If ye be then rysen agayne with Chryst, seke those thynges which are aboue, where Chryst sytteth on the ryght hande of God.
Set youre affeccyon on heauenly thynges, and not on erthye thynges.
For ye are deed, and youre lyfe is hyd with Chryst in God.
Whensoeuer Chryst (which is oure lyfe) shall shewe hym selfe, then shall ye also appeare with hym in glory.
Mortifye therfore youre erthy membres: fornicacyon, vnclennes, vnnaturall lust, euyll concupiscence, and coueteousnes, which is worshyppynge of ydoles:
for which thynges sake the wrath of God vseth to come on the disobedyent chyldren
amonge whom ye walked somtyme, when ye lyued in them.
But nowe put ye also awaye from you all soch thinges: wrath, fearnes, maliciousnes, cursed speakynge, fylthy communicacyon out of your mouth.
Lye not one to another, seing that ye haue put of the olde man with hys workes,
and haue put on the newe man which is renued into the knowledge Ꟶ ymage of him that made hym,
where is nether Gentyle nor Iewe, circumcisyon nor vncircumcisyon, Barbarous or Sythian, bonde or fre: but Christ is all in all thinges.
Therfore as electe of God, holy Ꟶ beloued, put on tender mercye, kyndnes, humblenes of mynde, mekenes, longe suffrynge,
for bearynge one another, Ꟶ forgeuynge one another, yf any man haue a quarell agaynst another: as Christ forgaue you, euen so do ye.
Aboue all these thinges put on loue which is the bonde of perfectnes.
And the peace of God rule in youre hertes: to the which peace ye are called in one body. And se that ye be thankfull.
Let the worde of Chryst dwell in you plenteously with all wysdome. Teache and exhorte youre awne selues, in Psalmes, and hymnes, and spirituall songes syngynge with grace in youre hertes to the Lorde
And whatsouer ye do (in worde or dede) do all in the name of the Lord Iesu, geuynge thankes to God the father by hym.
Ye wyues, submyt youre selues vnto youre awne husbandes, as it is comly in the Lorde:
Ye husbandes, loue youre wyues and be not bytter vnto them.
Ye chyldren, obey youre fathers and mothers in all thinges, for that is well pleasynge vnto the Lorde.
Ye fathers, prouoke not youre chyldren, lest they be of a desperate mynde.
Ye seruauntes be obedient vnto them that are youre bodyly masters in all thinges: not with eye seruice as men pleasers, but in synglenes of herte, fearynge God.
And whatsoeuer ye do, do it hertely, as, though ye dyd it to the Lord, and not vnto men:
knowynge, that of the Lord ye shall receaue the rewarde of inheritaunce, for ye serue the Lorde Christ.
But he that doth synne, shall receaue for hys synne. Nether is ther any respect of persones.
Masters, do vnto youre seruauntes that which is iust and equall knowynge, that ye also haue a master in heauen.
Continue in prayer, Ꟶ watch in the same with thankes geuynge,
prayenge also for vs that God maye open vnto vs the dore of vtteraunce, that we maye speake the mystery of Christ (wherfore I am also in bondes)
that I maye vtter it, as it becommeth me to speake.
Walke wysely towarde them that are without, and lose no oportunite.
Let youre speache be alwayes well sauored Ꟶ powdred with salt, that ye maye knowe, howe ye ought to answer euery man.
Of all my busynes shal ye be certified by Tichicus, the beloued brother and faythful mynyster and felowe seruaunt in the Lord,
whom I haue sent vnto you for the same purpose, that he myght knowe whath ye do, Ꟶ that he myght comfort youre hertes,
wyth one Onesymus a faythfull and beloued brother, which is one of you. They shall shewe you of all thynges, which area doinge here.
Aristarchus my preson felowe saluteth you, and Marcus Barnabas systers sonne: touchynge whom, ye receaued commaundementes. If he come vnto you, receaue hym:
and Iesus which is called Iustus, whych are of the circumcisyon. These only are my worke felowes vnto the kyngdome of God, which haue bene vnto my consolacyon.
Epaphras the seruaunt of Chryst, (which is one of you) saluteth you, and all wayes laboureth feruently for you in prayers, that ye maye stande perfect and full, in all the wyll of God.
For I beare hym recorde, that he hath a feruent mynde for you and them that are of Laodicia and them that are of Hierapolis.
Deare Lucas the Phisycion greteth you, and Demas.
Salute the brethren whych are of Laodicia, and salute Nymphas, and the congregacyon, whych is in hys house,
And when the Epystle is reed of you, make that it be reed also in the congregacyon of the Laodicians: and that ye lykewyse reade the Epistle of Laodicia.
And saye to Archyppus: take hede to the offyce that thou hast receaued in the Lord, that thou fulfill it.
The salutacion by the hande of me Paul Remember my bondes, the grace be wyth you. Amen.
Paul and Syluanus Ꟶ Timothe. Unto the congregacyon of the Thessalonyans, in God the father, and in the Lorde Iesus Christ. Grace be vnto you, and peace from God our father, and from the Lorde Iesus Christ.
We geue god thankes alwaye for you all: makynge mencyon of you in our prayers
without ceasynge, Ꟶ call you to remembraunce because of the worke of your fayth, and labour in loue, and because ye haue contynued in the hope of oure Lorde Iesus Christ, in the syght of God our father.
We knowe brethren (beloued of God) how that ye are electe.
For oure Gospel came not vnto you by worde onely, but also by power, and by the holy goost, and by moch certayntye, as ye knowe, after what maner we be haued oure selues amonge you, for your sake.
And ye became folowers of vs and of the Lorde, receauynge the worde with moch affliccyon, with ioye of the holy goost:
so that ye were an ensample to all that beleue in Macedonia and Achaia.
For from you sounded out the worde of the Lorde, not in Macedonia and in Achaia onely: but youre fayth also which ye haue vnto God, spred her selfe abroade in all quartars, so that it nedeth not vs to speake eny thynge at al.
For they them selues shewe of you, what maner of entring in we had vnto you and how ye tourned to God from ymages, for to serue the liuynge and true God,
and for to loke for hys sonne from heauen, whom he raysed from deeth: euen Iesus, whych delyuereth vs from the wrath to come.
For ye youre selues (brethren) knowe of oure entraunce in vnto you, how that it was not in vayne:
but euen after that we had suffred before, and were shamfully entreated at Phillipos (as ye knowe) then were we bolde in oure God, to speake vnto you the Gospell of God, in moch stryuynge.
For oure exhortacyon was not to brynge you to erroure, nor yet to vnclennes, nether was it wyth gyle:
but as we were alowed of God, that the Gospell sholde be commytted vnto vs: euen so we speake, not as they that please men, but God, whych tryeth oure hertes.
Nether led we oure conuersacyon at eny tyme with flatterynge wordes, as ye knowe: nether by occasyon of coueteousnes. God is recorde:
nether sought we prayse of men nether of you, nor yet of eny other, when we myght haue bene in auctorite, as the Apostles of Christ,
but we were tender amonge you, euen as a norsse cheryssheth her chyldren,
so were we affeccyoned towarde you: our good wyll was to haue dealte vnto you, not the Gospell of God onely: but also oure awne soules, because ye were deare vnto vs.
Ye remember brethren oure laboure, and trauayle. For we laboured daye Ꟶ nyght because we wolde not be chargeable vnto eny of you, and preached vnto you the Gospell of God.
Ye are witnesses, and so is God how holyly Ꟶ iustly Ꟶ vnblameably we behaued oure selues amonge you that beleued,
as ye knowe, how that we bare soch affeccyon vnto euery one of you, as a father doth vnto chyldren, exhortynge, confortyng, and besechyng you,
that ye wolde walke worthy of God, whych hath called you vnto his kyngdome and glorye.
For this cause thanke we God also without ceassyng, because that when ye receaued of vs the worde (wherwith ye learned to know God) ye receaued it not as the worde of man: but euen as it was in dede, the worde of God, whych worketh also in you that beleue.
For ye brethren became folowers of the cogregacyons of God whych in Iewry are in Christ Iesu: for ye haue suffred lyke thynges of youre kynsmen, as we oure selues haue suffered of the Iewes.
Whych as they kylled the Lorde Iesus, and theyr awne Prophetes, euen so haue they persecuted vs: and God they please not, and are contrary to al men,
Ꟶ hynder vs, that we shuld not speake vnto the Gentyls, that they myght be saued, to fulfyll their synnes alwaye. For the wrath of God is come on them, euen to the vtmost.
For as moch brethren as we are kept from you for a season, as concernynge the bodyly presence (but not in the herte) we enforsed the more to se you personally with great desyre.
And therfore we wold haue come vnto you, I Paul once and agayne: but Satan withstode vs:
for what is oure hope of ioye or crowne of reioysing? are not ye it in the presence of our Lord Iesus Christ at his commynge?
yes, ye are oure glory and ioye.
Wherfore, sence we coulde no lenger forbeare, we thought it good to remayne at Athens alone,
and sent Timothe oure brother Ꟶ mynyster of God, and the helper forth of oure laboure in the Gospell of Christ, to stablisshe you: and to conforte you concernyng our fayt
that no man shulde be moued in these affliccyons, For ye your selues knowe, that we are euen apoynted there vnto.
For when we were wyth you, we tolde you before, that we shude suffre tribulacyon, euen as it came to passe, and as ye knowe.
For this cause when I coulde no lenger forbeare, I sent that I myght haue knowledge of youre fayth, lest by some meanes the tempter had tempted you, and lest oure laboure had bene bestowed in vayne.
But now lately, when Timothe came from you vnto vs, Ꟶ declared to vs your faith Ꟶ your loue, Ꟶ how that ye haue good remembraunce of vs allwayes, desyrynge to se vs as we also desyre to se you.
Therfore brethren we receaued consolacyon by you, in all our aduersite Ꟶ necessite, through your fayth.
For now are we alyue, yf ye stande stedfast in the Lorde.
For what thankes can we recompence to God agayne for you, ouer al the ioye, that we ioye for your sakes before our God:
praying nyght and daye exceadyngly, that we might se you presently, and myght fulfyll the thynges which are lackynge vnto youre fayth.
God him selfe oure father, and oure Lorde Iesus Christ shall gyde oure iorney vnto you:
the Lord also shall increace you Ꟶ make you flowe ouer in loue one toward another, and towarde all men, euen as we do toward you,
that he maye make youre hertes stable Ꟶ vnblameable, in holynes before God oure father, at the commynge of oure Lorde Iesus Christ with all saynctes.
Furthermore, we beseche you (brethren) and exhorte you by the Lord Iesus, that ye increace more Ꟶ more euen as ye haue receaued of vs, how ye ought to walcke and to please God.
For ye knowe, what commaundementes we gaue you by oure Lorde Iesu Christ.
For this is the wyll of God euen youre holynes, that ye shuld abstayne from fornicacyon,
Ꟶ that euery one of you shuld knowe how to kepe his vessell in holynes and honoure,
and not in the lust of concupiscence as do the hethen which know not God,
that noman oppresse and defraude his brother in bargaynyng: because that the Lord is the auenger of all soch thinges, as we tolde you before, and testifyed.
For God hath not called vs vnto vnclennes but vnto holynes.
He therfore that despyseth, despyseth not man, but God, whych hath sent his holy sprete amonge you.
But as touchynge brotherly loue, ye nede not, that I wryte vnto you. For ye are taught of God, to loue one another.
Yee and that thynge verely ye do vnto all the brethren which are in all Macedonia. We beseche you brethren, that ye encreace more Ꟶ more,
and that ye studye to be quyet, Ꟶ to medle with youre awne busynes, and to worke wyth youre awne handes, as we commaunded you:
that ye maye behaue youre selues honestly towarde them that are wythout, and that nothynge be lackynge vnto you.
I wolde not brethren that ye shulde be ignoraunt concernynge them whych are fallen aslepe, that ye sorowe not as other do, whych haue no hope.
For yf we beleue, that Iesus dyed, Ꟶ rose agayne: euen so them also which slepe by Iesus, wyll God brynge agayne wt hym.
For thys saye we vnto you in the worde of the Lorde, that we whych shall lyue, Ꟶ shall remayne in the commynge of the Lorde, shall not come yer they whych slepe.
For the Lorde hym selfe shall descende from heauen with a showte Ꟶ the voyce of the Archangell and trompe of God. And the deed in Christe shall aryse fyrst:
then we which shall lyue (euen we which shall remayne) shall be caught vp with them also in the cloudes, to mete the Lorde in the ayer. And so shall we euer be with the Lorde.
Wherfore, comforte your selues one another wt these wordes.
Finally of the tymes Ꟶ seasons (brethren) it is no nede that I wryte vnto you:
for ye yourselues know perfectly, that the daye of the Lord shall come, euen as a thefe in the nyght.
For when they shall saye, peace and all thynges are safe, then shall soden destruccyon come vpon them (as sorowe commeth vpon a woman traualynge with chylde) Ꟶ they shall not scape:
But ye brethren are not in darcknes, that that daye shulde come on you as a thefe.
Ye are all the chyldren of lyght, and the chyldren of the daye. We are not of the nyght nether of darknes.
Therfore let vs not slepe as do other: but let vs wacth, Ꟶ be sober.
For they that slepe, slepe in the nyght: Ꟶ they that be droncken, are droncken in the nyght.
But let vs whych are of the daye, be sober armed wyth the brest plate of fayth and loue, and with hope of saluacyon for an helmet.
For God hath not appoynted vs to prouoke wrath vnto oure selues, but to obtayne saluacyon by the meanes of oure Lorde Iesu Christ
whych dyed for vs: that whether we wake or slepe, we shulde lyue together wyth him.
Wherfore, comforte your selues together, Ꟶ edifye euery one another, euen as ye do.
We beseche you brethren, that ye knowe them whych laboure amonge you, and haue the ouersyght of you in the Lorde,
Ꟶ geue you exhortacyon, that ye haue them in hye reputacyon thorowe loue, for theyr workes sake, and be at peace with them.
We desyre you (brethren) warne them that are vnruly, comforte the feble mynded, lyft vp the weake, be pacient towarde all men.
Se that none recompence euyll for euyll vnto eny man: but euer folowe that whych is good, both amonge your selues, and to all men.
Reioyce euer.
Praye contynually.
In all thynges geue thankes. For this is the wyll of God thorowe Christ Iesu towarde you.
Quenche not the sprete.
Despyse not prophesyinges.
Examen all thynges, kepe that which is good.
Abstayne from all euell appearaunce.
The very God of peace sanctifye you thorowe out. And I praye God that youre whole sprete, and soule and body, maye be preserued: so that in nothyng ye maye be blamed in the commynge of oure Lorde Iesus Chryst.
Faythfull is he whych called you, which wyll also do it.
Brethren, praye for vs.
Grete all the brethren wyth an holy kysse.
I charge you in the Lorde, that this Epistle be red vnto all the holy brethren.
The grace of the Lorde Iesus Christ be wyth you. Amen.
Paul and Syluanus and Timotheus. Unto the congregacyon of the Thessalonyans in God oure father, and in the Lord Iesus Christ.
Grace be vnto you and peace from God oure father, and from the Lorde Iesus Chryst.
We are bounde to thanke God all wayes for you brethren (as it is mete) because that youre fayth groweth excedyngly, and euery one of you swymmeth in loue towarde another betwene youre selues,
so that we oure selues boast of you in the congregacyons of God, ouer your pacyence Ꟶ fayth in all your persecucyons Ꟶ tribulacyons, that ye suffre,
whych is a token of the ryghtewes iudgement of God, that ye are counted worthy of the kyngdome of God, for whych ye also suffre.
It is verely a ryghtewes thyng with God that he recompence tribulacyon to them that trouble you:
and to you whych are troubled, rest wyth vs, when the Lorde Iesus shall shewe hym selfe from heauen with the Angels of hys power,
wyth flaminge fyre, whych shall rendre vengeaunce vnto them that knowe not God, and that obeye not the Gospell of oure Lorde Iesus Christ
which shalbe punysshed wyth euerlastynge damnacyon, from the presence of the Lorde, and from the glory of his power,
when he shall come to be glorifyed in his saynctes, and to be come maruelous in all them that beleue: because oure testimonie that we had to you, was beleued euen the same daye.
Wherfore, also we praye allwayes for you, that our God will make you worthy of this calling, Ꟶ fulfyll all delectacyon of goodnes Ꟶ the worcke of fayth, wt power:
that the name of oure Lorde Iesus Chryst maye be glorifyed by you, and ye by hym, accordynge to the grace of oure God, and of the Lorde Iesus Christ.
We beseche you (brethren) by the commynge of oure Lorde Iesu Christ, and in that we shall assemble vnto hym,
that ye be not sodenly moued from youre mynde, ner be troubled, nether by sprete, nether by wordes, nor yet by letter whych shulde seme to come from vs, as though the daye of Christ were at hande.
Let no man deceaue you by eny meanes, for the Lorde shall not come excepte ther come a departynge fyrst, and that that synfull man be opened, the sonne of perdicyon,
whych is an aduersarye: and is exalted aboue all that is called God, or that is worshypped: so that he doth syt in the temple of God, boastynge him selfe to be God.
Remember ye not, that when I was yet wyth you, I tolde you these thynges?
And nowe ye know what wythholdeth: euen that he myght be vttered at hys tyme.
For the mistery of the iniquitie doeth all readye worcke: tyll he which nowe onlye letteth, be taken out of the waye.
And then shall that wycked be vttered, whom the Lorde shall consume with the sprete of his mouth, and shall destroye wyth the appearaunce of hys commynge
euen hym whose commynge is after the workynge of Satan, with all lyinge power sygnes and wonders.
and with all deceauablenes of vnryghtwesnes, amonge them that perysshe: because they receaued not the loue of the trueth, that they myght be saued.
And therfore, God shall sende them stronge delusyon, that they shulde beleue lyes:
that all they myght be damned, whych beleued not the trueth: but had pleasure in vnryghtewesnes.
But we are bounde to geue thankes alwey to God for you (brethren beloued of the Lorde) for because that God hath from the begynnynge chosen you to saluacyon, thorowe sanctifyinge of the sprete, and thorow beleuing of the trueth,
wher vnto he called you by oure Gospell, to obtayne the glorye of oure Lord Iesu Christ.
Therfore brethren stande fast, Ꟶ kepe the ordinaunces which ye haue learned: whether it were by oure preachinge, or by Epistle.
Oure Lorde Iesu Christ hym selfe, and God and oure father (which hath loued vs, and hath geuen vs euerlastynge consolacyon, and good hope thorowe grace)
comforte your hertes and stablysshe you in all good sayenge and doynge.
Furthermore brethren praye ye for vs, that the worde of God maye haue passage, and be glorifyed, as it is also with you:
and that we maye be delyuered from vnreasonable and frowarde men. For all men haue not fayth:
but the Lord is faythfull, whych shall stablysshe you, and preserue you from euyll.
We haue confydence thorowe the Lord to you warde, that ye both do, Ꟶ wyll do the thynges which we commaunde you.
And the Lord gyde youre hertes to the loue of God and to the pacyente waytynge for Chryst.
We require you brethren by the name of oure Lorde Iesu Christ that ye wythdrawe youre selues from euery brother, that behaueth him selfe inordinatly, Ꟶ not after the institucion which he receaued of vs.
For ye your selues know, howe ye ought to folowe vs. For we behaued not oure selues inordinatly amonge you.
Nether toke we breed of eny man for naught: but wrought wt laboure Ꟶ sweate nyght Ꟶ daye, because we wolde not be chargeable to eny of you:
not but that we had auctorite: but to make oure selues an ensample vnto you to folowe vs.
For when we were wyth you, this we warned you of, that yf eny wolde not worcke, the same shulde not eate.
For we haue, hearde saye that ther are some whych walke amonge you inordinatly, workynge not at all, but beynge busybodyes.
Them that are soch, we commaunde and exhorte, by oure Lorde Iesu Christ, that they worcke with quietnes, and eate theyr awne breed:
Brethren be not ye weery in well doynge.
If eny man obey not oure sayinge, sende vs worde of him by a letter: and haue no companye with him, that he maye be ashamed.
And count him not as an enemy: but warne him as a brother.
The very Lorde of peace geue you peace allwayes, by all meanes. The Lord be with you all.
The salutacyon of me Paul, with myne awne hande. This is the token in all Epistles. So I wryte.
The grace of oure Lorde Iesus Christ be wyth you all. Amen.
Paul an Apostle of Iesus Christ, by the commyssyon of God our sauyour, Ꟶ Lord Iesus Christ, which is our hope.
Unto Timothe hys naturall sonne in the fayth. Grace mercy and peace from God oure father, Ꟶ from the Lord Iesus Christ our Lorde.
As I besought the to abyde styll at Ephesus (when I departed into Macedonia) euen so do, that thou commaunde some, that they folowe no straunge doctrine,
nether geue hede to fables Ꟶ endles genealogyes whych brede doubtes more then Godlye edifyinge, which is by fayth
for the ende of the commaundement is, loue out of a pure herte, and of a good conscience, and of fayth vnfayned: from the whych thynges,
because some haue erred, they are turned vnto vayne iangelynge,
because they wolde be doctours of the lawe, and yet vnderstande not what they speake, nether wherof they affyrme.
We knowe, that the lawe is good, yf a man vse it lawfully:
knowynge thys, howe that the lawe is not geuen vnto a ryghteous man, but vnto the vnryghteous and disobedyent, to the vngodly and to synners, to vnholy and vncleane: to murtherers of fathers and murtherers of mothers, to manstears,
to whormongers: to them that defyle them selues whyth mankynde: to manstealers: to lyars, to periured, and yf ther be eny other thynge that is contrary to the holsome doctryne,
accordynge to the Gospell of the glory of the blessed God, whych Gospell is commytted vnto me.
And I thanke Chryst Iesus oure Lorde, whych hath made me stronge: for he counted me true, and put me in offyce
where as before I was a blasphemer, and a persecuter, Ꟶ a Tyraunt. But yet I obtayned mercy, because I dyd it ignorauntly thorowe vnbelefe.
Neuerthelesse, the grace of oure Lorde was exceadynge aboundaunt with fayth and loue, whych is by Christ Iesu.
This is a true sayinge (and by all meanes worthy to be receaued of vs) that Chryst Iesus came into the worlde, to saue synners, of whom I am chefe.
Not wythstandynge for this cause optayned I mercy, that Iesus Christ shulde fyrst shewe on me all longe pacience, to declare an ensample vnto them which shulde beleue on him vnto eternall lyfe.
So then vnto God, kynge euerlastynge, immortall inuisyble, wyse onely, be honoure and prayse for euer and euer. Amen.
Thys commaundement commyt I vnto the sonne Timotheus accordynge to the prophesyes, whych in tyme past were prophesyed of the, that thou in them shuldest fyght a good fyght,
hauynge fayth and good conscyence: whych some haue put awaye from them, and as concernynge fayth haue made shypwracke.
Of whose nombre is Hymeneus and Alexander whom I haue delyuered vnto Satan, that they maye lerne not to blaspheme.
I Exhorte therfore, that aboue all thynges, prayers, supplicacyons, intercessions, and geuynge of thankes be had for all men:
for kynges, and for all that are in auctorite, that we maye lyue a quyet and a peaceable lyfe, wyth all Godlynes and honestye.
For that is good and accepted in the syght of God oure sauyoure,
whych wyll haue all men to be saued, and to come vnto the knowledge of the trueth.
For ther is one God, and one mediator betwene God and man, euen the man Christ Iesus,
whych gaue him selfe a raunsome for all men, that it shulde be testifyed at hys tyme,
where vnto I am ordayned a preacher and an Apostle. I tell the trueth in Christ and lye not: beynge the teacher of the gentyls wyth fayth and veritye.
I wyll therfore that the men praye euery where, lyftynge vp pure handes without wrath, or doubtinge.
Lykewise also the wemen, that they araye them selues in comlye apparell wyth shamfastnes and discrete behaueour, not wt broyded heare, ether golde or pearles, or costly araye:
but as becommeth wemen, that professe godlynesse thorowe good worckes.
Let the woman learne in sylence wyth all subieccyon.
But I suffre not a woman to teach, nether to vsurpe auctoryte ouer the man: but to be in sylence.
For Adam was fyrst fourmed, Ꟶ then Eue.
Adam also was not deceaued, but the woman was deceaued, and was subdued to the transgressyon.
Notwythstandynge thorowe bearynge of chyldren she shalbe saued, yf they contynue in fayth and loue, and holynes, wyth discrecyon.
This is a true sayinge: If a man desyer the offyce of a Bysshoppe, he desyreth an honest worke.
A Bisshoppe therfore must be blameles, the husbande of one wyfe, dilygent, sober, discrete, a keper of hospitalite: apte to teach:
not geuen to ouer moch wyne, no fyghter, not gredy of fylthye lucre. but gentle, abhorryng fyghtynge, abhorrynge coueteousnes,
one that ruleth well his awne house, one that hath chyldren in subieccyon with all reuerence.
For yf a man cannot rule his awne house, howe shall he care for the congregacyon of God?
He maye not be a yonge scoler, lest he swell and fall into the iudgement of the euyll speaker.
He must also haue a good reporte of them whych are without, lest he fall into rebuke, and snare of the euyll speaker.
Lyke wyse must the mynisters be honest, not double tonged, not geuen vnto moch wyne, nether gredy of fylthy lucre:
but holdynge the mystery of the fayth with a pure conscience.
And let them fyrst be proued, and then let them mynister so, that no man be able to reproue them.
Euen so must theyr wyues be honest, not euyll speakers: but sober and faythfull in all thynges.
Let the Deacons be the husbandes of one wyfe, and such as rule theyr chyldren well, and their awne housholdes.
For they that mynister well, get them selues a good degre and greate lybertye in the fayth, whych is in Christ Iesu.
These thynges write I vnto the trustinge to come shortely vnto the:
but and yf I tarie longe, that then thou mayst yet haue knowledge, howe thou oughtest to behaue thy selfe in the house of God, whych is the congregacyon of the lyuynge God, the pyllar Ꟶ grounde of trueth.
And without doute great is that mystery of godlynes: God was shewed in the flesshe, was iustifyed in the sprete, was sene amonge the Angels, was preached vnto the gentyls, was beleued on in the worlde, and receaued vp in glory.
The sprete speaketh euydently, that in the later tymes some shall departe from the fayth, and shall geue hede vnto spretes of erroure, and deuelysshe doctrines of them
which speake false thorowe ypocrysye, Ꟶ haue their consciences marcked wt an hote yron,
forbyddynge to mary, Ꟶ commaundynge to abstayne from meates which God hath created to be receaued with geuynge thanckes, of them whych beleue, Ꟶ knowe the trueth.
For all the creatures of God are good, Ꟶ nothynge to be refused, yf it be receaued with thankesgeuynge.
For it is sanctified by the worde of God Ꟶ prayer.
If thou put the brethren in remembraunce of these thynges thou shalt be a good mynyster of Iesu Chryst whych hast bene norisshed vp in the wordes of the fayth Ꟶ of good doctrine, whych thou hast continually followed.
But cast awaye vngostly and olde wyues fables. Exercyse thy selfe rather vnto godlynes.
For bodely exercyse profyteth lytell: but godlynes is profytable vnto all thynges, as a thinge which hath promyses of the lyfe that is nowe, Ꟶ of the lyfe to come.
This is a sure sayinge, Ꟶ by all meanes worthy to be alowed.
For therfore we bothe laboure Ꟶ suffre rebuke, because we haue a stead fast hope in the lyuinge God, which is the saueoure of all men, specially of those that beleue.
Soch thynges commaunde Ꟶ teache.
Let no man despyse thy youth but be vnto them that beleue, an ensample, in worde, in conuersacyon, in loue, in sprete, in fayth, in purenes.
Tyll I come, geue attendaunce to readynge, to exhortacyon, to doctrine.
Despyse not the gyfte that is in the, whych was geuen the thorowe prophesye, with the layinge on of handes by the auctoryte of presthode.
These thinges exercyse, and geue thy selfe vnto them, that it maye be sene, howe thou profetest in all thynges.
Take hede vnto thy selfe, and vnto learnynge, and continue therin. For yf thou shalt so do, thou shalt saue thy selfe, Ꟶ them that heare the.
Rebuke not an elder, rygorously but exhorte him as a father: the yonger men, as brethren:
the elder wemen, as mothers: the yonger as systers, wt all purenes.
Honoure wyddowes, which are true wyddowes.
If eny wyddow haue chyldren or nevews, let them learne fyrst to rule their awne houses godly Ꟶ to recompense their elders. For that is good Ꟶ acceptable before God.
She that is a true wyddowe Ꟶ frendelesse, putteth her trust in God, Ꟶ contynueth in supplicacyons and prayers nyght Ꟶ daye.
But she that lyueth in pleasure, is deed, euen yet alyue.
And these thynges commaunde that they maye be without rebuke.
But yf eny prouide not for her awne (Ꟶ specially for them of her housholde) the same hath denyed the fayth, and is worsse then an infydell.
Let no wyddowe be chosen vnder threscore yere olde, Ꟶ soch a one as was the wyfe of one man,
and well reported of men in good workes: yf she haue brought vp chyldren, yf she haue lodged strangers, yf she haue wesshed the saynctes fete, yf she haue mynistred vnto them whych were in aduersytie, yf she haue bene contynually geuen vnto all maner of good worckes.
The yonger wyddowes refuse. For when they haue begonne to were wanton agaynst Christ, they wyll mary,
hauynge damnacyon, because they haue cast awaye their fyrst fayth.
And also they learne to goo from house to house ydle: yee not ydle onely, but also tatlers and besybodyes, speakynge thynges which are not comly.
I wyll therfore that the yonger wemen mary, to beare chyldren, to guyde the house, and geue none occasyon to the aduersary to speake euyll.
For many of them are all ready turned backe, and are gone after Satan.
And yf eny man or woman that beleueth haue wyddowes, let them mynyster vnto them, Ꟶ let not the congregacyon be charged: that there maye be sufficyent for them that are wyddowes in dede.
The elders that rule well, are worthy of double honoure, most specially they whych laboure in the worde Ꟶ teachynge.
For the scripture sayth: thou shalt not moosel the mouth of the oxe that treadeth out the corne. And the labourer is worthy of his reward.
Agaynst an elder, receaue none accusacyon: but vnder two or thre witnesses.
Then that synne, rebuke openly, that other also maye feare.
I testifye before God and the Lord Iesus Christ Ꟶ the electe angels, that thou obserue these thynges without hastynesse of iudgement, Ꟶ do nothinge parcially.
Laye handes sodenly on no man, nether be partaker of other mens synnes: kepe thy selfe pure.
Dryncke no lenger water, but vse a lytell wyne for thy stommakes sake and thyne often dyseases.
Some mennes synnes are open before hande, and go before vnto iudgement: Ꟶ some mennes synnes folowe after.
Lykewyse also good workes are manifest before hande, and they that are other wyse, cannot be hyd.
Let as many seruauntes as are vnder the yoke, counte theyr masters worthy of all honour, that the name of God Ꟶ hys doctryne be not euyll spoken of.
Se that they whych haue beleuynge masters, despyse them not because they are brethren: but rather do seruyce, for as moch as they are beleuynge and beloued, Ꟶ partakers of the benefyte.
These thynges teach Ꟶ exhorte. If eny man folowe other doctrine, and enclyne not vnto the wholsome wordes of oure Lorde Iesu Christ, and to the doctrine which is accordynge to Godlynes,
he is pufte vp, and knoweth nothynge: but wasteth hys braynes about questions and stryfe, of wordes, wherof sprynge enuye, stryfe, raylynges, euyll surmisynges,
vayne disputacyon of men that haue corrupte myndes, Ꟶ that are robbed of the trueth: which thynke, that lucre is godlynes. From them that are soch separate thy selfe.
Godlynes is greate ryches If a man be content with that he hath.
For we brought nothynge into the worlde, nether maye we cary any thynge out.
But when we haue fode and rayment we must ther with be content.
They that wylbe ryche, fall into temptacyon and snares, Ꟶ into many folysshe Ꟶ noysome lustes, which droune men into perdicyon Ꟶ destruccyon.
For coueteousnes of money is the rote of all euyll: whych whyll some lusted after, they erred from the fayth, Ꟶ tanglyd them selues with many sorowes.
But thou man of God, flye soch thynges. Folowe ryghtewesnes, godlynes, fayth, loue, pacience, meaknes.
Fyght the good fyght of fayth. Laye, hande on eternall lyfe, wher vnto thou art also called, and hast professed a good professyon before many witnesses.
I geue the charge in the syght of God, which quickneth all thynges, Ꟶ before Iesu Chryst (which vnder Poncius Pylate wytnessed a good witnessyng)
that thou kepe the commaundement, Ꟶ be without spotte and vnrebukeable, vntyll the appearynge of oure Lorde Iesus Christ,
which appearyng (in hys tyme) he shall shewe, that is blessed Ꟶ myghty onely, kynge of kynges, Ꟶ Lorde of Lordes,
whych onely hath immortalite, and dwelleth in the lyght that no man can attayne, whom no man hath sene, nether can se, vnto whom be honoure and rule euerlastynge. Amen.
Charge them which are ryche in this world, that they be not hye mynded, ner trust in vncertayne ryches, but in the lyuinge God (which geueth vs aboundauntly all thynges to enioye them)
that they do good: that they be riche in good workes: that they be redy to geue Ꟶ gladly to distribute,
laying vp in store for them selues a good fundacion against the tyme to come, that they maye obtayne eternall lyfe.
O Timothe, saue that which is geuen the to kepe, and avoyde vngostly vanyties of voyces and opposycyons of science falsly so called:
whych science whyle some professed, they erred as concernynge the fayth. Grace be with the. Amen.
Paul an Apostle of Iesus Christ, by the wyll of God, accordynge to the promes of lyfe which is in Christ Iesu.
To Timothe hys beloued sonne. Grace mercy and peace from God the father, Ꟶ from Iesu Christ our Lorde.
I thanke God, whom I serue from myne elders with pure conscience, that without anye ceasynge I make mencyon of the in my prayers nyght and daye,
desyringe to se the, myndefull of thy teares: so that I am fylled with ioye,
when I call to remembraunce the vnfayned fayth that is in the, which dwelt fyrst in thy graundmother Lois, and in thy mother Eunica: Ꟶ I am assured that it dwelleth in the also.
Wherfore I warne the that thou stere vp the gyfte of God which is in the by the puttynge on of my handes.
For God hath not geuen to vs the sprete of feare: but of power, and of loue, and of sobrenes.
Be not thou therfore ashamed of the testimony of oure Lorde, nether be ashamed of me whych am his presoner: but suffre thou aduersytie with the Gospell, accordynge to the power of God,
which saued vs, and called vs with an holy callynge, not accordynge to oure dedes, but accordynge to his awne purpose Ꟶ grace, whych was geuen vs thorowe Christ Iesu (before the worlde beganne)
but is nowe declared openly by the appearynge of oure sauyour Iesu Christ whych hath put awaye deeth, and hath brought lyfe and immortalite vnto lyght thorowe the Gospell,
whervnto I am apoynted, a preacher Ꟶ Apostle, and a teacher of the Gentyls:
for the whych cause I also suffre these thynges. Neuerthelesse, I am not ashamed. For I knowe, and am sure, that he (in whom I haue put my trust) is able to kepe that whych I haue committed to hys kepynge, agaynst that daye.
Se that thou haue the ensample of the holsome wordes, whych thou hast hearde of me with fayth and loue that is in Christ Iesu.
That good thynge, whych was committed to thy kepynge, holde fast thorowe the holy goost, which dwelleth in vs.
This thou knowest, howe that all they which are in Asia, be turned from me: of whych sorte are Phigelus and Hermogenes.
The Lorde geue mercye vnto the housholde of Onesyphorus for he ofte refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chayne:
but when he was at Rome, he sought me out very diligently, Ꟶ founde me.
The Lorde graunt vnto hym that he maye fynde mercye with the Lorde at that daye. And in howe many thynges he ministred vnto me at Ephesus, thou knowest very well.
Thou therfore my sonne, be stronge in the grace (that is thorow Christ Iesu)
and in the thynges that thou hast hearde of me by many wytnesses. The same commytte thou to faythfull men, which shalbe apte to teach other also.
Thou therfore suffre afflyccyons as a good soudier of Iesu Chryst.
No man that warreth, entanglyth hym selfe wyth worldly busynes, and that because he maye please hym, whych hath chosen hym to be a soudier.
And though a man stryue for a mastery, yet is he not crowned, except he stryue laufully
The husbandman that laboureth, must fyrst receaue of the frutes.
Consyder what I saye. The Lorde geue the vnderstandynge in all thynges.
Remember that Iesus Christ of the sede of Dauid, rose agayne from deeth according to my Gospell,
wherin I suffre trouble as an euyll doar, euen vnto bondes. But the worde of God was not bounde.
Therfore I suffre all thynges, for the electes sakes, that they myght also obtayne the saluacion, which is in Christ Iesu, with eternall glory.
It is a true sayinge for yf we be deed wt hym, we shall also lyue wyth hym.
If we be pacient, we shall also raygne wyth hym. If we denye hym, he also shall denye vs.
If we beleue not, yet abydeth he faythfull. He cannot denye hym selfe.
Of these thinges put them in remembraunce, and testifye before the Lorde, that they folowe no contencyous wordes: which are to no profet, but to the peruertynge of the hearers.
Study to shewe thy selfe laudable vnto God, a workman that nedeth not to be a shamed distributynge the worde of trueth iustly.
As for vngoostly vanyties of voyces, passe thou ouer them. For they wyll encreace vnto greater vngodlynes,
Ꟶ theyr wordes shall fret euen as doeth the disease of a cancre: of whose nombre is. Hymeneus and Philetus,
whych (as concernynge the trueth) haue erred, sayinge, that the resurreccyon is past all redy, and do destroye the fayth of some.
But the sure grounde of God standeth still, and hath this seale: the Lorde knoweth them that are hys. And let euery man that calleth on the name of Christ, departe from iniquite.
Not wythstandynge in a greate house are not onely vesseles of golde and of syluer: but also of wood and of erthe: some for honoure, and some vnto dyshonoure.
Yf a man therfore pourge him selfe from such men, he shalbe a vessel sanctifyed vnto honoure, mete for the vses of the Lorde, and prepared vnto all good workes.
Lustes of youth auoyde, but folowe ryghtwesnes, fayth, loue and peace, with them that call on the Lorde with a pure herte.
Folysshe and vnlearned questions put from the, knowinge, that they do but gendre stryfe.
The seruaunt of the Lorde must not stryue: but be gentle vnto all men apte to teach, and one that can suffre
the euyll with meaknes, and can informe them that resyst yf that God at eny tyme wyll geue them repentaunce, for to knowe the trueth:
and that they maye come to them selues agayne out of the snare of the deuyll, which are holden captiue of hym at hys wyll.
Thys knowe, that in the last dayes shall come parelous tymes.
For men shalbe louers of theyr awne selues, coueteous, boasters, proude, cursed speakers, dysobedient to fathers and mothers, vnthankfull, vngodly,
vnkynde, trucebreakers, falseaccusars, riatours, fearce, despisers of them which are good,
traytours, heady, hye mynded, gredy vpon volupteousnes more then the louers of God,
hauynge a symilitude of godlynesse, but haue denyed the power therof: and soch abhorre.
For of thys sorte are they, which entre into houses, and bringe into bondage wemen laden wt synne, which wemen are led with diuers lustes,
euer learnynge, and neuer able to come vnto the knowledge of the trueth.
As Iannes Ꟶ Iambres withstode Moses, euen so do these also resyst the trueth: men they are of corrupt myndes, and lewde as concerninge the fayth:
but they shall preuayle no lenger. For their madnes shalbe vttered vnto all men euen as theirs was.
But thou hast sene the experience of my doctryne, fassyon of lyuinge, purpose, fayth, longe sufferynge, loue, pacience,
persecucyons, and affliccyons whych happened vnto me at Antioche, at Iconium, and at Lystra: which persecutions I suffered paciently. And from them all, the Lorde delyuered me.
Yee, and all they that wyll lyue godly in Christ Iesu shall suffre persecutyon.
But the euyll men Ꟶ disceauers shall wexe worsse and worsse, whill they deceaue and are deceaued them selues.
But continue thou in the thynges which thou hast learned, which also were commytted vnto the, knowinge of whom thou hast learned them,
and for as moch also as of a chylde thou hast knowen the holy scriptures which are able to make the lerned vnto saluacyon thorow the fayth which is in Christ Iesu.
All scripture geuen by inspiracyon of God, is proffitable to teache, to improue, to amende and to instruct in ryghtewesnes,
that the man of God maye be perfecte Ꟶ prepared vnto all good workes.
I Testifye therfore before God, Ꟶ before the Lord Iesu Christ, which shall iudge the quicke and deed at hys apearinge in hys kyngdom,
preache thou the worde, be feruent, in season Ꟶ oute of season. Improue, rebuke, exhorte wt all longe sufferynge and doctryne.
For the tyme will come, when they shall not suffer wholsome doctryne: but after their awne lustes shall they (whose eares ytche) gett them an heepe of teachers,
and shall withdrawe their eares from the trueth, and shalbe turned vnto fables.
But watche thou in all thynges, suffre affliccyons, do the worke thorowlye of an Euangelist, fulfyll thyne offyce vnto the vtmost.
For I am nowe ready to be offered, and the tyme of my departynge, is at hande.
I haue fought a good fyght, I haue fulfylled my course, I haue kept the fayth.
From hence forth ther is layde vp for me a crowne of ryghtewesnes, which the Lorde (that is a ryghteous iudge) shall geue me at that daye: not to me onely, but vnto all them also that loue his comminge.
Do thy dyligence that thou mayest come shortly vnto me.
For Demas hath forsaken me, and loueth thys present worlde, and is departed vnto Thessalonica. Crescens is gone to Galacia, Tytus vnto Dalmacia.
Onely Lucas is with me. Take Marke, and bringe him with the, for he is proffitable vnto me for the minystracyon.
And Tychycus haue I sent to Ephesus.
The cloke that I lefte at Troada with Carpus, (when thou commest) bringe with the, and the bokes, but specially the partchement.
Alexander the coppersmyth dyd me moch euyll: the Lorde rewarde hym accordynge to hys dedes,
of whom be thou ware also. For he hath greatly wythstande oure wordes.
At my fyrst answerynge, no man assisted me, but all forsoke me. I praye God, that it maye not be layde to their charges:
Not wythstandynge the Lorde, assysted me, and strengthed me, that by me the preachynge shulde be fulfylled to the vtmost, and that all the Gentyls shulde heare. And I was delyuered out of the mouth of the lyon.
And the Lorde shall delyuer me from all euyll doynge, and shall kepe me vnto hys heuenly kyngdom. To whom be prayse for euer and euer. Amen.
Salute Prisea and Aquila Ꟶ the housholde of Onesiphorus,
Erastus abode at Corinthum. Trophunus haue I lefte at Myletum sycke.
Do thy diligence, that thou mayest come before winter. Eubolus gretith the, and so doth Pudens, and Lynus, Claudia, and all the brethren.
The Lorde Iesus Christ be with thy sprete. Grace be with you: Amen.
Paul the seruaunt of God, and apostle of Iesu Christ accordinge to the fayth of goddes electe, and accordynge to the knowledge of the trueth, which is after godlynes
in the hope of eternall lyfe, which God (that cannot lye) promysed before the worlde beganne:
but hath opened his worde at the tyme appoynted thorowe preachinge, which is commytted vnto me, accordynge to the commaundement of God oure saueoure.
To Tytus hys naturall sonne after the commen fayth. Grace mercy Ꟶ peace from God the father Ꟶ from the Lorde Iesu Christ oure saueoure.
For this cause left I the in Creta, that thou shuldest refourme the thynges that are vnperfect, Ꟶ shuldest ordeyne elders in euery cytie, as I had appoynted the.
If eny be blamelesse, the husband of one wyfe, hauynge faythfull children, which are not slaundred of ryote, nether are disobedient.
For a bysshope must be blamesse, as the stewarde of God: not stubborne, not angrye not geuen to moch wyne, no fyghter, not geuen to fylthy lucre:
but a keper of hospitalite, one that loueth goodnes sobre, ryghteous, godly, temperat,
and such as cleueth vnto the true worde of doctryne, that he maye be able also to exhorte by wholsome learnynge, Ꟶ to improue them that saye agaynst it.
For ther are many vnruely and talkers of vanite, and disceauers of myndes, specially they that are of the circumcision,
whose mouthes must be stopped which peruert whole houses, teachinge thinges which they ought not, because of fylthy lucre.
One of them selues (euen a prophete of their awne) sayde: The Cretyans are all wayes lyars, euyll beastes, slowe belyes.
Thys wytnes is true: wherfore rebuke thou them sharply, that they maye be sounde in the fayth,
not takynge hede to Iewes fables and commaundementes of men that turne awaye the trueth.
Unto the pure, are all thynges pure: but vnto them that are defyled and vnbeleuynge, is nothynge pure: but euen the mynde and conscience of them is defyled.
They confesse that they knowe God: but with the dedes they denye hym seinge they are abominable and disobedient, Ꟶ vnapte vnto euery good worcke.
But speake thou the thinges which become wholsome learning.
That the elder men be sober sage, discrete, sounde in the fayth, in loue, in pacyence:
the elder wemen lykewyse, that they be in soche rayment as be commeth holynes, not beynge false accusars, not geuen to moch wyne, but that they teache honest thynges,
to make the younge wemen sobre mynded, to loue theyr husbandes, to loue their chyldren,
to be discrete, chast, huswyfly good, obedient vnto their husbandes, that the worde of God be not euyll spoken of.
Yonge men lykewyse exhorte, that they be sobre mynded.
In all thinges shewe thy selfe an ensample of good worckes in the doctryne, with honestie, grauytie, Ꟶ with the wholsome
worde which cannot be rebuked: that he which withstandeth, maye be ashamed, hauinge no euell thynge to saye of you.
Exhort seruauntes, to be obedient vnto their awne masters, Ꟶ to please them in all thinges, not answering agayne,
nether to be pickers, but that they shewe all good faythfulnes, that they maye do worshippe to the doctrine of God oure saueoure in all thynges.
For the grace of God, that bryngeth saluacyon vnto all men, hath appeared
and teacheth vs that we shulde denye vngodlynes and worldy lustes, Ꟶ that we shulde lyue soberly, and ryghteously, and godly in thys present worlde,
lokynge for the blessed hope Ꟶ appearinge of the glory of the greate God, Ꟶ of oure sauioure Iesu Christ,
whych gaue him selfe for vs, to redeme vs from all vnryghtewesnes, and to pourge vs a peculyer people vnto hym selfe feruently geuen vnto good workes.
These thynges speake, and exhorte, and rebuke, with all feruentnes of commaundynge. Se that no man despyse the.
Warne them that they submytte them selues to rule Ꟶ power: that they obey the officers: that they be ready vnto euery good worke:
that they speake euyll of no man: that they be no fyghters, but gentle, shewynge all mekenes vnto all men.
For we oure selues also were somtyme foolyshe dysobedient, deceaued, seruynge diuerse lustes and volupteousnes, lyuynge in maliciousnes and enuye, full of hate, hatynge one another.
But after that the kyndnes and loue of oure saueoure God to man warde appeared,
not by the dedes of rightewesnes which we wrought, but accordynge to hys mercye he saued vs by the fountayne of the newe byrth, and renuynge of the holy goost,
which he shedd on vs abountdantly, thorowe Iesus Christ oure saueoure,
that we iustifyed by hys grace, shulde be made heyres accordinge to the hope of eternall lyfe,
Thys is a true sayinge. Of these thynges I wyll that thou certifye, that they which beleue in God, myght be diligent to go forwarde in good workes. For these thynges are good and profitable vnto men,
Folysshe questyons, and genealogies, and braulynge, thorowe stryuinges aboute the lawe, auoyde? for they are vnprofytable and superfluous.
A man that is an auctor offectes, after the fyrst Ꟶ the seconde admonycion auoyde:
knowynge, that he (that is soche) is peruerted Ꟶ synneth euen damned by hym selfe.
When I shall sende Artemas vnto the, or Tychicus, be diligent, to come to me vnto Nichopolis: For I haue determined there to winter,
Bringe zenas the lawear Ꟶ Apollos on their iorney diligently, that nothynge be lackynge vnto them.
And let oures also learne to excell in good workes, as farforth as nede requyreth, that they be not vnfrutefull.
All that are with me, salute the. Grete them that loue vs in the fayth. Grace be with you all. Amen.
Paul the presoner of Iesu christ and brother Timothe. Unto Philemon the beloued, and oure helper,
and to the beloued Appia, and to Aechippus oure felowe soudier and to the congregacyon that is of thy house.
Grace be vnto you and peace, from God oure father, Ꟶ from the Lorde Iesus Christ.
I thanke my God, makynge mencyon all wayes of the in my prayers,
when I heare of thy loue Ꟶ fayth, which thou hast to warde the Lorde. Iesu, and towarde all saynctes,
so that the fellishyppe of thy fayth is frutefull in the knowledge of euery good which is in, you towarde Iesus Christ.
For we haue great ioye and consolacyon in thy loue: because that by the (brother) the sayntes hertes are conforted.
Wherfore, though I myght be bold in Christ to commaunde the, that which was thy dewtye to do:
yet for loues sake I rather beseche the, though I be as I am, euen olde Paul, Ꟶ nowe a presoner of Iesu Christ.
I beseche the for my sonne Onesimus whom I haue begotten in my bondes,
(which in tyme passed was to the vnprofitable but nowe proffitable both to the Ꟶ to me)
whom I haue sent home agayne. Thou therfore receyue hym, that is to saye myne awne bowels,
whom I wolde fayne haue retayned with me, that in thy steade he myght haue minystred vnto me in the bondes of the Gospell.
Neuerthelesse, without thy mynde wolde I do nothinge, that the good whych thou doest, shulde not be as it were of necessite, but wyllyngly.
For happly he therfore departed for a season, that thou shuldest receaue hym for euer,
not nowe as a seruaunt: but aboue a seruaunt, euen a brother beloued, specially to me: but howe moche more vnto the, both in the flesshe, and also in the Lorde?
If thou count me therfore a felowe, receaue him as my selfe.
If he haue done the anye hurt, or oweth the ought, that laye to my charge.
(I Paul haue written it with myne awne hande) I wyll recompence it. So that I do not saye to the, howe that thou owest vnto me euen thyne awne selfe also.
Euen so brother, let me enioye the in the Lorde: Comforte my bowels in the Lorde.
Trustynge in thyne obedience, I wrote vnto the, knowynge, that thou wylt also do more then I saye.
Moreouer, prepare me lodginge for I trust that thorowe the helpe of youre prayers, I shalbe geuen vnto you.
Ther salute the, Epaphras my felowe presoner in Christ Iesu,
Marcus, Aristarcus, Demas, Lucas, my helpers.
The grace of oure Lorde Iesu Christ be with your sprete: Amen.
God in time past diuersly and many wayes, spake vnto the fathers by Prophetes:
but in these last dayes he hath spoken vnto vs by his awne sonne, whom he hath made heyre of all thynges by whom also he made the worlde.
Which (sonne) beinge the bryghtnes of his glory, and that very ymage of his substance rulynge all thynges with the worde of hys power, hath by hys awne person pourged oure synnes, and sytteth on the ryght hande of the maiestye on hye:
beynge so moch more excellent then the angels, as he hath by inherytaunce obteyned a more excellent name then they.
For vnto which of the angels sayde he at eny tyme: Thou art my sonne, thys daye haue I begotten the? And agayne I wyll be hys father, and he shalbe my sonne.
And agayne, when he bringeth in the fyrst begotten sonne into the worlde, he sayth. And let all the angels of God worshyppe hym.
And vnto the angels he sayth. He maketh hys angels spretes, and hys minystres a flamme of fyre.
But vnto the sonne he sayth: Thy seate (O God) shalbe for euer and euer The scepter of thy kyngdome is a ryght scepter.
Thou hast loued ryghtewesnes, and hated iniquyte. Wherfore, God, euen thy God hath anoynted the with the oyle of gladnes aboue thy felowes.
And thou Lorde in the begynnynge hast layde the foundacyon of the erth. And the heauens are the workes of thy handes.
They shall perysshe, but thou endurest, But they all shall wexe olde also as doth a garment:
Ꟶ as a vesture shalt thou chaunge them, Ꟶ they shalbe chaunged. But thou art euen the same and thy yeres shall not fayle.
Unto whych of the angels sayde he at eny tyme: Syt on my ryght hande, tyll I make thyne enemyes thy fote stole?
Are they not all minystrynge spretes, that are sent to minyster, for theyr sakes whych shalbe heyres of saluacyon?
Wherfore, we ought to geue the more ernest hede to the thynges that are spoken vnto vs, lest at any tyme we perysshe.
For yf the worde whych was spoken by angells was stedfast: And euery transgressyon and disobedience receaued a iust recompence of rewarde,
howe shall we escape, yf we despyse so great saluacyon, which at the fyrst began to be preached of the Lorde hym selfe, and was confirmed vnto vs warde, by them that hearde it?
God bearynge wytnes therto, both with sygnes Ꟶ wonders also Ꟶ with diuers myracles, Ꟶ gyftes of the holy gooste, accordynge to hys awne wyll.
For vnto the angels hath he not subdued the worlde to come, wherof we speake,
but one in a certayne place wytnessed, sayinge, What is man, that thou art myndfull of hym. Or the sonne of man, that thou visitest hym?
Thou madest hym a lytle lower then the angels: thou hast crowned hym with honour Ꟶ glory, and hast set hym aboue the workes of thy handes.
Thou hast put all thynges in subieccyon vnder hys fete. In that he put all thynges vnder him, he left nothynge that is not put vnder him.
Neuerthelesse, we se not yet all thynges subdued vnto him: but him that was made lesse then the angels, we se that it was Iesus, which is crowned with glory and honour for the sofferynge of death: that he by the grace of God, shulde tast of deeth for all men.
For it became him, for whom are all thinges and by whom are all thynges (after that he had brought many sonnes vnto glory) that he shulde make the Lorde of their saluacyon perfecte thorowe affliccyons.
For both he that sanctifyeth and they which are sanctyfyed, are all of one. For whych causes sake he is not a shamed to call them brethren,
sayinge: I wyll declare thy name vnto my brethren, in the myddes of the congregacyon wyll I prayse the.
And agayne: I wyll put my trust in hym. And agayne: beholde, here am I and the chyldren whom God hath geuen me.
For as moch then as the chyldren are partetakers of flesshe and bloud, he also him selfe lykewyse toke parte with them that (thorowe deeth) he myght expell hym that had lordshyppe ouer deeth, that is to saye the deuyll,
and that he myght delyuer them, which thorowe feare of deeth were all there lyfe tyme subdued vnto bondage.
For he in no place taketh on hym the angels: but the seed of Abraham taketh he on hym.
Wherfore, in all thynges it became hym to be made lyke vnto his brethren, that he myght be mercyfull, and a faythfull hye Preste in thynges concernynge God, for to pourge the peoples synnes.
For in that it fortuned hym selfe to be tempted, he is able to sucker them also that are tempted.
Therfore holy brethren, partakers of the celestiall callynge consyder the ambassadour and hye preste of oure professyon Christ Iesus,
howe that he is faythfull vnto hym that put hym in the offyce, euen as was Moses in all his house.
For loke howe moche honoure he (that hath buylded a house) hath more then the house it selfe, so moch honour is he counted worthy of more then Moses.
For euery house is buylded of some man. But he that ordeyned all thynges, is God.
And Moses verely was faythfull in all hys house, as a minyster, to beare witnes of those thynges which were to be spoken afterwarde.
But Christ as a sonne, hath rule ouer the house, whose house are we, yf we holde fast the confydence and the reioysynge of that hope, vnto the ende.
Wherfore (as the holy goost sayth:) to daye yf ye wyll heare hys voyce,
harden not youre hertes, as in the prouokynge, in the daye of temptacyon in the wyldernes,
where youre fathers tempted me, proued me, and sawe my workes .xl. yeare.
Wherfore I was greued with the generacyon, and sayde: They do all waye erre in their hertes: they verely haue not knowen my wayes,
so that I sware in my wrath: they shall not enter into my rest.
Take hede brethren, lest at anye tyme ther be in anye of you a frowarde herte subiect vnto vnbelefe, that he shulde departe from the lyuynge God:
but exhorte ye one another dayly, while it is called to daye: lest eny of you wexe harde harted thorowe the deceytfulnesse of synne.
We are made partetakers of Christ, yf we kepe sure (vnto the ende) the begynnynge of the substance,
so longe as it is sayde: to daye yf ye wyll heare hys voyce, harden not youre hertes, as in the prouokynge,
for some when they hearde dyd prouoke: howe be it not all the came out of Egypt by Moses.
But with whom was he despleased .xl. yeares? Was he not despleased with them that had synned, whose carkases were ouerthrowen in the desert?
To whom sware he that they shulde not enter into his rest, but vnto them that were not obedient?
And we se, that they coulde not enter in, because of vnbelefe:
Let vs feare therfore, lest eny of you (forsakynge the promes of entringe into hys rest) shulde seme at anye tyme to haue bene disapoynted.
For vnto vs is it declared, as well as vnto them. But it proffyted not them, that they hearde the worde: because they whych hearde it, coupled it not with fayth.
For we which haue beleued, do enter into his rest, as he sayde. Euen as I haue sworne in my wrath: they shall not enter into my rest. And that spake he verely longe after that the workes were made, and the foundacyon of the worlde layde.
For he spake in a certayne place of the seuenth daye, on thys wyse. And God dyd rest the seuenth daye from all hys workes.
And in thys place agayne: They shall not enter into my rest.
Seynge therfore it foloweth, that some must enter therinto, and they (to whom it was fyrst preached) entred not therin for vnbelefes sake,
he apoynteth a certayne daye after so longe a tyme sayinge in Dauid (as it is rehearsed) this daye yf ye wyll heare hys voyce, harden not your hertes.
For yf Iosue had geuen them rest, then wolde he not afterwarde haue spoken of another daye.
There remayneth therfore yet a rest to the people of God.
For he that is entred into hys rest hath ceased also from his awne workes, as God dyd from his.
Let vs study therfore to entre into that rest, lest eny man fall after the same ensample of vnbelefe.
For the worde of God is quycke, and myghty in operacion, and sharper then eny two edged swearde: Ꟶ entreth through, euen vnto the diuidynge a sonder of the soule and the sprete, and of the ioyntes and the mary: and is a discerner of the thoughtes and of the intentes of the herte:
nether is ther eny creature that is not manifest in the syght of him: But all thinges are naked and open vnto the eyes of him, of whom we speake.
Seynge then, that we haue a great hye prest which is entred into heauen (euen Iesus the sonne of God) let vs holde the profession.
For we haue not an hye preste, which cannot haue compassyon on oure infirmities: but was in all poyntes tempted, lyke as we are: but yet with out synne.
Let vs therfore go boldely vnto the seate of grace, that we maye obtayne mercy, and fynde grace to helpe in tyme of nede.
For euery hye preste that is taken from amonge men, is ordeyned for men, in thynges pertaynynge to God to offer gyftes and sacrifyces for synne,
which can haue compassion on the ignoraunt, and on them that erre out of the waye, for as moch as he him selfe also is compassed with infirmitie.
And for the same infirmities sake he is bounde to offer for synnes, as well for him selfe, as for the people.
And no man taketh honour vnto him selfe, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.
Euen so Christ also glorified not him selfe, to be made the hye preste: but he that sayde vnto him, thou art my sonne, this daye haue I begoten the, glorifyed him.
As he sayeth also in another place: thou art a Preste for euer after the order of Melchisedech
which in the dayes of his flesshe, whan he had offered vp prayers and supplicacions, with stronge cryinge and teares (vnto him that was able to saue him from deeth) and was hearde because of hys reuerence,
though he were the sonne yet learned he obedience, by those thynges which he suffered:
Ꟶ he beynge perfecte, was the cause of eternall saluacion vnto all them that obeyed him:
and is called of God an hye Prest, after the order of Melchisedech.
Wherof we wolde speake many thinges but they are harde to be vttered: seynge ye are dull of hearinge.
For when as concerninge the tyme, ye ought to be teachers, yet haue ye nede agayne, that we teache you the fyrst principles of the worde of God: and are become soch as haue nede of mylke: and not of stronge meate:
for euery man that is fed with mylke, is inexperte in the worde of ryghteousnes. For he is but a babe.
But stronge meate belongeth to them that are perfecte euen those, which (by reason of vse) haue their wittes exercised to discerne both good and euyll.
Therfore leauynge the doctryne that pertayneth to the begynnynge of Christen men, let vs go forth vnto perfeccion, not layenge agayne the foundacyon of repentaunce from deed workes and of fayth towarde God,
of baptysynges, of doctryne, and of layinge on of handes, and of resurreccyon from deeth, and of eternall iudgement.
And so wyll we do If God permytte.
For it can not be that they which were once lyghted, and haue tasted of the heauenly gyfte, Ꟶ were become partakers of the holy goost,
and haue tasted of the good worde of God, and of the power of the worlde to come:
yf they fall awaye (and as concernynge them selues crucifye the sonne of God a fresshe, and make a mocke of him) that they shulde be renued agayne by repentaunce.
For the erth which dryncketh in the rayne that commeth oft vpon it, and bringeth forth herbes mete for them that dresse it, receaueth blessinge of God.
But that grounde which beareth thornes and bryars, is reproued, and is nye vnto cursynge: whose ende is to be burned.
Neuerthelesse (deare frendes) we trust to se better of you, and thynges which accompany saluacion, though we thus speake.
For God is not vnryghteous that he shulde forget youre worke and laboure that procedeth of loue, which loue ye shewe in his name, which haue ministred vnto the saynctes, and yet minister.
Yee, and we desyre, that euery one of you shewe the same diligence, to the full stablishinge of hope, euen vnto the ende,
that ye faynt not, but be folowers of them, which thorowe fayth and pacience receaue the enheritaunce of the promyse.
For when God made promes to Abraham because he had none greater to sweare by he sware by him selfe,
sayinge: Surely I will blesse the, and multiplie the in dede.
And so after that he had taried paciently, he enioyed the promes.
For men verely sweare by hym that is greater then them selues, and an othe to confyrme the thynge, is to them an ende of all stryfe.
So God wyllinge very aboundantly to shewe vnto the heyres of promes, the stablenes of his counsayl, added an oth:
that by two immutable thynges (in whych it was vnpossible that God shulde lye) we myght haue a stronge consolacyon, which hitherto haue fled, for to holde fast the hope that is set before vs,
whych hope we holde as an ancre of the soule both sure and stedfast, whych hope also entreth in, into those thinges which are with in the vayle,
where the fore runner is for vs entred, euen Iesus, that is made an hye preste for euer, after the order of Melchisedech.
This Melchisedech kynge of Salem (which beinge preste of the most hye God, met Abraham, as he returned agayne from the slaughter of the kynges and blessed him:
to whom also Abraham gaue tythes of all thynges) fyrst is called by interpretacion kynge of ryghtewesnes: after that, kynge of Salem (that is to saye, Kynge of peace)
wythout father without mother, without kynne, Ꟶ hath nether begynnynge of dayes, nether yet ende of lyfe: but is likened vnto the sonne of God and contynueth a preste for euer.
Consyder what a man this was, vnto whom also the patriarke Abraham gaue tythes of the spoyles.
And verely those chyldren of Leuy, which receaue the office of the prestes, haue a commaundement to take (accordinge to the lawe) tythes of the people, that is to saye, of their brethren, yee though they spronge out of the loynes of Abraham.
But he whose kynred is not counted amonge them, receaued tythes of Abraham, and blessed him that had the promises.
And no man denyeth, but that he which is lesse, receaueth blessynge of him which is greater.
And here men that dye, receaue tythes. But there he receaueth tythes, of whom it is wytnessed, that he lyueth.
And to saye the trueth, Leuy hym selfe also which vseth to receaue tythes payed tythes in Abraham.
For he was yet in the loynes of hys father whan Melchisedech met Abraham.
If now therfore perfeccion came by the presthod of the Leuytes (for vnder that presthod the people receaued the lawe) what neded it furthermore, that another prest shuld ryse to be called after the order of Melchisedech, and not after the order of Aaron?
For yf the presthod be translated, then of necessitie must the lawe be translated also.
For he of whom these thynges are spoken pertayne vnto another trybe, of whom neuer man serued at the aultare.
For it is euident that oure Lorde spronge of the trybe of Iuda, of whych trybe spake Moses nothinge concerninge presthod.
And it is yet a more euident thynge, yf after the similitude of Melchisedech there aryse another preste,
whych is not made after the lawe of the carnall commaundement: but after the power of the endlesse lyfe.
(For after thys maner doth he testifie thou art a prest for euer, after the order of Melchisedech)
Then the commaundement that went afore, is disanulled, because of weaknes and vnproffytablenes.
For the lawe brought nothynge to perfeccion: but was an introduccyon to a better hope, by the whych we drawe nye vnto God.
And therfore is it a better hope, because the thing was not done without an othe.
For those prestes were made without an othe, but thys preste with an othe, by hym that sayde vnto hym. The Lorde sware, and wyll not repent: Thou art a prest for euer after the order of Melchisedech.
And for that cause was Iesus a stablyssher of a better testament.
And amonge them many were made prestes, because they were not suffred to endure by the reason of deeth
But this man (because he endureth euer) hath an euerlasteng presthode.
Wherfore, he is able also euer to saue them to the vttemost, that come vnto God by him, seynge he euer lyueth to make intercession for vs.
For soch an hye Prest it became vs to haue, which is holy, harmlesse, vndefiled, separate from synners, made hyer then heauen.
Which nedeth not dayly (as yonder hye prestes) to offer vp sacrifice. Fyrst for his awne synnes and then for the peoples synnes. For that dyd he once, when he offered vp him self.
For the lawe maketh men prestes, which haue infirmitie: but the worde of the oth that came sence the lawe, maketh the sonne preste, whych is perfecte for euermore.
Of the thynges which we haue spoken, thys is the pyth: that we haue soch an hye preste as sytteth on the ryght hande of the seate of maiestye in heauen,
and is a minyster of holy thynges, and of the true tabernacle, whych God pyght, and not man.
For euery hye prest is ordeyned to offer gyftes and sacrifices: wherfore it is of necessite, that this man haue some what also to offer.
For he were not a prest, yf he were on the erth where are prestes, that accordynge to the law
offer gyftes whych serue vnto the ensample, and shadowe of heauenly thynges: euen as the answere of God was geuen vnto Moses, when he was about to fynyssh the tabernacle. Take hede (sayde he) that thou make all thinges accordinge to the patrone which is shewed to the in the mount.
But now hath he obtayned a presthode so moch the more excellent, as he is the mediator of a better testament, which was confirmed in better promyses.
For yf that fyrst testament had bene soch, that no faute coulde haue bene founde in it, then shulde no place haue bene sought for the seconde.
For in rebukynge them, he sayth vnto them. Beholde the dayes come (sayth the Lord) and I wyll fynyssh vpon the house of Israel, and vpon the house of Iuda,
a new testament: not like the testament that I made with theyr fathers in that daye, when I toke them by the handes, to leade them out of the land of Egypte. For they contynued not in my testament, and I regarded them not sayth the Lord.
For this is the testament, that I wyll make wt the house of Israel: After those dayes (sayth the Lord) I wyll put my lawes in their myndes, and in their hertes I will write them, and I wylbe their God, and they shalbe my people.
And they shall not teach euery man hys neyghboure, and euery man hys brother, saying: knowe the Lord: for they shall knowe me, from the least to the moste of them:
For I wilbe mercyfull ouer their vnrightewesnes, and their synnes Ꟶ their iniquities will I thinke vpon nomore.
In that he sayth a new testament, he hath worne out the olde, For that which is worne out Ꟶ wexed olde, is redy to vanyshe awaye.
The olde testament then had verely ordynaunces, and seruinges of God, and wordly holynes.
For there was a fore tabernacle made, wherin was the lyght, and the table, and the shewe breed, whych hys called holy.
But within the seconde vayle was there a tabernacle, whych is called holyest of all,
whych had the golden senser, and the arcke of the testament ouerlayde round about with golde, wherin was the golden pot with Manna, and Aarons rodde, that spronge and the tables of the testament.
Ouer the arcke were the Cherubins of glory, shadowyng the seate of grace. Of which thynges we cannot now speake particularly.
When these thinges were thus ordeyned, the prestes went allwayes into the fyrst tabernacle, whych executed the seruice of the holy thinges.
But into the seconde, went the hye prest alone once euery yeare: not wyth out bloud which he offered for him selfe, and for the ignoraunces of the people.
Wherwith the holy goost thys signifyed, that the waye of holy thynges was not yet opened, whyll as yet the fyrst tabernacle was standyng.
Which was a symilitude for the tyme then present, in which were offered gyftes and sacrifices, that coulde not make the minister parfecte, as pertayning to the conscyence,
wyth onely meates Ꟶ drinckes, Ꟶ diuers wasshinges and iustifyinges of the fleshe, whych were ordeyned vntyll the tyme of reformacyon.
But Christ beynge and hye Prest of good thynges to come, came by a greater Ꟶ a more perfecte tabernacle, not made wyth handes: that is to saye, not of thys buylding,
nether by the bloude of goates Ꟶ calues: but by hys awne bloude he entred in once into the holy place, and founde eternall redempcyon.
For yf the bloud of oxen and of gotes Ꟶ the asshes of a yong kow, when it was sprinckcled, purifieth the vnclene, as touchyng the purifyinge of the flesshe:
how moch moare shall the bloud of Christ (which thorow the eternall sprete, offered him self without spot to God) pourge youre conscience from deed workes, for to serue the lyuinge God?
And for this cause is he the mediator of the new testament, that thorow deeth which chaunsed, for the redempcion of those transgressions that were vnder the fyrst testament they whych are called, myght receaue the promes of eternall inheritaunce.
For where as is a testament, ther must also (of necessite) be the deeth of hym that maketh the testament.
For the testament taketh auctoritie when men are deed: for it is yet of no value, as longe as he that maketh the testament is alyue,
for which cause also nether the first testament was ordeyned without bloude.
For when Moses had declared all the commaundement to all the people according to the lawe, he toke the bloud of calues and of goates, with water Ꟶ purple wolle, and ysope, and sprinckled both the boke, Ꟶ all the people,
saying: this is the bloud of the testament, whych God hath appoynted vnto you.
Moreouer, he sprinckled the tabernacle wyth bloud also, and all the ministringe vessels.
And almost all thinges are by the lawe purged with bloud, Ꟶ without sheadinge of bloud is no remissyon.
It is nede then, that the similitudes of heauenly thynges be purifyed wyth soch thynges: but that the heauenly thynges them selues be purifyed wt better sacrifyces then are those.
For Christ is not entred into the holy places that are made wyth handes (whych are symilitudes of true thynges) but is entred into very heauen, for to appeare now in the syght of God for vs:
not to offer hym selfe often as the hye prest entreth into the holy place euery yeare with straunge bloud,
for then must he haue often offered sence the worlde began. But now in the ende of the worlde, hath he appeared once, to put sinne to flight by the offerynge vp of him selfe.
And as it is apoynted vnto all men tkat they shall once dye, and then commeth the iudgement
euen so Christ was once offered, to take awaye the sinnes of many, Ꟶ vnto them that loke for hym shall he appeare agayne without synne vnto saluacyon.
For the lawe (hauynge the shadowe of good thynges to come, and not the very fasshion of the thinges them selues) can neuer with those sacrifices which they offer; yeare by yeare continually make the commers therunto parfayt.
For wold not then those sacrifices haue ceased to haue bene offred, because that the offerers once purged shuld haue had no more conscience of synnes?
Neuerthelesse, in those sacrifyces, is there mencyon made of synnes euery yeare.
For the bloude of oxen and of goates can not take awaye synnes.
Wherfore, when he commeth into the worlde he sayth: Sacryfyce and offerynge thou woldest not haue: but a bodye hast thou ordeyned me:
Burnt offerynges also for synne hast thou not alowed.
Then sayd I: lo, I am here. In the begynnyng of the booke it is written of me, that I shuld do thy will, o God.
Aboue, when he sayeth: sacryfice Ꟶ offeryng, Ꟶ burnt sacryfyces and synne offerynges thou woldest not haue, nether hast thou alowed them (whiche yet are offered by the lawe)
then sayd he: Lo, I am here, to do thy wyll, o God: he taketh awaye the fyrst to stablisshe the latter,
by wych will we are made holy, euyn by the offeryng of the body of Iesu Christe once for all.
And euery prest is ready dayly ministring and offryng often tymes one maner of oblacion, which can neuer take awaye synnes.
But thys man after he hath offered one sacrifice for synnes, is set downe for euer on the ryght hand of God,
Ꟶ from hence forth taryeth tyll his foes be made his fote stole.
For wt one offeringe hath he made parfecte for euer, them that are sanctyfyed.
The holy goost him self also beareth vs recorde, euen when he tolde before:
This is the testament that I wyll make vnto them: after those dayes (sayth the lorde) I will put my lawes in their hertes, Ꟶ in their myndes will I write them,
Ꟶ their synnes Ꟶ iniquities will I remember nomore.
And where remission of these thynges is, ther is nomore offeryng for synne.
Seyng therfore brethren, that by the meanes of the bloud of Iesu we haue libertye to enter into the holy place,
by the new Ꟶ lyuing waye whych he hath prepared for vs, through the vayle (that is to saye, by his flesshe.)
And seing also that we haue an hye prest whych is ruler ouer the house of God,
let vs draw nye wt a true herte in a sure fayth, sprynckeled in our hertes Ꟶ the euyll conscience put awaye Ꟶ wesshed in our bodyes wt pure water:
let vs kepe the profession of our hope, wt out waueryng (for he is faithfull that promysed)
Ꟶ let vs consider one another, to the intent that we maye prouoke vnto loue, Ꟶ to good workes,
not forsakynge the felishyppe that we haue among our selues, as the maner of some is: but let vs exhorte one another, Ꟶ so moch the more, because ye se that the daye draweth nye.
For yf we synne wyllfully after that we haue receaued the knowledge of the trueth, ther remayneth nomore sacryfyce for synnes,
but a fearfull lokyng for iudgement, Ꟶ violent fyre, whych shall deuoure the aduersaries.
He that despiseth Moses lawe, dyeth wythout mercy vnder two or thre witnesses:
how moch sorer (suppose ye) shall he be ponisshed which treadeth vnder fote the sonne of God: Ꟶ counteth the bloude of the testament, wherwith he was sanctifyed, as an vnholy thyng, Ꟶ doth dishonoure to the sprete of grace.
For we knowe hym that hath sayd: It belongeth vnto me to take vengeaunce. I wyll recompence sayth the Lord. And agayne: the Lord shal iudge his people.
It is a fearfull thynge to fall into the handes of the lyuyng God.
Call to remembraunce the dayes that are passed, in the whych after ye had receaued lyght, ye endured a greate fyght of aduersities,
partly whyle all men wondred Ꟶ gased at you for the shame and tribulacyon on that was done vnto you: partly, whyle ye became companyons of them which so passed their tyme.
For ye became parttakers also of the afflyccyons whych happened thorow my bondes, Ꟶ toke in worth the spoylyng of your goodes, Ꟶ that wyth gladnes: knowynge in your selues, how that ye haue in heauen a better Ꟶ an enduring substaunce.
Cast not awaye therfore your confydence, whych hath a great recompence of rewarde.
For ye haue nede of pacyence, that after ye haue done the wyll of God, ye myght receaue the promes.
For yet a very lytell whyle, Ꟶ he that shall come wyll come, Ꟶ wyll not tary.
But the iust shall lyue by faith. And yf he withdrawe him selfe, my soule shall haue no pleasure in him.
It is not we that withdrawe our selues vnto dampnacion, but we partayne vnto fayth, to the wynnynge of the soule.
Fayth is a sure confydence of thynges, whych are hoped for, Ꟶ a certayntie of thynges whych are not sene.
For by it the elders obtayned a good reporte.
Thorowe fayth we vnderstande, that the worlde was ordeyned by the worde of God, and that thinges whych are sene, were made of thynges whych were not sene.
By fayth Abel offered vnto God a more plenteous sacryfyce then Cayn: by whych he obteyned witnes that he was ryghteous, God testyfyinge of his gyftes: by whych also he beyng deed, yet speaketh.
By fayth was Enoch translated, that he shulde not se deeth: nether was he founde: for god had taken him awaye. For a fore he was taken awaye, he obteyned a good reporte, that he pleased God:
but without fayth it can not be that anye man shuld please him. For he that commeth to God, must beleue that God is, Ꟶ that he is a rewarder of them that seke hym.
By fayth Noe beynge warned of God, eschued the thynges which were as yet not sene, and prepared the arke to the sauynge of hys housholde, thorow the whych arke, he condempned the worlde, and became heyre of the ryghtewesnes which is accordyng to fayth.
By fayth Abraham, when he was called obeyed, to go out into a place, which he shuld afterwarde receaue to inheritaunce: Ꟶ he went out, not knowing whether he shuld go.
By fayth he remoued into the lande of promes, as into a straunge countre, whan he had dwelt in tabernacles: Ꟶ so dyd Isaac Ꟶ Iacob heyres wt hym of the same promes.
For he loked for a cytie hauyng a foundacyon, whose buylder and maker is God.
Thorow fayth Sara also receaued strength to conceaue and be with chylde, and was delyuered of a childe when she was past age, because she iudged him faythful which had promysed.
And therfore sprange ther of one (euen of one whych was as good as deed) so many in multitude as are the starres of the skye, Ꟶ as the sond, that which is by the see shore, innumerable.
These all dyed accordinge to fayth, whan they had not receaued the promises: but sawe them a farre of, and beleued them, Ꟶ saluted them, and confessed, that they were straungers and pilgrems on the erthe.
For they that saye soch thynges, declare, that they seke a countre.
Also yf they had bene myndfull of the countre, from whence they came out, they had leasure to haue returned agayne:
but now they desyre a better (that is to saye) a heauenly. Wherfore God himselfe is not ashamed to be called theyr God for he hath prepared for them a citye.
By fayth Abraham offered vp Isaac, when he was proued, and he offered him beyng his only begotten sonne, in whom he had receaued the promyses.
And to hym it was sayde, in Isaac shal thy seed be called:
for he consydered, that God was able to rayse vp agayne from deeth. Therfore, receaued he him also for an ensample of the resurreccion.
By fayth did Isaac blesse Iacob and Esau, concernyng thynges to come.
By fayth Iacob when he was a dying, blessed both the sonnes of Ioseph, Ꟶ bowed him selfe towarde the toppe of hys scepter.
By fayth Ioseph when he dyed, remembred the departing of the children of Israel, Ꟶ gaue commaundement of hys bones.
By fayth Moses when he was borne was hyd thre monethes of his father Ꟶ mother because they sawe he was a proper childe, nether feared they the kynges commaundement.
By fayth Moses when he was great, refused to be called the sonne of Pharaos daughter,
Ꟶ chose rather to suffre aduersitie wyth the people of God, then to enioye the pleasures of synne for a ceason,
and estemed the rebuke of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt. For he had respect vnto the rewarde.
By fayth he forsoke Egipt Ꟶ feared not the fearcenes of the king. For he endured, euen as though he had sene him which is inuisible.
Thorow fayth he ordeyned the passeouer and that effusyon of bloud, lest he that destroyed the fyrst borne, shulde touch them.
By fayth they passed thorow the reed see as by drye lande: which when the Egypcyans had assayed to do, they were drowned.
By fayth the walles of Iericho fell downe after they were compassed about seuen dayes.
By fayth that harlot Raab perisshed not wt them that were disobedient, when she had receaued the spyes to lodgyng peaseably.
And what shall I more saye: for the tyme wyll be to short for me to tell of Gedon, of Barach, Ꟶ of Sampson, Ꟶ of Iephthae, of Dauid also Ꟶ Samuel, Ꟶ of the Prophetes:
Which thorow faith subdued kingdomes wrought righteousnes: obteyned the promyses: stopped the mouthes of lyons:
quenched that violence of fyre: escaped the edge of the swearde: out of weaknesse, were made stronge: waxed valient in fyght: turned to flight the armyes of the alientes
the wemen receaued theyr deed raysed to lyfe agayne. Other were racked, Ꟶ wolde not be delyuered, that they myght inheret a better resurrection.
Agayne, other were tried wt mockynges Ꟶ scourginges moreouer, wt bondes Ꟶ presonment:
were stoned, were hewen asunder, were tempted, were slayne wt swearde, walked vp Ꟶ downe in shepe skynnes, and goates skynnes, being destitute, troubled Ꟶ vexed:
which men that worlde was not worthy of: they wandred in wildernesses: Ꟶ in mountaynes, and in dennes, and caues of erth.
And these all thorow faith obtained good reporte, Ꟶ receaued not the promes,
because God had prouided a better thing for vs, that they wt out vs shuld not be made parfecte.
Wherfore, let vs also (seyng that we are compassed with so great a multitude of witnesses) laye awaye all that presseth doune, and the synne that hangeth so fast on, let vs runne with pacience vnto the battayle that is set before vs,
lookyng vnto Iesus the captayne Ꟶ finissher of our fayth, which (for the ioye that was set before him) abode the crosse, Ꟶ despised the shame, Ꟶ is set downe on the ryghte hande of the throne of God.
Consyder therfore, how that he endured such speakinge agaynst hym of synners lest ye shuld be weryed and faynte in your mindes.
For ye haue not yet resysted vnto bloud, striuynge agaynst synne.
And haue forgotten the exhortacion, which speaketh vnto you as vnto children? my sonne, despyse not thou the chastening of the Lord, nether faynt, when thou art rebuked of hym:
for whom the Lorde loueth, hym he chasteneth: yee, he scourgeth euery sonne that he receaueth.
If ye endure chastening, God offereth him selfe vnto you as vnto sonnes. What sonne is he whom the father chasteneth not?
If ye be not vnder correccion (where of all are part takers) then are ye bastardes, and not sonnes.
Therfore seyng we haue had fathers of our flesshe which corrected vs, Ꟶ we gaue them reuerence: shall we not moch rather be in subieccion vnto the father of spirites, Ꟶ lyue?
And they verely for a feaw dayes, nurtred vs after theyr awne pleasure: but he nurteth vs for our profit, to the intent that he maye mynister of his holynes vnto vs.
No maner chastisyng for the present tyme semeth to be ioyous, but greueous: neuertheles afterwarde, it bringeth the quyet frute of ryghtewesnes, vnto them which are exercysed therby.
Stretch forth therfore the handes which were let downe, and the weake knees:
and se that ye haue strayght steppes vnto youre fete, lest eny halting turne you out of the waye: yee let it rather be healed.
Folow peace with all men and holynes: with out the which no man shall se the Lorde.
And loke, that no man be destitute of the grace of god, lest anye roote of bytternes spryng vp and trouble, Ꟶ therby many be defyled:
that ther be no fornicator, or vncleane person, as Esau whych for one mease of meate solde his byrthryght.
For ye knowe how that afterwarde when he wolde by inheretaunce haue optayned blessyng, he was put by, For he founde no place of repentaunce, though he sought it with teares.
For ye are not come vnto the mounte that is touched, Ꟶ vnto burnyng fyre, nor vnto storme, Ꟶ darcknes, and tempestes of wedder,
and sounde of a trompe, and the voyce of wordes: which voyce, they (that hearde it) wysshed awaye, that the communicacyon shuld not be spoken to them,
For they coulde not abyde that which was commaunded. If a beast touche the mountayne, it shall be stoned, or thrust thorow with a darte:
so terrible was the syght which appeared. Moses sayde: I feare and quake.
But ye are come vnto the mount Syon, and to the citye of the liuynge God, the celestiall Ierusalem: and to an innumerable syght of angels,
and vnto the congregacion of the fyrst borne sonnes; whych are wrytten in heauen, and to God, the iudge of all, Ꟶ to the spretes of iust and parfecte men,
and to Iesus the mediator of the new testament, Ꟶ to the sprincklynge of bloud that speaketh better then the bloud of Abel.
Se that ye despyse not hym, that speaketh. For yf they escaped not, whych refused him that spake on erth: moch more shall we not escape, yf we turne awaye from hym, that speaketh from heauen:
whose voyce then shoke the erth, and now hath declared sayinge: yet once more will I shake, not the erth onely, but also heauen.
Where as he sayth: yet once more, it signifyeth the remouyng awaye of those thynges which are shaken as of thinges which haue ended their course: that the thynges which are not shaken, maye remayne.
Wherefore, yf we receaue the kyngdome which can not be moued, we haue grace, wherby we maye so serue God, and that we maye please hym with reuerence and godly feare.
For oure God is a consumyng fyre.
Let brotherly loue continu
Be not forgetfull to lodge straungers, For therby haue dyuers men lodged angels vnwares.
Remember them that are in bondes, euen as though ye were bounde wt them your selues. Be myndfull of them which are in aduersyte, as ye which are yet in the bodye.
Wedlocke is to be had in honoure among all men, and the bed vndefyled. As for whore kepers Ꟶ aduoutrers God shall iudge them.
Let your conuersacyon be without coueteousnes and be content with soch thynges as ye haue all ready. For he hath sayd: I will not fayle the, nether forsake the:
so that we maye boldly saye: the Lorde is my helper, and I will not feare what man maye do vnto me.
Remember them whych haue the ouersyght of you, whych haue spoken vnto you the worde of God. Whose fayth se that ye folowe, and consider the ende of theyr conuersacyon.
Iesus Christ yesterdaye and to daye, and the same continueth for euer.
Be not caryed aboute with diuers and straunge learnyng. For it is a good thynge that the herte be stablysshed with grace, and not wt meates, which haue not proffeted them that haue had theyr pastyme in them.
We haue an aulter, wherof they maye not eate, which serue in the tabernacle.
For the bodyes of those beastes whose bloud is brought into the holy place by the hye prest to purge synne, are burnt with out the tentes.
Therfore Iesus also to sanctifye the people with hys awne bloud, suffered without the gate.
Let vs goo forth therfore vnto hym, out of the tentes, and suffer rebuke with hym.
For here haue we no continuynge cytie: but we seke one to come.
By him therfore do we offer sacrifyce of lande alwayes to God: that is to saye, the frute of those lippes, which cofesse his name.
To do good Ꟶ to distribute, forget not, for wt such sacrifyces God is pleased.
Obeye them that haue the ouer syght of you, Ꟶ submyt your selues vnto them, for they watch for your soules, euen as they that must geue acomptes: that they maye do it with ioye, Ꟶ not with grefe. For that is an vnproffitable thyng for you.
Praye for vs. For we trust we haue a good conscience among all men, and desyre to lyue honestly,
But I desyre you the more, that ye so do, that I maye be restored to you the sooner.
The God of peace that brought agayne from deeth our Lorde Iesus the gret shepperde of the shepe, thorow the bloud of the euerlastyng testament,
make you parfect in all good workes, to do hys wyll, and bryng to passe, that the thyng which ye do, maye be pleasaunt in his syght thorowe Iesus Christ. To whom be prayse for euer whyle the world endureth. Amen.
I beseche you brethren, suffre the worde of exhortation: for we haue wrytten vnto you in feawe wordes.
Ye knowe our brother Timothe, that he is at libertye: with whom (yf he come shortly) I wyll se you.
Salute them that haue the ouersyght of you, and all the saynctes. They of Italy salute you.
Grace be with you all. Amen.
Iames the seruaunt of God Ꟶ of the Lorde Iesus Christ, sendeth gretyng to the twelue trybes which are scattered abroade.
My brethren, count it for an excedyng ioye, when ye fall into diuers temptacyons:
knowyng this, that the trying of your fayth gendreth pacience:
and let pacience haue her parfect worke, that ye maye be parfecte and sounde, lackyng nothyng.
If eny of you lacke wysdome, let hym aske of him that geueth it: euen God, which geueth to all men indifferentlye, and casteth no man in the teeth: and it shalbe geuen him.
But let him aske in fayth, and wauer not, For he that douteth, is lyke a waue of the see, which is tost of the wyndes and caryed with violence.
Nether let that man thinke, that he shall receaue eny thing of the Lorde.
A wauerynng mynded man, is vnstable in all his wayes.
Let the brother which is of lowe degre reioyce whan he is exalted.
Agayne: let hym that is riche, reioyce whan he is made lowe. For euen as the flower of the grasse, shall he passe awaye.
For as the sonne ryseth with heat, Ꟶ the grasse wydereth, Ꟶ hys flower falleth awaye, and the beautie of the fassyon of it perissheth: euen so shall the rich man perisshe in his wayes.
Happy is the man that endureth temptacyon: for when he is tryed, he shall receaue the crowne of lyfe, which the Lorde hath promysed to them that loue hym.
Let no man saye when he is tempted, that he is tempted of God, for as God can not be tempted with euill, so nether he hymselfe tempt the eny man.
But euery man is tempted, whan he is drawne awaye, Ꟶ entysed of hys awne concupiscence.
Then, when lust hath conceaued, she bryngeth forth synne: Ꟶ synne when it is finisshed, bryngeth forth deeth.
Do not erre my deare brethren,
Euery good gyfte, and euery parfayt gyft, is from aboue, and commeth downe from the father of lyghtes wt whome is no variablenes, nether is he chaunged vnto darcknes.
Of hys awne wyll begat he vs with the worde of trueth, that we shulde be the fyrst frutes of hys creatures.
Wherfore (deare brethren) let euery man be swyfte to heare, slowe to speake, slowe to wrath.
For the wrath of man worketh not that which is ryghteous before God.
Wherfore laye a parte all fylthynes Ꟶ superfluyte of maliciousnes, and receaue wt meknes, the worde that is graffed in you, which is able to saue your soules.
And se that ye be doars of the worde Ꟶ not hearers onely, deceauing your awne selues.
For yf eny man heare the worde and declareth not the same by his workes, he is lyke vnto a man beholding his bodely face in a glasse.
For assone as he hath loked on hym selfe, he goeth his waye, Ꟶ forgetteth immediatly what hys fassyon was.
But who so loketh in the parfayt lawe of libertye, and contynueth therin (yf he be not a forget full hearer, but a doar of the worke) the same shalbe happye in his dede.
If eny man among you seme to be deuoute Ꟶ, refrayneth not hys tong, but deceaueth hys awne hert, thys mannes deuocyon is in vayne.
Pure deuocyon and vndefyled before God the father, is this: to visyt the fatherlesse Ꟶ widdowes in theyr aduersyte, Ꟶ to kepe him selfe vnspotted of the worlde.
My brethren, esteme not the fayth of our Lorde Iesus Christ the Lorde of glory wt respecte of persons.
For if ther come into youre company a man wearyng a golden ryng, clothed in goodly aparell, and ther come in also a poore man in vyle rayment,
Ꟶ ye haue a respecte to him that weareth the gaye clothing, and say vnto him: Syt thou here in a good place: and saye vnto the poore: stande thou there, or syt here vnder my fote stole:
are ye not parciall in youre selues, and haue iudged after euyll thoughtes?
Harken my deare beloued brethren. Hath not God chosen the poore of thys worlde, soch as are ryche in faythe, Ꟶ heyres of the kyngdome, whych he promysed to them that loue hym?
But ye haue despysed the poore. Do not rych men execute tyrannye vpon you, and draw you before the iudgement seates.
Do not they speake euyll of that good name which is called vpon ouer you?
Yf ye fulfyll the royall lawe, accordynge to the scripture. (Thou shalte loue thyne neghboure as thy selfe) ye do well.
But yf ye regarde one person more then another, ye commyt synne, Ꟶ are rebuked of the lawe, as transgressours.
Whosoeuer shall kepe the whole lawe, Ꟶ yet fayle in one poynt, he is gyltie of all.
For he that sayd: Thou shalt not commyt adulterye, sayde also thou shalt not kyll. Though thou do none adulterye, yet yf thou kyll, thou art become a transgressor of the lawe.
So speake ye, and so do, as they that shalbe iudged by the lawe of libertye.
For he shal haue iudgement without mercy that sheweth no mercy: and mercy reioyseth agaynst iudgement.
What auayleth it my brethren, though a man saye he hath fayth, yf he haue no dedes? Can fayth saue hi
If a brother or a syster be naked Ꟶ destitute of dayly fode,
Ꟶ one of you saye vnto them: departe in peace, God send you warmnes Ꟶ fode, not wtstandyng ye geue them not those thinges which are nedful to the body, what shal it helpe?
Euen so fayth, yf it haue no dedes: is deed in it selfe:
But some man wyll saye: thou hast fayth, Ꟶ I haue dedes: shewe me thy fayth by thy dedes: Ꟶ I will shewe the my fayth by my dedes.
Beleuest thou that ther is one god? Thou doest well. The deuyls also beleue, Ꟶ tremble.
But wilt thou vnderstande. (O thou vayne man) the fayth without dedes is deed?
Was not Abraham oure father iustifyed thorow workes, when he had offered Isaac his sonne vpon the aulter?
Thou seest, how that fayth wrought wt his dedes, Ꟶ through the dedes was the fayth made parfecte:
Ꟶ the scripture was fulfylled, which sayth: Abraham beleued God, and it was reputed vnto hym for ryghtewesnes: Ꟶ he was called the frende of God.
Ye se then how that of dedes a man is iustifyed, and not of fayth onely.
Lykewyse also, was not Raab the harlot iustifyed thorow workes, when she had receaued the messengers, and had sent them out another waye?
For as the body, wythout the sprete is deed, euen so fayth wythout workes is deed also.
My brethren, be not euery man a master, knowinge how that we shal receaue the greater damnacion:
for in many thinges we synne all. If a man synne not in worde, the same is a perfecte man, Ꟶ able also to tame all the body.
Beholde, we put bittes in to the horses mouthes, that they maye obeye vs, Ꟶ we turne aboute all the body of them.
Beholde also the shyppes, whych though they be so great, Ꟶ are dryuen of fearce wyndes, yet are they turned about wyth a very small helme whyther soeuer the violence of the gouerner will.
Euen so the tonge is a lytel member also, and boasteth great thynges. Beholde, how gret a thynge a lytell fyre kyndleth,
and the tonge is fyre, euen a world of wyckednes. So is the tonge set amonge oure membres, that it defyleth the whole body, and setteth a fyre all that we haue of nature, and is it selfe set a fyre euen of hell.
All the natures of beastes, and of byrdes, and of serpentes, Ꟶ thinges of the see are meked and tamed of the nature of man.
But the tonge can no man tame. It is an vnruely euyll, full of deedly poyson.
Ther wt blesse we God the father, and therwith cursse wemen, which are made after the symilitude of God.
Out of one mouth proceadeth blessing and cursyng. My brethren, these thinges ought not so to be.
Doth a fountayne send forth at one place swete water and bytter also.
Can the fygge tree (my brethren) beare olyue beries: ether a a vyne beare fygges?
So can no fountayne geue bothe salt water Ꟶ fresshe also. Yf eny man be wyse Ꟶ endued wt knowledge amonge you, let hym shewe his workes out of good conuersacion with mekenes of wysdome.
But yf ye haue bytter enuyeng Ꟶ stryfe in your herte, reioyce not: nether be lyars agaynst the trueth:
For soch wysdome descendeth not from aboue: but is erthy, naturall, Ꟶ diuelisshe.
For wher enuyeng Ꟶ strife is, there is vnstablenes, Ꟶ all manner of euyll workes.
But the wysdome that is from aboue, is first pure, then peasable, gentle, Ꟶ easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good frutes, without iudging, without simulacion:
yee, Ꟶ the frute of ryghtewesnes is sowen in peace, of them that mayntene peace.
From whence commeth warre, and fyghtyng amonge you? come they not here hence? euen of youre lustes, that fight in your membres?
Ye lust, and haue not. Ye enuye Ꟶ haue indignacyon, Ꟶ can not obtayne. Ye fight Ꟶ warre. Ye haue not because ye aske not.
Ye aske and receaue not, because ye aske amysse: euen to consume it vpon your lustes.
Ye aduouterars, and wemen that breke matrimonye: knowe ye not how that the frendshyp of the worlde is enmytie wt God? whosoeuer therfore wilbe a frende of the worlde, is made the enemye of God.
Ether do ye thynke that the scripture sayth in vayne. The sprete the dwelleth in vs, lusteth euen contrary to enuy:
but geueth more grace.
Submit your selues therfore to God: but resyst the deuyll, and he will flye from you.
Drawe nye to God, and he will drawe nye to you. Clense your handes ye siners, Ꟶ pourge your hertes ye waueryng mynded.
Suffre afflictions Ꟶ mourne, Ꟶ wepe. Let your laughter be turned to mournyng, Ꟶ youre ioye to heuynes.
Humble youre selues in the sight of the lord, Ꟶ he shal lyft you vp.
Backbyte not one another, brethren. He that backbyteth his brother, Ꟶ he that iudgeth hys brother, backbyteth the lawe, and iudgeth the lawe. But Ꟶ yf thou iudge the lawe, thou art not an obseruer of the lawe: but a iudge.
Ther is one lawe geuer which is able to saue and to destroye. What art thou that iudgest another?
Go to now ye that saye: to daye and to morow let vs go into soch a citye, and continue there a yeare, and bye and sell, and wynne:
Ꟶ yet can not ye tell, what shall happen on the morow. For what thing is your lyfe? It is euen a vapour, that apereth for a lytell time, and then vanissheth awaye:
For that ye ought to saye: yf the Lord will, and yf we lyue, let vs do this or that.
But now ye reioyce in your boastynges. All soch reioysynge is euyll.
Therfore to hym that knoweth how to do good, and doth it not, to hym it is synne.
Go to now ye ryche men. Wepe, and howle on your wretchednes that shal come vpon you.
Your riches is corrupte, your garmentes are motheaten,
Youre golde Ꟶ syluer is cankred, and the rust of the shalbe a wytnes vnto you, Ꟶ shall eate youre flesshe as it were fyre. Ye haue heaped treasure together in your last dayes:
Beholde the hyre of labourers which haue reaped downe youre feldes (which hyre is of you kept backe by fraude) cryeth: Ꟶ the cryes of them which haue reaped, are entred in to the eares of the Lord Sabaoth.
Ye haue lyued in pleasure on the erthe, Ꟶ bene wantan. Ye haue norysshed youre hertes, as in a daye of slaughter.
Ye haue condempned and kylled the iust, and he hath not resisted you.
Be pacient therfore brethren, vnto the commynge of the Lord. Beholde, the husbande man wayteth for the precyous frute of the earth, Ꟶ hath longe pacience ther vpon, vntyll he receaue the early Ꟶ the latter rayne.
Be ye also pacient therfore, and settle youre hertes, for the commynge of the Lorde draweth nye.
Grudge not one agaynst another brethren lest ye be damned. Beholde, the iudge standeth before the dore.
Take (my brethren) the Prophetes for an ensample of sufferinge aduersytie, and of pacience, which spake in the name of the Lorde.
Beholde, we counte them happy which endure. Ye haue heard of the pacience of Iob, and haue knowen what ende the Lorde made. For the Lord is very pitiefull and mercyfull.
But aboue all thynges my brethren sweare not, nether by heuen, nether by earth, nether eny other othe. Let your yee be yee, and your naye naye: lest ye fall into ypocrisy,
If any of you be vexed, let him praye. If eny of you be mery, let him synge Psalmes.
If eny be diseased amonge you, let hym call for the elders of the congregacyon, and let them praye ouer him, Ꟶ anoynte him with oyle in the name of the Lorde,
and the prayer of fayth shall saue the sycke, and the Lord shal rayse him vp: and yf he haue commytted synnes, they shalbe forgeuen hym.
Knowledge youre fautes one to another: and praye one for another, that ye maye be healed. For the feruent prayer of a ryghteous man auayleth moch.
Helyas was a man vnder infirmitees euen as we are, and he prayed in his prayer that it myght not rayne: and it rayned not on the earthe by the space of thre yeares Ꟶ syxe monethes.
And he prayed agayne, and the heauen gaue rayne, and the earth brought forth her frute.
Brethren, yf eny of you do erre from the trueth and another conuert hym,
let the same knowe that he which conuerteth the synner from goyng a straye out of hys waye, shall saue a soule from deeth, and shal hyde the multitude of synnes.
Peter an Apostle of Iesu Chryst, to them that dwell here and there as straun thorowout Pontus, Galacia, Capadocya: Asia, and Bethynia, elect
accordyng to the for knowledge of God the farthe thorow the sanctifynge of the sprete vnto obedience Ꟶ sprincklyng of the bloude of Iesus Chryst. Grace be wyth you and peace be multiplyed.
Blessed be God the father of oure Lord Iesus Chryst, whych accordyng to his aboundant mercye begat vs agayne vnto a lyuely hope (by that that Iesus Christ rose agayne from deeth)
to an inherytaunce immortall and vndefyled, and that perissheth not, reserued in heauen for you,
whych are kept by the power of of God thorow fayth, vnto saluacion, whych is prepared allready to be shewed in the last tyme,
in the whych ye reioyce, though now for a season (yf nede require) ye are in heuynes, thorowe manifolde temptacyons,
that the triall of youre fayth beyng moche more precious then golde that peryssheth (though it be tryed with fyre) myght be founde vnto laude, glory and honoure, at the apperynge of Iesus Chryst,
whom ye haue not sene, Ꟶ yet loue hym, in whome euen now, though ye se hym not, yet do you beleue, and reioyce with ioye vnspeakable and glorious
receauyge the ende of your fayth, euen the saluacyon of youre soules.
Of whych saluacyon haue the Prophetes enquyred and searched, whych prophesyed of the grace that shuld come vnto you,
searchyng when or at what tyme the sprete of Chryst (whych was in them) shuld sygnifye, whych sprete testifyed before, the passyons that shuld happen vnto Chryst, Ꟶ the glory that shulde folowe after,
vnto whych Prophetes it was also declared, that not vnto them selues, but vnto vs, they shulde minyster the thynges whych are now shewed vnto you of them, whych (by the holy goost sent downe from heauen) haue in the Gospell preached vnto you the thynges, whych the angels desyre to beholde.
Wherfore gyrde vp the loynes of youre mynde, be sober, Ꟶ trust perfectly on the grace that is brought vnto you (by the declaryng of Iesus Chryst)
as obedient chyldren, that ye geue not youre selues ouer vnto youre olde lustes,
by whych ye were led, whan as yet ye were ignoraunt of Christ: but as he which called you, is holy, euen so be ye holy also in all maner of conuersacyon,
because it is written. Be holy, for I am holy.
And yf so be that ye call on the father, which wythout respect of person iudgeth according to euery mannes worke, se that ye passe the tyme of youre pilgremage in feare.
For as moch as ye knowe, how that ye were not redemed wyth corruptible thynges (as syluer Ꟶ golde) from youre vayne conuersacion, whych ye receaued by the tradicion of the fathers:
but wt the precious bloude of Chryst, as of a lambe vndefyled, and wythout spot,
whych was ordeyned before hande, euen before the worlde was made: but was declared in the last tymes for your sakes,
whych by his meanes do beleue on God, that raysed hym vp from deeth, Ꟶ gloryfyed hym, that ye might haue fayth and hope toward God:
euen ye whych haue purifyed youre soules thorow the sprete, in obeynge the trueth wyth brotherly loue vnfayned, se that ye loue one another wyth a pure hert feruently:
for ye are borne a newe, not of mortall seed, but of immortall, by the worde of God, which lyueth and lasteth for euer.
For all flesshe is grasse, and all the glory of man is as the floure of grasse. The grasse wyddereth, and the floure falleth awaye,
but the worde of the Lord endureth euer And thys is the worde, whych by the Gospell was preached vnto you.
Wherfore laye asyde all maliciousnes Ꟶ al gyle, Ꟶ faynednesse Ꟶ enuy and all backbytinge:
Ꟶ as new borne babes, desyre ye that mylke (not of the body but of the soule) which is wt out disceate that ye maye growe ther by
If so be that ye haue tasted, how gracious the Lorde is,
to whom ye come, as vnto a lyuinge stone, disalowed of men, but chosen of God Ꟶ precious:
Ꟶ ye as lyuinge stones, are made a spretuall house an holy presthode, for to offer vp spretual sacrifyces, acceptable to God by Iesus Christ.
Wherfore it is contayned also in the scripture: beholde I put in Sion a stone to be layed in the chefe corner, electe Ꟶ precious. Ꟶ he that beleueth on him shall not be confounded.
Unto you therfore whych beleue he is precious: but vnto them which beleue not the stone which the buylders refused, the same is begonne to be the heed of the corner,
and a stone that men stomble at, and a rocke wherat they be offended whych stomble at the worde, and beleue not that, wheron they were set.
But ye are a chosen generacion, a royall presthod, an holy nacyon, a people whych are wonne: that ye shuld shewe the vertues of hym, that called you out of darcknes into hys meruclous lyght,
whych in tyme past were not a people, but are now the people of God: which some time had not optayned mercye, but now haue optayned mercye.
Dearly beloued, I beseche you as straungers and pylgrems, abstayne from fleshly lustes, which fyght against the soule,
Ꟶ se that ye haue honest conuersacion amonge the Gentyles, that where as they backbyte you as euyll doars they maye se your good workes, and prayse God in the daye of vysytacion.
Submyt youre selues therfore vnto all maner ordinaunce of man for the lordes sake, whether it be vnto the kynge, as vnto the chefe heed:
other vnto rulars, as vnto them that are sent of hym, for the punysshement of euyll doars, but for the laude of them, that do well.
For so is the wyll of God, that wyth well doyng ye maye stoppe the mouthes of foolysh Ꟶ ignoraunt men:
as fre, Ꟶ not as hauinge the lybertie for a cloacke of maliciousnes, but euen as the seruauntes of God
Honoure all men. Loue brotherly feleshyppe. Feare God, honoure the kynge.
Seruauntes, obey your masters wt feare not onely yf they be good Ꟶ courteous: but also though they be froward
For it is thanke worthye yf a man for conscience towarde God endure grefe, and suffer wrong vndeserued.
For what prayse is it, yf when ye be buffeted for your fautes, ye take it pacyently? But Ꟶ yf when ye do well, ye suffer wronge Ꟶ take it paciently, then is ther thanke wt God.
For here vnto verely were ye called: for Christ also suffered for vs leauynge vs an ensample, that ye shulde folowe his steppes,
whych dyd no synne, nether was there gyle found in hys mouth:
whych when he was reuyled, reuyled not agayne: when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed the vengeaunce to hym that iudgeth ryghteously
whych hys awne selfe bare our synnes in his body on the tree, that we beyng delyuered from synne, shuld lyue vnto ryghteousnes. By whose strypes ye were healed.
For ye were as shepe goyng astraye: but are now turned vnto the shepeherd and bysshope of youre soules.
Likewyse ye wyues be in subieccyon to youre husbandes, that euen they whych obeye not the worde, maye without the worde be wonne by the conuersacyon of the wyues,
whyll they beholde youre chast conuersacyon coupled wyth feare.
Whose apparell shall not be outward wt broyded heare, Ꟶ hangyng on of golde, ether in puttynge on of gorgyous apparell:
but let the hyd man which is in the herte, be without all corrupcyon, so that the sprete be at rest and quyete: whych sprete is before God a thynge moch set by.
For after this maner in the olde tyme dyd the holy wemen which trusted in God, tyer them selues, and were obedient to their husbandes,
euen as Sara obeyed Abraham, and called hym Lorde: whose daughters ye are, as longe as ye do well, Ꟶ are not afrayde for anye terrour.
Lykewyse, ye men, dwell with them accordynge to knowledge: geuyng honoure vnto the wife, as vnto the weaker vessell, Ꟶ as vnto them that are heyres also of the grace of lyfe that youre prayers be not hyndred.
In conclusyon, be ye all of one mynde, of one hart Ꟶ loue as brethren, be petifull, be courteous
not rendrynge euyll for euyll, or rebuke for rebuke: but contrarywise, blesse: knowinge that ye are ther vnto called, euen that ye shulde be heyres of the blessynge.
For he that doth longe after lyfe, and loueth to se good dayes, let hym refrayne his tonge from euyll, Ꟶ his lippes that they speake not gyle.
Let him eschue euyll, Ꟶ do good: let him seke peace, and ensue it.
For the eyes of the Lord are ouer the ryghteous, and hys eares are open vnto their prayers. Agayne: the face of the Lorde is ouer them that do euyll.
Morouer, who is it that wyll harme you, yf ye folowe that whych is good?
Yee, happy are ye, yf anye trouble happen vnto you for rightewesnesse sake. Be not ye afrayed for anye terroure of them, nether be ye troubled
but sanctifye the Lorde God in youre hertes Be ready allwayes to geue an answere to euery man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you, and that with meaknes and feare:
hauynge a good conscience that where as they backbyte you as euyll doars, they maye be ashamed, that falsely accuse your good conuersacion in Chryst.
For it is better (yf the wyll of God be so) that ye suffre for well doynge, then for euyll doinge.
For as moch as Christ hath once suffered for synnes, the iust for the vniust, to bring vs to God, and was kylled, as pertayninge to the flesshe: but was quyckened in the sprete.
In whych sprete he also went Ꟶ preached vnto the spretes that were in preson,
which some tyme had bene disobedyent, when the longe sufferynge of God was once loked for in the dayes of Noe whyll the arcke was a preparyng: wherin feaw, that is to saye .viij. soules, were saued by the water,
like as baptyme also now saueth vs, not the puttynge awaye of the fylth of the flesshe, but in that a good conseyence consenteth to God, by the resurreccyon of Iesus Christ,
whych is on the ryghte hande of God: and is gone into heauen, angels, powers, and myght subdued vnto hym.
For as moch then as Christ hath suffred for vs in the flesshe, arme ye youre selues lykewyse with the same mynde: for he whych suffereth in the flesshe, ceaseth from synn
that he hence forwarde shulde lyue (as moch tyme as remayneth in the flesshe) not after the lustes of men, but after the wyll of God.
For it is sufficyent for vs, that we haue spent the tyme that is past of the lyfe, after the wyll of the Gentyls, walkynge in wantannes, lustes, in excesse of wynes, in excesse of eatynge, in excesse of drinkynge and in abomynable ydolatrie.
And it semeth to them an inconuenient thynge, that ye runne not also with them vnto the same excesse of ryote, Ꟶ therfore speake they euyll of you,
whych shall geue acomptes to him, that is ready to iudge quicke and deed.
For vnto thys purpose verely was the Gospell preached also vnto the deed, that they shuld be iudged lyke other men in the flesshe, but shuld lyue before God in the sprete.
The ende of al thinges is at hande. Be ye therfore sober, and watch vnto prayer.
But aboue all thynges haue feruent loue among your selues. For loue shall couer the multitude of synnes.
Be ye herberous one to another, wythout grudgynge.
As euery man hath receaued the gyfte, euen so mynister the same one to another, as good mynisters of the manyfolde grace of God.
If eny man speake, let him talke as the wordes of God. If eny man mynister, let him do it as of the abylite, whych God mynystreth vnto hym. That God in all thynges maye be glorifyed thorow Iesus Christ, to whom be prayse and dominion for euer and euer. Amen.
Dearly beloued, maruayll not that ye are proued by fyre (whych thyng is to trye you) as though some straunge thing happened vnto you:
but reioyce, in as moch as ye are partakers of Christes passyons: that when hys glory appeareth, ye maye be mery and glad.
If ye be rayled vpon for the name of Christ, happie are ye. For the glory and the sprete of God resteth vpon you. On their parte he is euyll spoken of: but on youre parte he is glorifyed.
Se that none of you be punysshed as a murtherer, or as a thefe, or an euyll doar, or as a busybody in other mens matters.
If eny man suffre as a Christen man, let him not be ashamed: but let him glorifye God on this behalfe.
For the tyme is come, that iudgement must begynne at the house of God. If it fyrst begynne at vs, what shall the ende be of them, whych beleue not the Gospell of God?
And yf the ryghteous scarcely be saued: where shall the vngodly and the synner appeare?
Wherfore, let them that are troubled accordyng to the wyll of God, commyt their soules to him with well doynge, as vnto a faythfull creator.
The elders which are amonge you, I exhorte, which am also an elder, and a wytnes of the affliccyons of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that shalbe opened:
Fede ye Christes flocke, asmoch as lyeth in you, takynge the ouersyght of them, not as compelled therto, but wyllyngly: not for the desyre of fylthy lucre: but of a good mynde,
not as though ye were lordes ouer the parisshes: but that ye be an ensample to the flock
And when the chefe sheperd shall appeare; yee shal receaue, an incorruptibile crowne of glorie.
Lykewyse ye yonger, submyt your selues vnto the elder: Submit youre selues euery man, one to another, knyt youre selues together in lowlynes of mynde. For God resisteth the proude, and geueth grace to the humbl
Submyt youre selues therfore vnder the myghty hande of God, that he maye exalte you, when the tyme is come.
Cast all your care vpon him: for he careth for you.
Be sober and watch, for youre aduersary the deuyll as a roaring lyon walketh about, sekyng whom he maye deuoure:
whom resyst stedfast in the fayth, knowing, that the same affliccyons are apoynted vnto your brethren, that are in the worlde.
But the God of all grace whych hath called vs vnto hys eternall glory by Christ Iesus, shall hys awne selfe (after that ye haue suffred a lytell affliccyon) make you perfect: settle, strength and stablisshe you.
To him be glory and dominyon for euer, and euer. Amen.
By Syluanus a faythfull brother vnto you (as I suppose) haue I wrytten brefly, exhortynge and testifyinge, how that thys is the true grace of God, wherin ye stande.
The congregacyon of them whych at Babylon are companyons of youre eleccyon, saluteth you, and so doth Marcus my sonne.
Grete ye one another wyth the kysse of loue. Peace be wt you all, which are in Christ Iesu. Amen.
Simon Peter a seruaunt, and an Apostle of Iesus Christ, to them whych haue obtayned lyke precyous fayth wt vs thorow the ryghtewesnes of oure God and sauioure Iesus Christ.
Grace be vnto you, and peace be multiplyed thorow the knowledge of God and of Iesus oure Lorde.
Accordynge as his godly power hath geuen vnto vs all thinges that pertayne vnto lyfe and godlynes, thorow the knowledge of him that hath called vs by glory, and vertue,
by the whych are geuen vnto vs excellent and moste greate promyses, that by the meanes therof ye myght be partakers of the godly nature, yf ye flye the corrupcyon of worldly lust.
And herunto geue all diligence: in youre fayth mynyster vertue: in vertue knowledge:
in knowledge temperaunce, in temperaunce pacience: in pacience godlynes,
in godlynes brotherly kyndnes, in brotherly kyndnes loue.
For yf these thynges be amonge you, and be plenteous, thy wyll make you that ye nether shalbe ydle nor vnfrutefull in the knowledge of oure Lorde Iesus Christ.
But he that lacketh these thynges, is blynde and gropeth for the waye wyth his hande, and hath forgotten, that he was pourged from hys olde synnes.
Wherfore brethren, geue the more diligence for to make your calling Ꟶ eleccyon sure For yf ye do soch thynges, ye shall neuer fall.
Yee and by this meanes an entrynge in shal be mynistred vnto you aboundantly into the euerlastyng kyngdome of oure Lorde and sauioure Iesus Christ.
Wherfore, I wyll not be neglygent to put you all wayes in remembraunce of soch thynges though ye knowe them youre selues, and and be stablished in the present trueth.
Notwythstandynge I thynke it mete (as longe as I am in thys tabernacle) to strete you vp by puttyng you in remembraunce, for as moch,
as I am sure, that shortly I must put of thys my tabernacle, euen as oure Lorde Iesus Christ shewed me.
I wyll euer also geue my diligence, that ye maye haue wherwyth to stere vp the remembraunce of these thinges after my departyng.
For we haue not folowed deceatfull fables, when we opened vnto you the power and commynge of oure Lorde Iesus Christ, but wyth our eyes we sawe his maiestie:
euen then verely when he receaued of God the father honoure and glory, and when ther came soch a voyce to hym from the excellent glorye. Thys is my dere beloued sonne, in whom I haue delyte.
This voyce we hearde come from heauen, whan we were wyth hym, in the holy mounte.
We haue also a ryght sure worde of prophecye, wher vnto yf ye take hede, as vnto a lyght that shyneth in a darcke place, ye do well, vntyll the daye dawne, and the daye starre aryse in youre hertes.
So that ye fyrst know thys: that no prophecye in the scripture hath eny pryuate interpretacyon:
For the scripture came neuer by the wyll of man: but holy men of God spake, as they were moued by the holy goost.
Ther were false prophetes also amonge the people, euen as ther shalbe false teachers amonge you: whych preuely shall brynge in damnable sectes (euen denyenge the Lorde that hath bought them) and brynge vpon them selues swyft damnacyon,
and many shall folowe their damnable wayes, by whom the waye of trueth shal be euyll spoken of,
and thorow coueteousnes shall they wyth fayned wordes make marchandyse of you, whose iudgement is now not farre of, and their damnacyon slepeth not.
For yf God spared not the angels that synned, but cast them downe into hell, and delyuered them into chaynes of dercknes to be kept vnto iudgement:
nether spared the olde worlde, but saued. Noe the eyght preacher of ryghtewesnes, and brought in the floud vpon the worlde of the vngodly,
and turned the cyties of zodom and Gomor into asshes: ouerthre we them, damned them, and made on them an ensample vnto those that after shulde lyue vngodly.
And iust Lot vexed wyth the vnclenly conuersacyon of the wycked, delyuered he.
For he beynge ryghteous, and dwellynge among them in seynge and hearyng, vexed his ryghteous soule from daye to daye wyth their vnlaufull dedes.
The Lorde knoweth how to delyuer the godly out of temptacyon, and to reserue the vniuste vnto the daye of iudgement for to be punysshed:
but chefely them that walcke after the flesshe in the lust of vnclennes, and despyse auctoryte. Presumpteous are they, and stubborne, whych feare not to speake euyll of them that excell in worshippe.
When the angels which are greater both in power Ꟶ might, receaue not of the Lord rayling iudgment agaynst them selues.
But these as brute beastes, naturally brought forth to be taken and destroyed, speake euyll of the thinges that they vnderstande not, Ꟶ shall perisshe in their awne destruccion,
Ꟶ receaue the rewarde of vnryghtwesnes. They count it pleasure to lyue delyciously for a season. Spottes they are Ꟶ fylthynes: which lyue at pleasure in their owne disceauable wayes, feastinge Ꟶ scorninge you:
hauinge eyes full of aduoutrie, and the cannot cease from synne: begyling vnstable soules. Hertes they haue excercysed with robrie. They are cursed chyldren
which haue forsaken the ryght waye, and are gone astraye folowynge the waye of Balaam the sonne of Bosor, which loued the rewarde of vnryghtewesnes:
but was rebuked of hys iniquitie. The tame and domme beast, speakynge with mannes voyce, forbade the madnesse of the Prophete.
These are welles without water: cloudes that are, caried with a tempest, to whom the myst of darcknes is reserued for euer.
For when they haue spoken the greate swelling wordes of vanytie, they entyse thorow lustes in the volupteousnes of the flesh, them that were cleane escaped: euen them that now lyue in erroure:
while they promes them libertie, where as they them selues are the bonde seruauntes of corruption. For of whom a man is ouer come, vnto the same is he brought in bondage.
For yf they (after they haue escaped from the fylthynes of the worlde thorow the knowledge of the Lord and the sauyour Iesu Christ) are yet tangled againe therin, and ouercome then is the latter ende worse wyth them then the begynninge.
For it had bene better for them, not to haue knowne the waye of ryghteousnes, then after they haue knowen it, to turne from the holy commaundement that was geuen vnto them:
But the same is happened vnto them that is vsed to be spoken by the true prouerbe. The dogge is turned to his awne vomet agayne and the sow that was wasshed is turned agayne to her walowynge in the myer.
This is the seconde epistle that I now write vnto you dearly beloued, wherwith I stere vp your syncere mynde, by putting you in remembraunce,
that ye maye be myndefull of the wordes (whych were tolde before of the holy Prophetes) and also the commaundement of vs whych be Apostles of the Lorde and sauyour
This fyrst vnderstande, that ther shall come in the last dayes, mockers whych wyll walke after their awne lustes,
Ꟶ saye: Where is the promes of hys commyng? For sence the fathers dyed, all thynges continue in the same estate wherin they were at the beginninge.
For this they knowe not (and that wylfully) how that the heauens a great whyle ago were, Ꟶ the erth out of the water appeared vp thorow the water, by the word of God:
by the whych thynges the world that then was, peryshed beynge ouerrunne wyth water.
But the heauens and erth whych are now, be kept by hys worde in store, and reserued vnto fyre, agaynst the daye of iudgement Ꟶ perdicion of vngodly men.
Dearly beloued, be not ignoraunt of this one thinge, howe that one daye is with the Lorde as a thousande yeare, Ꟶ a thousande yeare as one daye.
The Lord that hath promised, is not slacke, as some men count slacknes: but is pacyent to vs warde: for asmoch as he wolde haue no man lost, but wyll receaue all men to repentaunce.
Neuerthelesse the daye of the Lord wyll come as a thefe in the nyghte, in the which daye, the heauens shall passe awaye in maner of a tempest, and the elementes shal melt with heat: the erth also Ꟶ the workes that are therin, shall burne.
Seyng then that all these thinges shal perishe, what maner persons ought ye to be in holy conuersacyon, and godlynes:
lokyng for, and hastinge vnto the commynge of the daye of God, by whom the heauens shall perisshe with fyre, Ꟶ the elementes shall melt with heate?
Neuerthelesse, we (according to his promes) loke for a new heauen and a new earth, wherin dwelleth ryghtewesnes.
Wherfore dearly beloued, seynge that ye loke for such thinges, be diligent that ye maye be founde of hym in peace, wythout spotte and vndefyled.
And suppose that the longe sufferinge of the Lord is saluacyon, euen as oure derely beloued brother Paule also (accordinge to the wysdome geuen vnto him) hath wrytten vnto you,
ye, almoost in euery epistle, speakynge of such thinges: amonge which are many thinges harde to be vnderstande, which they that are vnlearned Ꟶ vnstable, peruert, as they do also the other scriptures vnto their awne destruccion.
Ye therfore beloued, (seynge ye be warned afore hand) beware, lest ye, wyth other men be also plucked awaye thorow the erroure of the wycked, and fall from your awne stedfastnes:
but growe in grace, Ꟶ in the knowledge of oure Lorde and sauyoure Iesus Christ. To whom be glory both now and for euer. Amen.
That which was from the begynnynge, whyche we haue hearde, whyche we haue sene wyth oure eyes, whych we haue loked vpon, and our handes haue handled, of the word of the lyfe.
And the lyfe appeared, Ꟶ we haue sene and beare wytnes, Ꟶ shewe vnto you that eternall lyfe, whyche was wyth the father, Ꟶ appeared vnto vs.
That which we haue sene Ꟶ herde, declare we vnto you, that ye also maye haue fellowshyppe with vs, and that oure felloushyppe maye be wyth the father and his sonne Iesus Christ.
And thys write we vnto you, that youre ioye maye be full.
And this is the tydynges whych we haue hearde of hym Ꟶ declare vnto you, that God is lyght, Ꟶ in him is no dercknes at all.
If we saye, that we haue feloushippe with hym, and walcke in dercknes, we lye, Ꟶ do not the truth.
But Ꟶ yf we walke in lyght euen as he is in lyght, then haue we fellishippe wt him, and the bloude of Iesus Christ his sonne clenseth vs from all synne.
If we saye that we haue no synne, we deceaue oure selues, and the trueth is not in vs:
If we knowledge oure synnes, he is faythfull Ꟶ iust, to forgeue vs oure synnes, and to clense vs from all vnryghtewesnes.
If we saye we haue not synned, we make hym a lyar, and hys worde is not in vs.
My lytell chyldren, these thinges write I vnto you, that ye synne not. And yf eny man synne, we haue an aduocate wyth the father, Iesus christ, the ryghteous:
Ꟶ he it is that obtayneth grace for oure synnes, not for oure synnes onely: but also for the synnes of all the worlde.
And herby we are sure that we knowe hym, yf we kepe hys commaundementes.
He that sayth I knowe hym, and kepeth not hys commaundementes is a lyar, and the veritye is not in hym.
But whoso kepeth hys worde, in hym is the loue of God perfect in dede: herby knowe we that we are in him.
He that sayth he bydeth in hym, ought to walke euen as he walked.
Brethren, I wryte no newe commaundement vnto you: but that olde commaundement, which ye haue had from the beginnynge.
The olde commaundement is the worde, which ye haue hearde from the beginninge. Agayne, a new commaundement I wryte vnto you, that is true in him, and the same is true also in you: for the dercknes is past, and the true lyght now shyneth.
He that sayth how that he is in the lyght, Ꟶ yet hateth his brother, is in dercknes euen vntyll thys tyme.
He that loueth his brother, abydeth in the lyght, and ther is none occasion of euyll in hym.
He that hateth his brother, is in dercknes, Ꟶ walketh in dercknes: and can not tell whyther he goeth, because that dercknes hath blynded hys eyes.
Babes I wryte vnto you, how that youre synnes are forgeuen you for his names sake.
I wryte vnto you fathers, how that ye haue knowne him that is from the beginnynge. I wryte vnto you yonge men, how that ye haue ouercome the wicked: I write vnto you lytell chyldren, how that ye haue knowen the father.
I haue wryten vnto you fathers, how that ye haue knowne hym that is from the beginnynge. I haue wryten vnto you yonge men, how that ye are stronge, and the worde of God abydeth in you, and ye haue ouercome that wycked.
Se that ye loue not the worlde, nether the thynges that are in the worlde. If eny man loue the worlde, the loue of the father is not in hym.
For all that is in the worlde (as the lust of the flesshe, and the lust of the eyes, Ꟶ the pryde of life) is not of the father, but of the worlde.
And the worlde passeth awaye and the lust therof: but he that fulfylleth the will of God, abydeth for euer.
Lytell chyldren, it is the last tyme, and as ye haue herde how that Antichrist shall come, euen now are there many begonne to be Antichristes allredy, wherby we knowe, that it is the last tyme.
They went out from vs, but they were not of vs. For yf they had bene of vs, they wolde no dout haue continued with vs. But that it myght appeare, that they were not of vs.
Neuerthelesse, ye haue an oyntment of him that is holy, and ye knowe all thinges.
I haue not writen vnto you, as though ye knewe not the trueth: but as though ye knewe it (Ꟶ knowe also) that no lye commeth of trueth.
Who is a lyar, but he that denyeth that Iesus is Christ? the same is Antichrist, that denieth the father Ꟶ the sonne.
Whosoeuer denyeth the sonne, the same hath not the father.
Let therfore abyde in you that same which ye hearde from the beginninge. If that which ye hearde from the beginnynge shal remayne in you, ye also shall contynew in the sonne, and in the father.
And thys is the promes that he hath promysed vs, euen eternall lyfe.
These thinges haue I writen vnto you, concernynge them that disceaue you.
And the anoyntinge which ye haue receaued of him dwelleth in you. And ye nede not, that eny man teach you: but as the anoyntinge teacheth you of all thinges, and is true, and no lye, and as it hath taught you, euen so byde therin.
And now babes abyde in hym: that when he shall appeare, we maye be bolde, Ꟶ not be made ashamed of hym at hys commynge.
If ye knowe that he his righteous, knowe also that euery one which doth rightewesnes, is borne of hym.
Beholde, what loue the father hath shewed on vs, that we shuld be called the the sonnes of God. For this cause the worlde knoweth you not, because it knoweth not hym.
Dearely beloued, now are we the sonnes of God Ꟶ yet it doth not appeare, what we shalbe. But we knowe, that when it shall appeare, we shalbe lyke him. For we shall se hym as he is.
And euery man that hath this hope in him, pourgeth him selfe, euen as he also is pure.
Whosoeuer commytteth synne, committeth vnryghteousnes also, and synne is vnryghteousnes.
And ye knowe, that he appeared, to take awaye oure synnes, and in him is no synne.
As many as byde in hym, synne not: whosoeuer synneth, hath not sene hym, nether knowne hym.
Babes, let no man deceaue you. He that doeth ryghteousnes, is ryghteous, euen as he is ryghteous.
He that committeth synne, is of the deuyll: for the deuyll synneth sence the beginnynge. For this purpose appeared the sonne of God, to lowse the worckes of the deuyl.
Whosoeuer is borne of God, synneth not: for his seed remayneth in him, and he cannot synne, because he is borne of God.
In thys are the chyldren of God knowen, and the chyldren of the deuyll. Whosoeuer doeth not ryghteousnes, is not of God, nether he that loueth not hys brother.
For this is the tidinges, that ye hearde from the beginninge, that ye shuld loue one another,
not as Cayn which was of that wicked, and slewe his brother. And wherfore slewe he hym? Because his awne workes were euyll, and hys brothers good.
Maruayle not my brethren though the world hate you.
We knowe, that we are translated from deeth vnto lyfe, because we loue the brethren. He that loueth not hys brother, abydeth in deeth.
Whosoeuer hateth his brother, is a man slear. And ye knowe, that no man slear, hath eternall lyfe abydynge in hym.
Herby perceaue we loue: because he gaue his lyfe for vs: Ꟶ we ought to geue oure liues for the brethren.
But whoso hath thys worldes good and seyth hys brother haue neade: and shutteth vp his compassion from him: how dwelleth the loue of God in hym?
My babes, let vs not loue in worde, nether in tonge: but in dede Ꟶ in veritie.
Herby we knowe, that we are of the veritie Ꟶ can quyet oure hertes before hym.
For yf oure herte condempne vs, God is gretter then oure herte, and knoweth all thinges.
Dearly beloued, yf oure herte condempne vs not, then haue we trust to God warde:
Ꟶ what soeuer we aske we receaue of hym, because we kepe his commaundementes, Ꟶ do those thinges which are pleasinge in his syght.
And this is hys commaundement, that we beleue on the name of his sonne Iesus Christ, and loue one another, as he gaue commaundement.
And he that kepeth hys commaundementes, dwelleth in him, Ꟶ he in him, and herby we knowe that he abydeth in vs, euen by the sprete which he hath geuen vs.
Dearly beloued beleue not euery sprete: but proue the spretes, whether they are of god or not, for many false prophetes are gone out into the worlde.
Herby shall ye knowe the sprete of God. Euery sprete that confesseth that Iesu Christ is come in the fleshe is of God.
And euery sprete which confesseth not that Iesus Christ is come in the flesshe, is not of God. And this is that sprete of Antichrist, of whom ye haue hearde, howe that he shulde come: and euen now alredy is he in the worlde.
Lyttell chyldren, ye are of God, and haue ouercome them: for greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the worlde.
They are of the worlde, therfore speake they of the worlde, and the worlde heareth them.
We are of God. He that knoweth God, heareth vs: he that is not of God, heareth vs not. Herby knowe we the sprete of veritie, and the sprete of erroure.
Dearly beloued let vs loue one another: for loue commeth of God. And euery one that loueth, is borne of God, and knoweth God.
He that loueth not, knoweth not God: for God is loue.
In this appeared the loue of God to vs ward, because that God sent hys onely begotten sonne into the worlde, that we might liue thorow him.
Herin is loue, not that we loued God, but that he loued vs, Ꟶ sent hys sonne to be the agrement for oure synnes.
Dearly beloued, yf God so loued vs, we ought also to loue one another.
No man hath sene God at eny tyme. If we loue one another, God dwelleth in vs, Ꟶ hys loue is parfect in vs.
Herby knowe we that we dwell in hym, and he in vs: because he hath geuen vs of hys sprete.
And we haue sene, Ꟶ do testifye, that the father sent the sonne to be the sauyour of the worlde.
Whosoeuer confesseth, that Iesus is the sonne God, in him dwelleth God, Ꟶ he in God.
And we haue knowen and beleued the loue that God hath to vs. God is loue, Ꟶ he that dwelleth in loue, dwelleth in God, and God in him.
Here in is the loue perfect in vs, that we shuld haue trust in the daye of iudgement: For as he is, euen so are we in this worlde.
Ther is no feare in loue, but parfect loue casteth out feare, for feare hath paynfulnes. He that feareth, is not parfect in lone.
We loue him, for he loued vs fyrst.
If a man say, I loue God, and yet hate his brother, he is a liar. For how can he that loued not hys brother whom he hath sene, loue God whom he hath not sene?
And this commaundement haue we of hym: that he which loueth God, shuld loue his brother also.
Whosoeuer beleueth that Iesus is Christ, is borne of God. And euery one that loueth hym which begat, loueth him also which was begotten of him.
By this we knowe, that we loue the chyldren of God, when we loue God, and kepe his commaundementes.
For this is the loue of God, that We kepe his commaundementes, and his commaundementes are not greuous.
For all that is borne of God, ouercommeth the worlde. And this is the victory that ouer commeth the worlde, euen oure fayth.
Who is it that ouercommeth the worlde: but he which beleueth, that Iesus is the sonne of God?
This Iesus Christ is he that cam by water Ꟶ bloud, not by water onely: but by water and bloud. And it is the sprete that beareth wytnes, because the sprete is trueth.
(For ther are thre which beare recorde in heauen the father the worde Ꟶ the wholy goost. And these thre are one.)
And ther are thre which beare recorde (in earth) the sprete Ꟶ water, and bloud: Ꟶ these thre are one.
If we receaue the wytnes of men, the witnes of God is greater. For this is the witnes of God (that is greater) which he testifyed of his sonne.
He that beleueth on the sonne of God, hath the witnes in hym selfe. He that be beleueth not God, hath made him a liar
because he beleued not the recorde that God gaue of hys sonne. And this is that recorde, how that God hath geuen vnto vs eternall lyfe, Ꟶ this lyfe is in hys sonne.
He that hath the sonne hath lyfe: Ꟶ he that hath not the sonne of God, hath not lyfe.
These thynges haue I wrytten vnto you that beleue on the name of the sonne of God, that ye maye knowe, how that ye haue eternall lyfe, Ꟶ that ye maye beleue on the name of the sonne of God.
And thys is the trust that we haue in hym: that yf we aske eny thynge accordynge to hys wyll, he heareth vs.
And yf we knowe that he heare vs whatsoeuer we aske, we knowe, that we haue the peticyons, that we desyre of hym.
If eny man se hys brother synne a synne not vnto deeth, let him aske, Ꟶ he shall geue him lyfe for them that synne not vnto deeth. Ther is a synne vnto deeth, for which saye I not that a man shuld praye.
All vnryghtewesnes is synne, Ꟶ ther is synne not vnto deeth
We knowe, that whosoeuer is borne of God, synneth not: but he that is begotten of God, kepeth hym selfe, Ꟶ that wycked toucheth hym not.
We knowe, that we are of God, and the worlde is all together set on wyckednes.
We knowe, that the sonne of God is come, and hath geuen vs a mynde to knowe hym which is true: Ꟶ we are in hym that is true, through is sonne Iesu Christ. This same is very God, and eternall lyfe.
Babes kepes youre selues from ymages. Amen.
The elder to the electe lady and her children, whom I loue in the trueth: and not I onely, but also all that haue knowen the trueth
for the truthes sake whych dwelleth in vs, and shalbe in vs for euer.
With vs shall be grace, mercye, Ꟶ peace from God the father Ꟶ from the lord Iesus Christ the sonne of the father, in trueth Ꟶ loue.
I reioysed greatly, that I founde of thy children walkinge in trueth, as we haue receaued a commaundement of the father.
And now beseche I the lady, not as though I wrote a new commaundement vnto the, but that same which we haue had from the beginnynge, that we shuld loue one another.
And this is the loue, that we shulde walke after hys commaundement. This commaundement is (that as ye haue hearde from the beginnynge) ye shuld walke in it.
For many deceauers are entred into the worlde, whych confesse not that Iesus Christ is come in the fleshe. This is a deceauer and an Antichrist.
Loke on your selues that we loose not that we haue wrought: but that we maye haue ful rewarde.
Whosoeuer transgresseth Ꟶ bydeth not in the doctryne of Christ, hath not God. He that endureth in the doctrine of Christ, hath both the father Ꟶ the sonne.
If ther come eny vnto you, Ꟶ bringe not this learninge, him receaue not to house: nether byd him God spede.
For he that byddeth him God spede, is partaker of hys euyl dedes.
I had many thynges to wryte vnto you, neuerthelesse I wolde not wryte wt paper and ynke: but I trust to come vnto you, Ꟶ speake wt you mouth to mouth, that oure ioye maye be full:
the sonnes of thy electe sister grete the. Amen.
The elder vnto the beloued Gayus whom I loue in the trueth.
Beloued I wisshe in all thynges that thou prosperedest, and faredest well, euen as thy soule prospereth,
For I reioysed greatly, when the brethren came, and testifyed of the trueth that is in the, how thou walkest in the trueth.
I haue no greater ioye, then for to heare, how that my sonnes walke in veritye.
Beloued thou doest faythfully, what soeuer thou doest to the brethren, and to straungers,
which beare wytnes of thy loue before the congregacyon. Which brethren if thou brynge forwardes of theyr iorney (after a godly sorte) thou shalt do well:
because that for his names sake they went forth: and toke nothynge of the Gentyls.
We therfore ought to receaue such, that we myght be helpers to the trueth.
I wrote vnto the congregacion: but Diotrephes which loueth to haue the preeminence amonge them, receaueth vs not.
Wherfore yf I come, I will declare hys dedes which he doeth, iestinge on vs wt malicious wordes, nether is therewith content. Not onely he him selfe receaueth not the brethren: but also he forbyddeth them that wolde, and thrusteth them out of the congregacion.
Beloued, folowe not that which is euyll, but that which is good. He that doeth well is of God: but he that doeth euill, seyth not God.
Demetrius hath good reporte of all men Ꟶ of the trueth it selfe. yee, and we oure selues also beare recorde, Ꟶ ye knowe, that oure recorde is true.
I had many thinges to wryte: but I will not with ynke and penne wryte vnto the.
I trust I shall shortly se the Ꟶ we shall speake mouth to mouth. Peace be vnto the. The louers salute the. Grete the louers by name.
Iudas the seruaunt of Iesus Christ the brother of Iames. To them which are called, and sanctifyed in God the father, and preserued in Iesu Christ.
Mercy vnto you and peace and loue be multiplyed.
Beloued, when I gaue all dyligence to wryte vnto you of the commen saluacyon, it was nedeful for me to write vnto you, to exhorte you, that ye shuld contynually laboure in the fayth, which was once geuen vnto the saynctes.
For ther are certayne vngodly men craftely crept in, of which it was written afore tyme vnto such iudgement. They turne the grace of oure God vnto wantannes, and denye God (which is the onely Lorde) and oure Lorde Iesus Christ.
My mynde is therfore to put you in remembraunce, for as moche as ye once knowe this, how that the Lorde (after that he had delyuered the people out of Egypt) destroyed them which after warde beleued not.
The angels also which kept not their fyrst estate, but lefte their awne habitacion, he hath reserued in euerlastynge chaynes vnder darcknes vnto the iudgement of the greate daye
euen as Sodome Ꟶ Gomore, and the cytyes aboute them (which in lyke maner defyled them selues with fornicacyon, and folowed straunge flesshe) are set forth for an ensample, Ꟶ suffre the payne of eternall fyre.
Lykewyse, these beyng disceaued by dreames, defile the flesshe, despise rulars Ꟶ speake euyll of them that are in aucthorite.
Yet Michael the archangell when he stroue agaynst the deuyll, Ꟶ disputed about the body, of Moses, durst not geue raylinge sentence, but sayde, the Lorde rebuke the.
But these speake euyll of those thynges whych they knowe not: and what thynges they knowe naturaly (as beastes which are wythout reason) in those thinges they corrupte them selues.
Wo be vnto them, for they haue folowed the waye of Cain, Ꟶ are vtterly geuen to the erroure of Balam for lukers sake Ꟶ perisshe in the treason of Core.
These are spottes which of your kidnes feast together, wt out feare, lyuinge lawlesse, and after ther awne pleasure. Cloudes they are with out water, caryed about of windes, trees wt out frute at geatheringe time withered, twyse deed, Ꟶ plucked vp by the rotes.
They are the ragynge waues of the see, fomynge out their awne shame. They are wandrynge sterres, to whom is reserued the myst of darcknes for euer.
Enoch the seuenth from Adam prophesyed before of such, sayinge. Beholde, the Lord shall come with thousandes of saynctes,
to geue iudgement agaynst all men, Ꟶ to rebuke all that are vngodly amonge them of all their vngodly dedes, which they haue vngodly committed, and of all their cruell speakynges, which vngodly synners haue spoken agaynst hym.
These are murmurers, complayners, walkyng after their awne lustes, whose mouthes speake proude thinges. They haue men in greate reuerence because of aduantage.
But ye beloued, remember the wordes which were spoken before of the Apostles of oure Lord Iesu Christ,
how that they tolde you that there shuld be begylers in the last tyme, which shuld walke after their awne vngodly lustes.
These are makers of sectes, fleshlye, hauynge no sprete.
But ye derlye beloued, edifye youre selues in your most holy fayth, prayinge in the holy goost,
and kepe your selues in the loue of God, lokynge for the mercy of oure Lord Iesus Christ, vnto eternall lyfe.
And haue compassion of some, separatinge them,
and other saue with feare, pullinge them out of the fyre and hate the fylthy vesture of the fleshe.
Unto him that is able to kepe you fre from synne, Ꟶ to present you fautlesse before the presence of his glory wt ioye
to God oure sauyour: which onely is wyse be glory, maiestye, dominion, and power, now and euer. Amen.
The reuelacyon of Iesus Christ which God gaue vnto him, for to shewe vnto hys seruauntes, thynges whych muste shortely come to passe. And whan he had sent, he shewed by hys Angell vnto his seruaunt Iohn,
which bare recorde of the worde of God, and of the testymony of Iesus Christ, and of all thynges that he sawe.
Happy is he that readith, and they that heare the wordes of the prophesy, and kepe those thynges which are written therin. For the tyme is at hande.
Iohn to the seuen congregacions in Asia. Grace be vnto you and peace, from him which is and which was, and which is to come, Ꟶ from the seuen spretes which are before his trone,
Ꟶ from Iesus Christ, which is a faythfull wytnes, Ꟶ fyrst begotten of the deed: Ꟶ Lorde ouer the kynges of the erth. Unto him that loued vs, and wesshed vs from oure synnes in hys awne bloude,
Ꟶ made vs kynges and Prestes vnto God his father, be glory and dominion for euermore. Amen.
Beholde, he cometh with cloudes, Ꟶ all eyes shall se him, Ꟶ they also which pearsed him. And all kynredes of the erth shall wayle. Euen so: Amen.
I am Alpha and Omega, the begynnyng and the endynge, sayth the Lorde almyghty, which is and which was, and which is to come.
I Iohn youre brother, and companion in tribulacion, and in the kyngdome Ꟶ pacience in Iesu Christ, was in the yle that is called Pathmos, for the worde of God, and for the witnessing of Iesu Christ:
I was in the sprete on a sondaye, Ꟶ herde behynde me a great voyce, as it had bene of a trompe,
sayinge: I am Alpha and Omega, the fyrst and the laste. That thou seyst, wryte in a boke, and sende it vnto the seuen congregacions which are in Asia, vnto Ephesus, Ꟶ vnto Smyrna and vnto Pergamos, and vnto Thiatira, and vnto Sardis, Ꟶ vnto Philadelphia, and vnto Laodicia.
And I turned backe to se the voyce that spake to me. And when I was turned: I sawe seuen golden candelstickes,
Ꟶ in the myddes of the candelstickes, one lyke vnto the sonne of man, clothed with a lynnen garment downe to the fete, and gyrd about the pappes wt a golden gyrdle.
His heed, Ꟶ his heares were whyte, as whyte woll, Ꟶ as snowe and hys eyes were as a flame of fyre:
Ꟶ hys fete lyke vnto brasse, as though they brent in a fornace, and his voyce as the sounde of many waters.
And he had in his ryghte hande .vii. starres. And out of his mouthe went a sharpe two edged swearde. And his face shone, euen as the sonne in his strength.
And when I saw him, I fell at his fete. euen as deed. And he layde his ryghte hande vpon me, saying vnto me: feare not. I am the fyrst Ꟶ the laste,
Ꟶ and am a lyue, and was deed. And beholde I am a lyue for euermore Ꟶ haue the keyes of hell Ꟶ of deeth.
Wryte therfore the thynges which thou hast sene, and the thynges which are, and the thinges which must be fulfylled here after:
the mistery of the .vii. starres which thou sawest in my ryght hande, and the .vii. golden candelstickes. The .vii. starres are the messengers of the .vii. congregacions, And the seuen candelstickes which thou sawest, are the seuen congregacyons.
Unto the messenger of the congregacyon of Ephesus wryte: these thynges sayth he, that holdeth the seuen starres in hys ryght hande, and that walketh in the myddes of the seuen golden candelstickes.
I knowe thy workes, and thy labour, Ꟶ thy pacience, and how thou cannest not forbeare them whych are euyll: and hast examined them whych saye they are Apostles, and are not: Ꟶ hast founde them lyars,
Ꟶ hast suffred. And hast pacience: and for my names sake hast labored, and hast not faynted.
Neuerthelesse, I haue sum what agaynst the, because thou haste lefte thy fyrst loue.
Remember therfore from whence thou art fallen, Ꟶ repent, and do the fyrst worckes. Or elles I wyll come vnto the shortly, Ꟶ wyll remoue thy candelsticke out of his place, except thou repent.
But this thou hast, because thou hatest the dedes of the Nycolaitans, which dedes I also hate.
Lett hym that hath eares, heare what the sprete sayth vnto the congregacyons. To hym that ouercommeth, wyll I geue to eate of the tre of lyfe, which is in the myddes of the Paradyse of God.
And vnto the angell of the congregacyon of Smyrna wryte: These thynges sayth he that is fyrst, Ꟶ the laste, which was deed, and is alyue.
I know thy workes Ꟶ tribulacyon and pouerte, but thou art ryche. And I knowe the blasphemy of them, whych call them selues Iewes Ꟶ are not: but are the congregacyon of Sathan.
Feare none of those thynges, which thou shalt suffre. Beholde, the deuyll shall caste some of you into preson, to tempte you, Ꟶ ye shall haue tribulacyon ten dayes. Be faythfull vnto the deeth, and I wyll geue the a croune of lyfe.
Let hym that hath eares, heare, what the sprete sayth to the congregacyons. He that ouercommeth, shall not be hurt of the seconde deeth.
And to the messenger of the congregacyon in Pergamos wryte: This sayth he, which hath the sharpe swearde with two edges:
I knowe thy workes, Ꟶ where thou dwellest, euen where Sathanas seat is, and thou kepest my name, Ꟶ hast not denyed my fayth. And in my dayes Antipas was a faythfull wytnes of myne, whych was slayne amonge you, where Sathan dwelleth.
But I haue a fewe thynges agaynst the: because thou hast there, them that mayntayne the doctrine of Balam which taught in Balake, to put occasyon of synne before the chyldren of Israel, that they shulde eate of meate dedycat vnto ydoles, and commyt fornycacyon.
Euen so hast thou them that mayntayne the doctryne of the Nycolaitans, which thynge I hate.
But be conuerted, or elles I wyll come vnto the shortly, and wyll fight agaynst them with the swearde of my mouth.
Let hym that hath eares, heare, what the sprete sayth vnto the congregacyons. To hym that ouercommeth, wyll I geue to eate Manna that is hyd, Ꟶ wyll geue hym a whyte stone, Ꟶ in the stone a newe name wrytten, which no man knoweth, sauynge he that receaueth it.
And vnto the messenger of the congregacyon of Thyatira wryte. Thys sayth the sonne of God, which hath eyes lyke vnto a flamme of fyre, Ꟶ hys fete are lyke brasse:
I knowe thy workes, Ꟶ thy loue, seruyce, and fayth; and thy pacience, Ꟶ thy dedes, which are mo at the last then at the fyrst.
Notwith standynge I haue a feaw thynges agaynst the, because thou sufferest that woman Iesabell, which called her selfe a Prophetise, to teache Ꟶ to deceaue my seruauntes, to make them commyt fornycacyon, Ꟶ to eate meates offered vp vnto ydoles.
And I gaue her space to repent of her fornycacyon, Ꟶ she repented not.
Beholde, I wyll cast her into a beed: Ꟶ them that commyt fornycacyon with her into gret aduersytie, excepte they turne from their deades.
And I wyll kyll her chyldren with deeth. And all the congregacyons shall knowe, that I am he which searcheth the reynes Ꟶ hertes. And I wyll geue vnto euery one of you acordynge vnto hys workes.
Unto you I saye, and vnto other of them of Thyatira, as many as haue not this lernyng Ꟶ which haue not knowen the depnes of Sathan (as they saye) I wyll put vpon you none other burthen,
but that which ye haue already. Holde fast tyll I come,
Ꟶ whosoeuer ouercommeth Ꟶ kepeth my workes vnto the ende, to hym wyll I geue power ouer nacyons,
Ꟶ he shall rule them wt a rodde of yron: Ꟶ as the vessels of a potter, shall they be broken to sheuers. Euen as I receaued of my father,
so wyll I geue hym the mornynge starre.
Let hym that hath eares, heare, what the sprete sayth to the congregacyons.
And wryte vnto the messenger of the congregacion that is at Sardis: this sayth he that hath the seuen spretes of God Ꟶ the seuen starres. I know thy workes, thou hast a name that thou lyuest, and thou art deed.
Be awake, and strength the thynges which remayne, that are redy to dye. For I haue not founde thy worckes perfayete before God.
Remember therfore, how thou hast receaued Ꟶ heard, Ꟶ hold faste, Ꟶ repent. If thou shalt not watche, I wyll come on the as a thefe, Ꟶ thou shalt not know what houre I wyll come vpon the.
Thou hast a feawe names in Sardys, whych haue not defyled theyr garmentes, Ꟶ they shall walke wyth me in whyte, for they are worthy.
He that ouercommeth, shalbe thus clothed in whyte araye, and I wyll not put out his name out of the boke of lyfe, and I wyll confesse hys name before my father, and before hys Angels.
Let hym that hath eares, heare, what the sprete sayth vnto the congregacyons.
And wryte vnto the angell of the congregacion of Phyladelphia: this sayth he that is holy and true, which hath the keye of Dauid: whych openeth and no man shutteth, and shutteth, Ꟶ no man openeth.
I knowe thy worckes. Beholde, I haue set before the an open dore, and no man can shut it, for thou hast a lytell strength, Ꟶ haste kept my sayinges: Ꟶ hast not denyed my name.
Beholde, I make them of the congregacyon of Sathan, whych call them selues Iewes, and are not, but do lye: Beholde, I wyll make them that they shall come, and worshypp before thy fete: and shall knowe, that I haue loued the.
Because thou hast kept the wordes of my pacyence, therfore I wyll kepe the from the houre of temptacyon, which wyll come vpon all the worlde, to tempte them that dwell vpon the erth.
Beholde, I come shortly. Holde that which thou hast, that no man take awaye thy crowne.
Hym that ouercommeth, wyll I make a pyllar in the temple of my God, Ꟶ he shall go nomore out, And I wyll wryte vpon hym, the name of my God and the name of the cytye of my God, new Ierusalem: whych commeth downe out of heauen from my God, and I wyll wryte vpon hym my new name.
Let hym that hath eares, heare, what the sprete sayth vnto the congregacyons.
And vnto the messenger of the congregacyon whych is in Laodicia, wryte: This sayth (Amen) the faythfull and true wytnes, the begynnyng of the creatures of God.
I know thy workes, that thou art nether colde nor hotte: I wolde thou were colde or hotte.
So then because thou arr betwene bothe, and nether colde ner hote, I wyll spewe the out of my mouth,
because thou sayest: I am ryche Ꟶ incresyd wyth goodes, and haue nede of nothyng, and knowest not, how thou art wretched Ꟶ myserable, and poore, Ꟶ blynde and nakyd.
I counsell the to bye of me, golde tryed in the fyre, that thou mayste be ryche: and whyte rayment, that thou mayste be clothed, that thy fylthy nakednes do not appeare, Ꟶ anoynt thyne eyes wyth eye salue that thou mayste se.
As many as I loue, I rebuke, Ꟶ chasten, Be feruent therfore, and repent.
Beholde, I stande at the dore, Ꟶ knocke. If eny man heare my voyce, and open the dore, I wyll come in to hym, and wyll suppe with hym, and he with me.
To hym that ouercommeth wyll I graunte to syt with me in my seate, euen as I ouercam, Ꟶ haue sytten with my father in his seate.
Lett hym that hath eares heare, what the sprete sayth vnto the congregacyons.
After this I loked, and beholde a dore was open in heauen, and the fyrst voyce whych I hearde, was as it were of a trompett talkynge wyth me, whych sayde: come vp hyther, and I wyll shewe the thynges: whych must be fulfylled hereafter.
And immediatly I was in the sprete: Ꟶ beholde, a seate was sett in heauen, and one sate on the seate.
And he that sat, was to loke vpon, lyke vnto a Iasper stone and a Sardyne stone. And ther was a rayne bowe aboute the seate, in syght lyke to an Emeralde.
And aboute the seate were .xxiiii. seates. And vpon the seates .xxiiii. elders syttyng, clothed in whyte rayment, and had on theyr heades crownes of golde.
And out of the seate proceded lyghtnynges, Ꟶ thundrynges, Ꟶ voyces, Ꟶ ther were seuen lampes of fyre, burnynge before the seate, whych are the seuen spretes of God,
And before the seate ther was a see of glasse, lyke vnto Cristal, and in the myddes of the seate, Ꟶ rounde about the seate were foure beastes full of eyes before Ꟶ behynde.
And the fyrst beast was lyke a lyon, Ꟶ the seconde beaste lyke a calfe, Ꟶ the thyrde beast had a face as a man, Ꟶ the fourth beast was lyke a flyinge Egle.
And the foure beastes had eche one of them .vi. wynges about hym, Ꟶ they were full of eyes wt in. And they had no rest daye nether nyght saying. Holy, holy, holy, Lord God almyghty, whych was, and is, and is to come.
And when those beastes gaue glory and honour Ꟶ thankes to hym that sate on the seate, (which lyueth for euer Ꟶ euer)
the .xxiiii. elders fell downe before hym that sat on the trone Ꟶ worshypped hym that lyueth for euer Ꟶ cast theyr crounes before the trone saying:
thou arte worthy o Lord to receaue glory, Ꟶ honoure, and power, for thou hast created all thynges, Ꟶ for thy willes sake they are, Ꟶ were created.
And I sawe in the ryght hande of hym that sat in the trone, a boke written with in Ꟶ on the backsyde, sealed with seuen seales.
And I sawe a stronge angell, which preached wt a lowde voyce: Who is worthy to open the boke, Ꟶ to lose the seales therof.
And no man in heauen ner in erth nether vnder the erth, was able to open the boke, nether to loke theron.
And I wepte moch because no man was founde worthy to open Ꟶ to reade the boke, nether to loke theron.
And one of the elders sayde vnto me wepe not: Beholde, a lyon of the trybe of Iuda, the rote of Dauid, hath obtayned to open the boke, and to lose the seuen seales therof.
And I behelde, and lo, in the myddes of the seate, and of the foure bestes, and in the myddes of the elders, stode a lambe as though he had bene kylled, hauynge seuen hornes, and seuen eyes, whych are the seuen spretes of God, sent into all the worlde.
And he came, and toke the boke out of the ryght hande of him that sate vpon the seate.
And when he had taken the boke, the foure beastes and .xxiiii. elders fell downe before the lambe, hauyng (euery one of them) harpes Ꟶ golden vialles full of odoures, which are the prayers of saynctes,
Ꟶ they songe a new songe, saying: thou art worthy to take the boke, Ꟶ to open the seales therof: for thou wast kylled, Ꟶ hast redemed vs by thy bloud out of all kynredes, Ꟶ tonges, Ꟶ people, Ꟶ nacyons,
and hast made vs vnto oure God, kynges, and prestes, Ꟶ we shall raygne on the erth.
And I behelde, and I hearde the voyce of many angels about the trone, Ꟶ about the beaste Ꟶ the elders, and I hearde thousand thousandes,
saying wt a lowde voyce: Worthy is the lambe that was kylled to receaue power, Ꟶ ryches, Ꟶ wysdome, and strength, and honour, Ꟶ glory, Ꟶ blessynge.
And all the creatures whych are in heauen, Ꟶ on the erth, Ꟶ vnder the erth, Ꟶ in the see, Ꟶ all that are in them, herde I sayinge, blessyng, honour, glory, Ꟶ power be vnto hym that sytteth vpon the seate, Ꟶ vnto the lambe for euermore.
And the foure beastes sayd: Amen. And the .xxiiii. elders fell vpon their faces, and worshypped hym that lyueth for euermore.
And I sawe, when the lambe opened one of the seales, and I herde one of the foure beastes saye, as it were the noyse of thonder: come Ꟶ se:
and I sawe. And beholde ther was a whyte horsse: and he that sat on hym, had a bowe, and a crowne was geuen vnto hym, and he went forth conqueryng Ꟶ for to ouer come.
And when he had opened the seconde seale. I herde the seconde beaste, saye: come and se.
And ther went out another horsse that was redd, Ꟶ power was geuen to hym that satt theron, to take peace from the erth, Ꟶ that they shuld kyll one another. And ther was geuen vnto hym a great swearde.
And when he had opened the thyrde seale I herde the thyrde beaste saye, come Ꟶ se. And I behelde, Ꟶ lo, a black horsse: Ꟶ he that sate on him, had a payre of balances in his hande.
And I herde a voyce in the myddes of the foure beastes, saye: a measure of whete for a peny, Ꟶ thre measures of barly for a peny and oyle and wyne se thou hurte not.
And when he had opened the fourth seale, I herde the voyce of the fourth beaste saye, come and se:
Ꟶ I looked. And behold a pale horsse: Ꟶ his name that sate on him was deeth, Ꟶ hell folowed after hym, Ꟶ power was geuen vnto them ouer the fourth parte of the erth, to kyll wyth swearde, Ꟶ wyth honger, Ꟶ wyth deeth that commeth of vermen of the erth.
And when he had opened the fyft seale, I saw vnder the aultre the soules of them that were kylled for the worde of God, Ꟶ for the testymony whych they had,
Ꟶ they cryed with a lowde voyce, sayinge: How longe taryest thou Lord, holy Ꟶ true, to iudge Ꟶ to auenge oure bloud on them that dwel on the erth?
And longe whyte garmentes were geuen vnto euery one of them. And it was sayde vnto them, that they shuld reste yet for a lytle season vntyll the nomber of theyr felowes, and brethren, Ꟶ of them that shulde be kylled as they were, were fulfylled.
And I behelde, when he had opened the syxt seale: Ꟶ lo, ther was a great erthquake and the sunne was as blacke as sacke cloth made of heere. And the mone wexed all, euen as bloud,
and the starres of heauen fell vnto the erth, euen as a fygge tree casteth from her vntymely fygges, when she is shaken of a myghty wynde.
And heauen vanisshed awaye, as a scroll when it is rolled to gether. And all mountaynes and yles, were moued out of theyr places.
And the kynges of the erth, and the gret men, and the ryche men, and the chefe captaynes, Ꟶ the myghty men, Ꟶ euery bondman, and euery free man, hyd them selues in dennes, and in rockes of the hylles:
and sayde to the hylles and rockes: fall on vs, Ꟶ hyde vs from the presence of hym that sytteth on the seate, and from the wrath of the lambe:
for the grete daye of his wrath is come, and who is able to endure?
And after that, I sawe .iiii. angels stande on the .iiii. corners of the erth holdynge the foure wyndes of the erth, that the wynde shuld not blowe on the erth, nether on the see, nether on eny tree.
And I sawe another angell ascende from the rysynge of the sunne, which had the seale of the lyuyng God, Ꟶ he cryed wyth a loude voyce to the foure Angels (to whom power was geuen to hurte the erth Ꟶ the see)
saying: hurt not the erth nether the see, nether the trees, tyll we haue sealed the seruauntes of oure God in their forheades.
And I hearde the nombre of them whych were sealed, Ꟶ ther were sealed an .C. Ꟶ .xliiii.M. of all the trybes of the chyldren of Israel.
Of the trybe of Iuda were sealed .xii.M. Of the trybe of Ruben were sealed .xii.M. Of the trybe of Gad were sealed .xii.M.
Of the trybe of Aser were sealed .xii.M. Of the trybe of Neptali were sealed .xii.M. Of the tryb of Manasses were sealed .xii.M.
Of the trybe of Symeon were sealed .xii.M. Of the trybe of Leuy were sealed .xii.M. Of the trybe of Isacar were sealed .xii.M.
Of the trybe of zabulon were sealed .xii.M. Of the trybe of Ioseph were sealed .xii.M. Of the trybe of Beniamin were sealed .xii.M.
After this I behelde, Ꟶ lo, a gret multitude (which noman coulde nombre) of all nacyons Ꟶ people, Ꟶ tonges, stode before the seate, Ꟶ before the lambe, clothed with longe white garmentes, Ꟶ palmes in their handes,
Ꟶ cryed with a lowde voyce, sayinge: saluacyon be asscribed to him that sytteth vpon the seate of oure God, Ꟶ vnto the lambe.
And all the angels stode in the compase of the seate, Ꟶ of the elders Ꟶ of the foure bestes, Ꟶ fell before the seat on their faces, and worshypped God,
sayinge, Amen: Blessinge Ꟶ glory Ꟶ wysdome Ꟶ thankes, and honour, Ꟶ power, Ꟶ myght, be vnto oure God for euermore. Amen.
And one of the elders answered, sayinge vnto me: what are these which are arayed in longe whyte garmentes, Ꟶ whence came they?
And I sayde vnto him: Lord thou wotest. And he sayde to me: these are they, whych came out of great tribulacyon, Ꟶ made their garmentes large, Ꟶ made them white by the bloude of the lambe:
therfore are they in the presence of the seate of God Ꟶ serue hym daye Ꟶ nyght in his temple, Ꟶ he that sytteth in the seate wyll dwell amonge them.
They shall honger no more, nether thyrst, nether shall the sunne lyght on them, nether eny heate.
For the lambe whych is in the myddes of the seate, shall fede them, Ꟶ shall leade them vnto fountaynes of lyuynge water, Ꟶ God shall wype awaye all teares from their eyes.
And when he had opened the seuenth seale, ther was sylence in heauen aboute the space of halfe an houre.
And I sawe .vii. angelles standyng before God, Ꟶ to them were geuen seuen trompettes.
And another angell came Ꟶ stode before the aultre, hauynge a golden senser, Ꟶ moch of odoures was geuen vnto him, that he shulde offre of the prayers of all saynctes vpon the golden aulter, whych was before the seate.
And the smoke of the odoures whych cam of the prayers of all saynctes, ascended vp before God out of the Angelles hande.
And the Angell toke the senser, and fylled it wyth fyre of the aulter, and caste it into the erth, and voyces were made, Ꟶ thondrynges Ꟶ lyghtnynges, and erthquake.
And the seuen Angels whych had the seuen trompettes, prepared them selues to blowe.
The fyrst Angell blewe, Ꟶ there was made hayle Ꟶ fyre, which were myngled wt bloud, Ꟶ they were cast into the erth: Ꟶ the thirde parte of trees was burnt, and all grene grasse was brent.
And the seconde angell blewe: Ꟶ as it were a gret mountayne burnyng wt fyre was caste into the see, and the thyrde parte of the see tourned to bloude,
and the thyrde parte of the creatures which had lyfe, dyed, Ꟶ the thyrde part of shyppes were destroyed.
And the thyrde Angell blew, Ꟶ ther fell a gret starre from heauen, burnyng as it were a lampe, Ꟶ it fell into the thyrde parte of the ryuers, Ꟶ into fountaynes of waters,
Ꟶ the name of the starre is called wormwod. And the thyrde parte was turned to wormwod. And many men dyed of the waters, because they were made bytter.
And the fourth Angell blew, and the thyrde parte of the sunne was smytten, and the thirde parte of the mone, and the thyrde parte of starres: so that the thyrd part of them was darckned. And the daye was smytten, that the thyrde part of it shulde not shyne, Ꟶ lykewyse the nyght.
And I behelde and herde an Angell flyinge thorow the myddes of heauen, sayinge with a lowde voyce: Woo, woo, to the inhabiters of the erth, because of the voyces to come of the trompe of the thre Angels, whych were yet to blowe.
And the fyft Angell blewe, and I saw a starre fall from heauen vnto the erth. And to him was geuen the kaye of the bottomlesse pytt:
And he opened the bottomlesse pytt, and the smoke of the pytt arose as the smoke of a gret fornace. And the sunne, and the ayer were darckned by the reason of the smoke of the pytt.
And there came out of the smoke locustes vpon the erth, Ꟶ vnto them was geuen power, as the scorpions of the erth haue power.
And it was commaunded them, that they shuld not hurt the grasse of the erth: nether eny grene thynge: nether eny tree: but onely those men which haue not the seale in their forheades.
And to them was commaunded, that they shulde not kyll them, but that they shulde be vexed .v. monethes, Ꟶ their payne was as the payne that commeth of a scorpion, when he hath stonge a man.
And in those dayes shall men seke deeth, and shall not finde it, Ꟶ shall desyre to dye, and deeth shall flye from them.
And the symilitude of the locustes was lyke vnto horsses prepared vnto battayll, Ꟶ on their heades were as it were crounes, lyke vnto golde, and their faces were as it had bene the faces of men.
And they had heere as the heere of wemen. And their teethe were as the teeth of lyons.
And they had habbergions, as it were habbergions of yron. And the sounde of their winges, was as the sounde of charrettes, when many horsses runne to gether to battayle.
And they had tayles lyke vnto scorpions, and there were stynges in their tayles. And their power was to hurt men .v. monethes.
And they had a kyng ouer them, which is the angell of the bottomlesse pytt, whose name in the Hebrewe tong, is Abadon: but in the Greke tonge, Apollion that is to saye: a destroyer.
One wo is past, Ꟶ beholde, two wooes come yet after this.
And the syxt Angell blewe, and I herde a voyce from the .iiii. corners of the golden aultre, which is before God,
sayinge to the syxt Angell, which had the trompe: Lose the foure Angelles, which are bounde in the grete ryuer Euphrates.
And the foure Angelles were loosed, whych were prepared for an houre, for a daye, for a moneth, Ꟶ for ayere, for to slee the .iii. part of men.
And the nombre of horsmen of warre were .xx. thousande tymes .x.M. And I herde the nombre of them:
Ꟶ thus I sawe the horses in a vision, Ꟶ them that sate on them, hauynge fyrye habbergions of a Iacincte couloure, Ꟶ brymstone, Ꟶ the heades of the horses were as the heades of lyons. And out of their mouthes went forth fyre and smoke, Ꟶ brymstone.
And of these thre was the thyrd part of men kylled: that is to saye, of fyre, smoke, and brymstone: whych proceded out of the mouthes of them:
For their power was in their mouthes Ꟶ in their tayles, for their tayles were lyke vnto serpentes, Ꟶ had heades, Ꟶ with them they dyd hurt:
And the remanaunt of the men whych were not kylled by these plages, repented not of the dedes of their handes that they shulde not worshyppe deuyls, Ꟶ ymages of golde and syluer, and brasse, and stone, and of wood, whych nether can se, nether heare, nether go.
Also they repented not of their murther, and of their sorcery, nether of their fornycacyon, nether of their thefte.
And I saw another myghtye angell come downe from heauen clothed wt a cloude, Ꟶ the raynebowe vpon his heed. And his face as it were the sunne, Ꟶ his fete as it were pyllars of fyre,
and he had in his hande a lytell boke open, and he put his ryght fote vpon the see, Ꟶ his lyfe fote on the erth.
And cryed wyth a lowde voyce, as when a lyon roreth. And when he had cryed, seuen thonders spake their voyces.
And when the .vii. thondres had spoken their voyces, I was about to wryte. And I herde a voyce from heauen, sayinge vnto me: seale vp those thynges whych the .vii. thondres spake, Ꟶ wryte them not.
And the Angell which I sawe stonde vpon the see, Ꟶ vpon the erth, lyfte vp his hande to heuen,
and sware by him that lyueth for euer more, wich created heauen, Ꟶ the thynges that therin are and the see, Ꟶ the thynges which therin are: that there shulde be no lenger tym
but in the dayes of the voyce of the seuenth Angell, when he shall begyn to blowe: euen the mystery of God shalbe fynysshed, as he preached by his seruauntes the prophetes.
And the voyce which I herde from heuen, spake vnto me agayne, Ꟶ sayd: go Ꟶ take the lytle boke which is open in the hande of the angell which standeth vpon the see, Ꟶ vpon the erth.
And I went vnto the angell, Ꟶ sayde to him: geue me the lytle boke, and he sayde vnto me: take it, Ꟶ eate it vp, Ꟶ it shall make thy belly bytter, but it shalbe in thy mouthe as swete as hony.
And I toke the lytle boke out of his hande, Ꟶ eate it vp, Ꟶ it was in my mouth as swete as hony: and as sone as I had eaten it, my belly was bytter.
And he sayde vnto me: thou must prophesy agayne amonge the people, and nacyons, and tonges, and to many kynges.
And then was geuen me a rede, lyke vnto a rodd, Ꟶ it was sayde vnto me. Ryse Ꟶ meate the temple of God, Ꟶ the aulter, Ꟶ them that worshippe therin,
Ꟶ the queer which is wt in the temple, cast out Ꟶ meate it not for it is geuen vnto the Gentyles, Ꟶ the holy cytye shall they treade vnder fote .xlii. monethes.
And I wyll geue power vnto my two witnesses, Ꟶ they shall prophesy a thousande, two hundred Ꟶ .lx. dayes, clothed in sacke clothe.
These are two olyue trees, Ꟶ two candelstyckes, standynge before the God of the erth.
And yf eny man wyll hurt them, fyre shall procede out of their mouthes, and consume their enemyes. And yf eny men wyll hurt them, thys wyse muste he be kylled.
These haue power to shut heauen, that it rayne not in the dayes of their prophesying: and haue power ouer waters to turne them to bloude, and to smyte the erth with all maner plages, as often as they wyll.
And when they haue finysshed their testimony, the beast that cam out of the bottomlesse pyt, shall make warre agaynst them, Ꟶ shall ouercome them, Ꟶ kyll them.
And their bodyes shall lye in the stretes of the greate citye, which spritually is called zodom and Egypte, where oure Lorde was crucyfyed.
And they of the people Ꟶ kynredes, Ꟶ tonges, Ꟶ they of the nacyons, shall se their bodyes .iii. dayes and an halfe, Ꟶ shall not suffre their bodyes to be put in graues.
And they that dwell vpon the erth, shall reioyce ouer them, and be glad, Ꟶ shall sende gyftes one to another, for these two prophetes vexed them that dwelt on the erth.
And after .iii. dayes Ꟶ an halfe, the sprete of lyfe from God, entred into them. And they stode vp vpon their fete, Ꟶ greate feare came vpon them whych sawe them.
And they herde a greate voyce from heauen, sayinge vnto them. Come vp hyther. And they ascended vp into heauen in a cloude, Ꟶ their enemyes sawe them.
And the same houre was ther a great erthquake, and the tenth parte of the cytye fell, and in the erthquake were slayne names of men seuen .M. and the remnaunt were feared, and gaue glory to the God of heauen.
The second woo is past, Ꟶ beholde, the thyrde woo wyll come anone.
And the seuenth Angell blewe, Ꟶ ther were made greate voyces in heauen, sayinge: the kyngdoms of this worlde are oure lordes, and his Christes, Ꟶ he shall raygne for euermore.
And the .xxiiii. elders, whych syt before God on their seates, fell vpon their faces, Ꟶ worshypped God,
sayinge: we geue the thankes O Lord God almyghtye: whych arte Ꟶ wast, Ꟶ arte to come, for thou haste receaued thy great myght, and hast raygned.
And the nacyons were angry, and thy wrath is come, Ꟶ the tyme of the deed that they shuld be iudged and that thou shuldest geue rewarde vnto thy seruauntes the Prophetes and Saynctes, Ꟶ to them that feare thy name small Ꟶ great Ꟶ shuldest destroye them, which destroye the erth.
And the temple of God was opened in heauen, Ꟶ ther was sene in his temple, the arcke of his testament, Ꟶ ther folowed lightnynges, and voyces, and thondrynges and erthquake, and moch hayle.
And ther appered a gret wonder in heauen: A woman clothed wt the sonne, Ꟶ the mone vnder her fete, Ꟶ vpon her heed a croune of .xii. starres.
And she was wt chylde, Ꟶ cryed trauaylinge in byrth, Ꟶ payned redy to be delyuered.
And ther appered another wonder in heauen, for beholde, a gret red dragon hauynge .vii. heddes, Ꟶ ten hornes Ꟶ seuen crounes vpon hys heades:
and hys tayle drue the thyrde parte of the starres and cast them to the erth. And the dragon stode before the woman whych was redy to be delyuered: for to deuoure her chylde as sone as it were borne.
And she brought forth a man childe, which shulde rule all nacyons with a rodd of yron. And her sonne was taken vp vnto God, Ꟶ to his seate.
And the woman fleed into wyldernes, where she had a place, prepared of God, that they shulde fede her there a .M.ii. hundred and .lx. dayes.
And ther was a great battayll in heauen, Michael Ꟶ his angels fought with the dragon, Ꟶ the dragon fought Ꟶ his Angelles,
and preuayled not, nether was their place founde eny more in heauen.
And the great dragon, that olde serpent, called the deuyll Ꟶ Sathanas, was cast out. Which deceaueth all the worlde. And he was cast into the erth Ꟶ his angelles were cast out also
And I hearde a lowde voyce sayinge: in heauen is now made saluacyon and strength Ꟶ the kyngdome of oure God, Ꟶ the power of hys Chryst. For is cast doune, which accused them before God daye and nyght.
And they ouercame him by the bloude of the lambe, and by the worde of their testimony, Ꟶ they loued not their lyues vnto the deeth.
Therfore reioyce heuens, Ꟶ ye that dwell in them. Woo to the inhabiters of the erth, and of the see: for the deuyll is come downe vnto you, which hath great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short tyme.
And when the dragon sawe that he was caste vnto the erth, he persecuted the woman, which brought forth the man chylde.
And to the woman were geuen two wynges of a great Egle, that she myght flye into the wyldernes into her place, where she is norysshed for a tyme, tymes, Ꟶ halfe a tyme, from the presence of the serpent.
And the dragon cast oute of hys mouth water after the woman as it had bene a ryuer, because she shuld haue bene caught of the floud.
And the erth holpe the woman, and the erth opened her mouth Ꟶ swalowed, vp the ryuer, which the dragon cast out of his mouth.
And the dragon was wroth wyth the woman: and went, Ꟶ made warre wyth the remnaunt of hyr sede, which kepe the commaundementes of God, and haue the testimony of Iesus Christe. And he stode on the see sande.
And I sawe a beaste ryse out of the see, hauyng seuen heddes, and ten hornes, and vpon his hornes ten crounes, Ꟶ vpon his heed, the name of blasphemy.
And the beast which I sawe, was lyke a catte of the mountayne, and hys fete were as the fete of a beare, Ꟶ hys mouth as the mouth of a lyon. And the dragon gaue hym his power Ꟶ his seate, Ꟶ gret auctorite:
and I sawe one of his heedes as it were wounded to deeth, Ꟶ his dedly wounde was healed. And all the worlde wondred at the beast,
Ꟶ they worshypped the dragon, whych gaue power vnto the beast, and they worshypped the beast sayinge: who is lyke vnto the beast? who is able to warre with hym?
And ther was geuen vnto hym a mouth, that spake great thynges Ꟶ blasphemyes, Ꟶ power was geuen vnto hym, to do .xlii. monethes.
And he opened his mouth vnto blasphemy agaynst God, to blaspheme his name Ꟶ his tabernacle, Ꟶ them that dwell in heauen.
And it was geuen vnto hym to make warre with the Saynctes, Ꟶ to ouercome them. And power was geuen him ouer all kynred, and people, and tonge, and nacion,
and all that dwell vpon the erth worshypt hym: whose names are not written in the boke of lyfe of the lambe, which was kylled from the begynnynge of the worlde.
If eny man haue an eare let hym heare.
He that leadeth into captyuyte, shall go into captyuyte: he that kylleth with a swearde, must be kylled with a swearde. Heare is the pacyence, Ꟶ the fayth of the saynctes.
And I behelde another beast comminge vp out of the erth, and he had two hornes lyke a lambe, Ꟶ he spake as dyd the dragon.
And he dyd all that the fyrste beast coulde do in his presence, Ꟶ he caused the erth, Ꟶ them which dwel therin, to worshyppe the fyrst beast, whose dedly wounde was healed.
And he dyd grett wonders, so that he made fyre come doune from heauen in the syght of men.
And deceaued them that dwelt on the erth, by the meanes of those sygnes whyche he had power to do in the syght of the beast, sayinge to them that dwelt on the erth: that they shuld make an ymage vnto the beast, whych had the wounde of a swearde, and dyd lyue.
And he had power to geue a sprete vnto the ymage of the beast, Ꟶ that the ymage of the beast shuld speake, and shuld cause, that as many as wolde not worshyppe the ymage of the beast, shuld be kylled.
And he made all, both small Ꟶ gret, ryche Ꟶ poore, fre Ꟶ bond, to receaue a marke in theyr ryght handes or in theyr forheddes.
And that no man myght by or sell, saue he that had the marke or the name of the beast, other the nombre of his name.
Here is wysdome. Let hym that hath wytt, count the nombre of the beast. For it is the nombre of a man, and his nombre is syxe hondred, threscore, and syxe.
And I loked, and lo, a lambe stode on the mount Syon, Ꟶ with hym an .C. Ꟶ .xliiii. thousande hauynge his fathers name written in theyr forheddes.
And I herde a voyce from heuen, as the sounde of many waters, and as the voyce of a gret thoundre. And I herde the voyce of harpers harpynge with theyr harpes.
And they songe as it were a newe songe, before the seate, Ꟶ before the foure beastes, Ꟶ the elders, Ꟶ no man coulde learne that songe, but the hondred Ꟶ .xliii.M. which were redemed from the erth.
These are they, which were not defyled wt wemen, for they are virgyns. These folowe the lambe whythersoeuer he goeth. These were redemed from men, beynge the fyrste frutes vnto God and to the lambe,
Ꟶ in their mouthes was founde no gyle. For they are with oute spot before the trone of God.
And I sawe, another angell flye in the myddes of heauen hauynge the euerlastyng gospell, to preache vnto them that syt Ꟶ dwell on the erth, Ꟶ to all nacyons, kynreds, Ꟶ tonges Ꟶ people,
saying wt a lowde voyce: Feare God, Ꟶ geue honour to hym, for the houre of his iudgement is come: and worshyppe him, that made heauen Ꟶ erth, Ꟶ the see, Ꟶ fountaines of water.
And there folowed a nother angell, saying: Babylon is fallen is fallen that greate cyte, for she made all nacyons dryncke of the wyne of her fornycacyon.
And the thyrd angell folowed them sayinge wt a loude voyce: If any man worshyppe the beast and his ymage, Ꟶ receaue his marke in his forhed, or on his hande,
the same shall drincke the wyne of the wrath of God, which is powred in the cup of his wrath. And he shalbe punysshed in fyre Ꟶ brymstone, before the holy angels, Ꟶ before the lambe.
And the smoke of theyr torment ascendeth vp euermore. And they haue no rest daye nor night, which worshyppe the beast Ꟶ his ymage Ꟶ whosoeuer receaueth the prynt of his name.
Here is the pacyence of saynctes Heare are they that kepe the commaundementes and the fayth of Iesu.
And I hearde a voyce from heauen saying vnto me: wryte. Blessed are the deed, which here after dye in the Lorde, euen so sayth the sprete: that they rest from theyr laboures, but theyr workes folowe them.
And I loked, and beholde a whyte clowde, and vpon the clowde one syttynge lyke vnto the sonne of man, hauyng on his heed a golden crowne, and in his hande a sharpe sykle.
And another angell came out of the temple, crying with a lowde voyce to hym that sate on the clowde: Thruste in thy sykle Ꟶ repe, for thy tyme is come to repe, for the corne of the erth is rype.
And he that sate on the cloude, thrust in hys sycle on the earth, and the erth was reped.
And another angell came out of the temple, whych is in heauen, hauyng also a sharpe sykle.
And another angell came out from the aultre, whych had power ouer fyre, and cryed with a lowde crye to hym that had the sharpe sykle, Ꟶ sayde: thrust in thy sharpe sykle, Ꟶ gaddre the clusters of the erth, for her grapes are rype.
And the angell thrust in hys sharpe sykle on the erth, Ꟶ cut downe the grapes of the vyneyarde of the erth: and cast them into the gret wynefat of the wrath of God,
Ꟶ the wynefat was troden with out the cytie, and bloud came out of the fat, euen vnto the horsse brydles, by the space of a thousande, and .vi.C. furlonges.
And I sawe another sygne in heuen gret and meruellous, seuen Angels, hauyng the seuen laste plages, for in them is fulfylled the wrath of God.
And I sawe as it were a glassye see, myngled wt fyre, Ꟶ them that had gotten victory of the beast, and of hys ymage, and of the nombre of hys name, stande on the glassye see, hauyng the harpes of God,
and they songe the songe of Moses the seruaunt of God, Ꟶ the songe of the lambe, sayinge: Gret and maruelous are thy workes: Lorde God almyghtye, iuste Ꟶ true are thy wayes, thou Kyng of Saynctes.
Who shall not feare o Lorde, Ꟶ gloryfy thy name? For thou only arte holy, and all gentyls shall come and worshyppe before the, for thy iudgementes are made manyfeste.
And after that, I loked, and beholde, the temple of the tabernacle of testimony was open in heauen,
and the seuen Angels came out of the temple whych had the seuen plages clothed in pure and bryght lynnen, and hauyng theyr brestes gyrded with golden gerdels.
And one of the fowre beastes gaue vnto the seuen Angels seuen golden vyalles, full of the wrath of God, whych lyueth for euermore.
And the temple was full of the smoke of the glory of God Ꟶ of hys power, and no man was able to entre into the temple, tyll the seuen plages of the seuen Angels were fulfylled.
And I herde a great voyce out of the temple saying to the seuen angels: go youre wayes, powre out youre vyalles of wrath vpon the erth.
And the fyrst Angell went, Ꟶ powred out his vyall vpon the erth, Ꟶ there fell a noysome, Ꟶ a sore botche vpon the men whych had the marke of the beast, Ꟶ vpon them whych worshypped hys ymage.
And the second Angell shed out hys vyall vpon the see, and it turned as it were into the bloud of a deed man: and euery lyuyng thyng dyed in the see.
And the thyrde Angell shed out his vyall vpon the ryuers and fountaynes of waters, Ꟶ they turned to bloud.
And I herde an Angell saye: Lorde, whych arte and wast, thou arte ryghteous Ꟶ holy, because thou hast geuen soche iudgementes,
for they shed out the bloud of sainctes, and prophetes, Ꟶ therfore hast thou geuen them bloud to dryncke: for they are worthy.
And I herde another saye: euen so Lorde God almyghty: true and ryghteous are thy iudgementes.
And the fourth Angell powred out hys vyall on the sunne, Ꟶ power was geuen vnto him to vexe men with heat of fyre.
And the men raged in gret heate: Ꟶ spake euyll of the name of God, which hath power ouer those plages, Ꟶ they repented not of theyr euill dedis, to geue him glory.
And the fyft Angell powred out his viall vpon the seate of the beaste, and his kyngdome wexed derke, Ꟶ they gnewe theyr tonges for sorowe,
and blasphemed the God of heauen for sorowe Ꟶ payne of theyr sores, Ꟶ repented not of theyr dedes.
And the syxt Angell powred out his vyall vpon the gret ryuer Euphrates, Ꟶ the water dryed vp, that the wayes of the kynges of the east shulde be prepared.
And I sawe thre vnclene spretes lyke frogges come out of the mouth of the dragon, Ꟶ out of the mouth of the beast, Ꟶ out of the mouth of the false Prophete.
For they are the spretes of deuyls, workyng myracles, to go out vnto the kynges of the erth and of the whole world, to gathre them to the battayle of that gret daye of God almyghty.
Beholde, I come as a thefe. Happy is he that watcheth, and kepeth hys garmentes, lest he walke naked, and men se hys fylthynes.
And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrue tonge Armagedon.
And the seuenth Angell powred out hys vyall into the ayre. And ther cam a greate voyce out of heauen from the seate, saying, it is done.
And ther folowed, voyces, thondringes, and lightenynges, Ꟶ ther was a greate erthquake, suche as was not sence men were vpon the erth, so mighty an erthquake Ꟶ so great.
And the great cytye was deuyded into thre partes, and the cyties of all nacyons fell. And greate Babylon came in remembraunce before God, to geue vnto hyr the cup of the wyne of the fearcenes of his wrathe.
Euery yle also fled awaye, and the mountaynes were not founde.
And ther fell a greate hayle (as it had bene talentes) out of heauen vpon the men, and the men blasphemed God: because of the plage of the hayle, for it was great, and the plage of it sore.
And ther came one of the seuen Angels, whyche had the seuen vyalles: and talked wyth me, sayenge vnto me: come, I wyll shewe vnto the, the iudgement of the great whore that sytteth vpon many waters,
wyth whome haue commytted fornicacion the kynges of the erthe, and the inhabyters of the erth are droncken wyth the wyne of hir fornicacion.
And the sprete caryed me awaye in to the wyldernes. And I sawe a woman syt vpon a rose colored beast, full of names of blasphemye, whyche had seuen heades and ten hornes.
And the woman was arayed in purple and rose coloure, and decked wyth golde, precious stone, and pearles, and had a cup of golde in her hande, full of abhominacions and fylthynes of her fornicacion.
And in her forheade was a name written, a mystery, gret Babylon the mother of whordom and abominacions of the erth.
And I sawe the wyfe droncken wyth the bloude of saynctes, and with the bloude of the wytnesses of Iesu. And when I sawe her: I wondred with great meruayle.
And the Angell sayde vnto me: wherfore maruaylest thou? I wyll shewe the the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that beryth her, which hath seuen heades and ten hornes.
The beast that thon seest, was, and is not, and shall ascende out of the bottomlesse pyt, and shall go into perdicion, Ꟶ they that dwel on the erth shall wondre (whose names are not written in the boke of lyfe from the begynnynge of the worlde) when they behold the beast that was and is not.
And here is a mynde that hath wysdome. The seuen heades are seuen mountaynes, on which the woman sytteth,
they are also seuen kynges. Fyue are fallen, and one is, and another is not yet come. And when he commeth, he must continew a shorte space.
And the beast that was, Ꟶ is not, is euen the eyght and is one of the seuen, and shall go into destruccion.
And the ten hornes which thou sawest are ten kynges which haue receaued no kingdom as yet, but shall receaue power as kynges at one houre wyth the beast.
These haue one mynde, and shall geue their power and strength vnto the beast.
These shall fyght with the lambe, Ꟶ the lambe shall ouercome them. For he is Lorde of lordes, and kynge of kynges, and they that are on his side, are called, and chosen, and faythfull.
And he sayde vnto me: the waters whych thou sawest, where the whore sitteth, are people, and folke, Ꟶ nacions, and tonges.
And the ten hornes, which thou sawest vpon the beast, are they that shall hate the whore, Ꟶ shall make her desolate and naked, Ꟶ shall eate her flesshe, Ꟶ burne her wyth fyre.
For God hath put in theyr hertes to fulfyll his wyll, Ꟶ to do wyth one consent, for to geue their kyngdome vnto the beast, vntyll the wordes of God be fulfylled.
And the woman which thou sawest, is the great cytye, whiche raygneth ouer the kynges of the erth.
And after that, I sawe another Angell come from heauen, hauyng gret power, and the erthe was lyghtened wyth hys bryghtnes.
And he cryed myghtely with a stronge voyce, sayinge: Great Babylon is fallen, is fallen, and is become the inhabitacion of deuyls, and the holde of all fowle spretes, and a cage of all vncleane and hatefull byrdes,
for all nacyons haue dronken of the wyne of the wrath of her fornicacion. And the kynges of the earth haue commytted fornicacion wyth her, and the merchauntes of the erth are wexed ryche of the aboundaunce of her pleasures.
And I herde another voyce from heauen saye, come awaye from her my people, that ye be not partakers of her synnes, and that ye receaue not of her plages.
For her synnes are gone vp to heauen, Ꟶ God hath remembred her wickednes.
Rewarde her euen as she rewarded you, Ꟶ geue her double accordyng to her workes. And powre in double to her in, the same cuppe which she filled vnto you.
And as moche as she glorifyed her selfe and liued wantanly, so moch powre ye in for her of punysshement and sorowe, for she sayde in her selfe: I syt beynge a quene, Ꟶ am no wyddowe, and shall se no sorowe.
Therfore shal her plages come in one daye, deeth, Ꟶ sorowe, and honger, Ꟶ she shalbe brent with fyre: for stronge is the Lorde God which shal iudge her.
And the kynges of the erth shall bewepe her and wayle ouer her, which haue commytted fornicacion with her, Ꟶ haue lyued wantanly with her, when they shall se the smoke of her burnyng,
Ꟶ shall stande a farre of, for feare of her punishement, sayinge. Alas, Alas, that gret cytie Babylon, the myghtye citie: for at one hour is thy iudgement come.
And the marchauntes of the erth shal wepe and wayle in them selues, for no man wyll bye theyr ware eny more,
the ware of gold and siluer, Ꟶ precious stones, nether of pearle, and raynes, and purple, and skarlet, and all thynne wodde, and all maner vessels of yuery, Ꟶ all maner vessels of most precious wodde, Ꟶ of brasse Ꟶ yron,
Ꟶ synamom, and odours, Ꟶ oyntmentes, and franckinsence, Ꟶ wyne, and oyle, and fyne floure, and wheate, beastes, and shepe, and horsses, and charetes, and bodyes, and soules of men.
And the apples that thy soule lusted after, are departed from the. And all thinges which were deyntie, and had in price, are departed from the, Ꟶ thou shalt fynde them nomore.
The marchauntes of these thynges whyche were wexed ryche, shall stande a farre of from hir, for feare of the punyshement of her, wepynge and waylynge,
Ꟶ saying: Alas, Alas, that gret cytie, that was clothed in raynes and purple, and scarlet, and decked with golde, and precious stones, Ꟶ pearles:
for at one houre so great ryches is come to nought. And euery shyppe gouerner, and all they that occupied shyppes, and shypmen which worke in the see, stode a farre of,
and cryed, when they sawe the smoke of her burnyng, saying: what cytie is lyke vnto this gret citie?
And they cast dust on theyr heddes, and cryed wepyng, Ꟶ waylyng, Ꟶ sayde: Alas, Alas, that great cytie, wherin were made riche all that had shippes in the see, by the reason of her costlynes, for at one houre is she made desolate.
Reioyce ouer her thou heauen, and ye holy Apostles and Prophetes: for God hath geuen your iudgement on her.
And a mighty angell toke vp a stone lyke a gret milstone and cast it into the see, saying: with such vyolence shall that gret citie Babylon be cast, Ꟶ shalbe founde no more.
And the voyce of harpers, and musycions, Ꟶ of pypers, and trompetters shalbe herde no more in the: and no craftes man, of whatsoeuer craft he be, shalbe founde eny more in the. And the sounde of a myll shalbe herde no more in the,
and the voyce of the brydegrom and of the bryde, shalbe herd no more in the, for thy marchauntes were the gret men of the erth. And wt thyne inchauntment were deceaued al nacions:
Ꟶ in her was founde the bloude of the Prophetes, Ꟶ of the saynctes, Ꟶ of all that were slayne vpon the erth.
And after that, I herde a greate voyce of moch people in heauen saying: Alleluia. Saluacion Ꟶ glory Ꟶ honour Ꟶ power be ascribed to the Lorde our God,
for true and ryghteous are his iudgementes, for he hath iudged the gret whore which dyd corrupt the erth wt her fornicacion, Ꟶ hath auenged the bloud of his seruauntes of hyr hande.
And agayn they said: Alleluia. And smoke rose vp for euermore.
And the .xxiiii. elders, Ꟶ the .iiii. bestes fell downe, Ꟶ worshipped God that sate on the seate, saying: Amen, Alleluia.
And a voyce came out of the seat, sayinge: praise our Lord God all ye that are his seruauntes, Ꟶ ye that feare hym both small and great.
And I herde the voyce of moche people euen as the voyce of many waters, Ꟶ as the voyce of strong thondrynges sayinge: Alleluia, for the Lord our God omnipotent raygneth.
Let vs be glad and reioyce, Ꟶ geue honoure to him, for the mariage of the lambe is come, and hys wyfe made her selfe ready.
And to her was graunted, that she shuld be arayed with pure and goodly raynes. For the raynes is the rightewesnes of sainctes.
And he sayd vnto me, wryte, happy are they whiche are called vnto the supper of the lambes mariage. And he sayd vnto me: these are the true sayinges of God.
And I fell at his fete, to worshippe him. And he sayde vnto me: se thou do it not. For I am thy felow seruaunt, Ꟶ one of thy brethren, euen of them that haue the testimony of Iesus. Worshyppe God. For the testimony of Iesus is the sprete of prophesy.
And I sawe heauen open, Ꟶ behold, a whyte horsse: Ꟶ he that sat vpon him was called faythfull Ꟶ true, Ꟶ in rightewesnes he doth iudge Ꟶ make battayle.
His eyes were as a flamme of fyre: Ꟶ on his heed were many crownes: Ꟶ he had a name wrytten, that noman knew but he hym selfe.
And he was clothed wyth a vesture dipt in bloude, Ꟶ his name is called the worde of God.
And the warriers which were in heauen, folowed him vpon whyte horsses, clothed wyth whyte Ꟶ pure raynes:
and out of hys mouthe wente a sharpe two edged swerde, that wyth it he shulde smyte the hethen. And he shall rule them wyth a rodde of yron, and he trode the wynefat of fearsnes and wrath of almyghty God.
And hath on hys vesture and on his thygh a name wrytten: Kyng of Kynges, and Lorde of Lordes.
And I sawe an Angell stande in the sonne, and he cryed with a loude voyce, sayinge: to all the fowles that flye by the middes of heauen: come and gather youre selues to gether vnto the supper of the great God,
that ye maye eate fleshe of kynges, and the fleshe of hye captaynes, and the fleshe of myghty men, Ꟶ the fleshe of horsses, and of them that syt on them, and the flesh of all free men and bonde men and of small and gret.
And I sawe the beast, and the kynges of the earth, and their warriers gathered together to make batayle agaynst hym that sat on the horsse, and agaynst his soudiers.
And the beast was taken, Ꟶ with hym that false prophet that wrought miracles before hym, with whych he deceaued them that receaued the beastes marke, Ꟶ them that worshypped hys ymage. These both were cast quicke into a ponde of fyre burnynge wyth brymstone:
Ꟶ the remnaunt were slayne wt the swearde of hym that sat vpon the horsse, whych swearde proceaded out of his mouth, Ꟶ all the soules were fulfylled wyth theyr fleshe.
And I sawe an Angel come downe from heauen, hauyng the kaye of the bottomlesse pyt, and a greate chayne in hys hand.
And he toke the dragon the olde serpente, which is the deuyll Ꟶ Satanas, Ꟶ he bounde hym a thousande yeres:
and cast hym into the bottomlesse pyt, and he shutte hym vp, and set a seale on hym, that he shulde deceaue the people nomore, tyll the thousande yeres were fulfylled. And after that he must be losed for a lytell season.
And I sawe seates, and they sat vpon them, Ꟶ iudgement was geuen vnto them: and I sawe the soules of them that were beheaded for the wytnes of Iesu, and for the worde of God: Ꟶ which had not worshipped the beast, nether his ymage, nether had taken his marke vpon their forheades, or in their handes: and they lyued, and raygned with Christ a .M. yere:
but the other of the deed men lyued not agayne, vntyll the thousand yere were finisshed. This is that first resurreccion.
Blessed and holy is he, that hath parte in the first resurreccion. For on such shall the seconde deeth haue no power, but they shalbe the Prestes of God Ꟶ of Christ, and shall raygne wyth hym a thousande yere.
And when the thousand yeres are expyred, Satan shalbe lowsed out of his preson
and shall go out to deceaue the people, whych are in the foure quarters of the erth, Gog Ꟶ Magog, to gather them together to battayle, whose nombre is as the sonde of the see:
and they went vp in the playne of the erth: Ꟶ compased the tentes of the saynctes about, Ꟶ the beloued citie. And fyre came downe from God out of heauen, and deuoured them:
and the deuyll that deceaued them, was cast into a lake of fyre and brymstone, where the beast and the false prophetes shalbe tormented daye and nyght for euermore.
And I sawe a great whyte seate, and him that sate on it, from whose face fleed awaye both the erth and heauen, and their place was nomore founde.
And I sawe the deed, both gret and small stonde before God: And the bokes were opened, and another boke was opened, which is the boke of lyfe, Ꟶ the deed were iudged of those thynges whych were written in the bokes accordyng to their dedes:
and the see gaue vp her deed which were in her, and deeth and hell deliuered vp the deed, which were in them: Ꟶ they were iudged euery man accordyng to his dedes.
And deeth and hell were cast into the lake of fire. This is the seconde deeth.
And whosoeuer was not founde wrytten in the boke of lyfe, was cast into the lake of fyre.
And I sawe a newe heauen and a new earth. For the fyrst heauen, and the fyrst earth were vanysshed awaye, and ther was nomore See.
And I Iohn sawe that holy cytie, newe Ierusalem come downe from God out of heauen, prepared as a bryde garnisshed for her husband.
And I herde a greate voyce out of heauen sayinge: beholde, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he wyll dwell wyth them. And they shall be hys people, and God hym selfe shalbe wyth them, and be theyr God.
And God shall wype awaye all teares from theyr eyes. And there shalbe nomore deeth, nether sorowe, nether cryenge, nether shall ther be eny more payne, for the olde thynges are gone.
And he that sate vpon the seate, sayde: Beholde, I make all thynges newe. And he sayde vnto me: wryte, for these wordes are faythfull and true.
And he sayd vnto me: it is done, I am Alpha and Omega, the begynnyng Ꟶ the ende I wyll geue to hym that is a thyrst, of the well of the water of lyfe, fre.
He that ouer commeth shall enheret all thynges, and I wyll be hys God, and he shalbe my sonne.
But the fearfull and vnbeleuynge, and the abhominable, and murdrers, Ꟶ whormongers, and sorcerers, and ydolaters, and all lyars shall haue theyr parte in the lake which burnyth with fyre and brymstone, which is the seconde death.
And there cam vnto me one of the seuen Angels which had the seuen vyalles full of the seuen last plages: Ꟶ talked with me sayinge: come hyther, I wyll shewe the the bryde, the lambes wyfe.
And he caryed me awaye in the sprete to a great and an hye mountayne, and he shewed me the great cytie holy Ierusalem, descendyng out of heauen from God:
hauyng the bryghtnes of God. And her shynynge was lyke vnto a stone moste precious, euen lyke a Iasper cleare as Cristall:
Ꟶ had walles great Ꟶ hye, Ꟶ had .xii. gates Ꟶ at the gates .xii. Angels: and names written, whych are the names of the .xii. trybes of Israell:
on the East parte .iii. gates, Ꟶ on the Northside .iii. gates, Ꟶ towardes the South .iii. gates, and from the West thre gates,
and the wall of the cytie had .xii. foundacyons: and in them the twelue names of the lambes .xii. apostles.
And he that talked with me, had a golden reade to measure the cytie with all and the gates therof Ꟶ the wall therof.
And the cytie was bylt .iiii. square, and the length was as large as the bredth, Ꟶ he measured the cytie with the rede .xii.M. furlonges: and the length Ꟶ the bredth, and the heyth of it, were equall.
And he measured the wal therof, an .cxliiii. cubytes: the measure that the angell had, was after the measure that man vseth.
And the byldynge of the wal of it was of Iasper. And the cytie was pure golde, lyke vnto cleare glasse,
and the foundacions of the wall of the cytie were garnisshed with al maner of precious stones. The fyrst foundacion was Iaspis, the seconde Saphyre, the thyrde a Calcedony, the fourth an Emeralde,
the fyft Sardonix, the syxte Sardeos, the seuenth Crysolite, the eyght Berall, the .ix. a Topas, the tenth a Crusoprasos, the eleuenth a Iacynte, the twelueth an Amathist.
The twelue gates were twelue pearles, euery gate was of one pearle, and the strete of the cytie was pure golde, as thorow shynynge glasse.
And I sawe no temple therin. For the Lorde God almighty and the lambe are the temple of it.
And the cytie hath no nede of the sonne, nether of the mone to lighten it. For the brightnes of God dyd lyght it, and the lambe was the lyght of it.
And the people whych are saued shall walke in the lyght of it. And the kinges of the earth shall brynge theyr glory vnto it.
And the gates of it are not shut by daye. For there shalbe no nyght there.
n/a
And there shall enter into it none vncleane thinge, nether whatsoeuer worketh abhomynacion or maketh lyes: but they only which are wrytten in the lambes boke of lyfe.
And he shewed me a pure ryuer of water of lyfe, clere as Crystall: procedynge out of the seate of God, and the lambe.
In the middes of the stret of it, and of ether syde of the ryuer, was ther woode of lyfe: whych bare twelue maner of frutes: Ꟶ gaue frute euery moneth: Ꟶ the leues of the wood serued to heale the people with all.
And ther shalbe no more cursse, but the seate of God and the lambe shalbe in it: and hys seruauntes shall serue hym.
And they shall se hys face, and his name shalbe in their forheddes
And there shall be no nyght there, Ꟶ they nede no candle, nether light of the sunne: for the Lorde God geueth them lyght, and they shall raygne for euermore.
And he sayde vnto me: these sayinges are faythfull and true. And the Lorde God of the holy Prophetes sent hys Angell to shewe vnto hys seruauntes, the thynges whyche must shortly be fulfylled.
Beholde, I come shortly. Happy is he that kepeth the saying of the prophesy of thys boke.
I am Iohn, which sawe these thynges and herde them. And when I had herde Ꟶ sene, I fell doune to worshyppe before the fete of the Angell, whyche shewed me these thynges.
And he sayde vnto me: se thou do it not, for I am thy felowe seruaunt, Ꟶ the felowe seruaunt of thy brethren the Prophetes, and of them which kepe the sayinges of thys boke. But worshyppe God.
And he sayde vnto me: seale not the sayinges of the prophesy of this boke. For the tyme is at hande.
He that doeth euyll, let him do euyll styll: and he which is filthy, let him be fylthy styll: and he that is ryghteous, let hym be more ryghteous: Ꟶ he that is holy, let hym be more holy.
And beholde, I come shortly, and my rewarde is wyth me, to geue euery man accordynge as his dedes shalbe.
I am Alpha and Omega, the begynninge and the ende: the fyrst and the last.
Blessed are they that do his commaundementes, that theyr power maye be in the tree of lyfe, and maye entre in thorow the gates into the cytie.
For wythout shalbe dogges and inchaunters, and whormongers, and mortherers, and ydolaters, Ꟶ whosoeuer loueth or maketh leasynges.
I Iesus sent myne Angell, to testyfye vnto you these thynges in the congregacions. I am the rote and the generacion of Dauid and the bryghte mornynge starre.
And the sprete and the bryde saye come. And let him that heareth, saye also: come. And let him that is a thyrst: come. And let whosoeuer wyll, take of the water of lyfe, fre.
I testifye vnto euery man that heareth the wordes of the prophesy of thys boke: yf eny man shall adde vnto these thynges, God shall adde vnto hym the plages that are wrytten in thys boke.
And yf eny man shall mynisshe of the wordes of the boke of this prophesy, God shall take awaye hys parte out of the boke of lyfe, and out of the holy cytie, and from the thynges which are written in this boke.
He whych testifyeth these thynges, sayeth: be it. I come quyckly. Amen. Euen so come Lorde Iesu.
The grace of our Lorde Iesu Christ be wyth you all. Amen.
