1:1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses in yͤ wyldernesse of Sinai, in the Tabernacle of witnesse, the first daye of the secode moneth in the seconde yeare, wha they were gone out of the lade of Egipte, and sayde:
1:2 Take yͤ summe of the whole congregacion of the children of Israel, after their kynredes & their fathers houses, with the nombre of the names, all that are males, heade by heade,
1:3 frō twentye yeare and aboue, as many as are able to go forth in to yͤ warre in Israel. And ye shal nombre them acordinge to their armyes thou and Aaron,
1:4 and of euery trybe ye shal take vnto you one captayne ouer his fathers house.
1:5 These are the names of the captaynes that shal stonde with you. Of Ruben, Elizur the sonne of Sedeur.
1:6 Of Simeon, Selumiel the sonne of Zuri Sadai.
1:7 Of Iuda, Nahasson the sonne of Aminadab.
1:8 Of Isachar, Nathaneel the sonne of Zuar.
1:9 Of Zabulon, Eliab the sonne of Helon.
1:10 Amonge the children of Ioseph: Of Ephraim, Elisama yͤ sonne of Amihud. Of Manasse, Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur.
1:11 Of Ben Iamin, Abidam yͤ sonne of Gedeoni.
1:12 Of Dan, Ahieser the sonne of Ammi Sadai.
1:13 Of Asser, Pagiel the sonne of Ochram.
1:14 Of Gad, Eliasaph yͤ sonne of Deguel.
1:15 Of Nephthali, Ahira the sonne of Enan.
1:16 These are the awncient men of the congregacion, the captaynes amonge the trybes of their fathers, which were heades and prynces in Israel.
1:17 And Moses & Aaron toke them (like as they are there named by name)
1:18 and gathered the whole cogregacion together also, yͤ first daye of the secode moneth, and rekened the after their byrth, acordinge to their kynreds and fathers houses by their names, frō twetye yeare and aboue, heade by heade,
1:19 as the LORDE commaunded Moses, and nombred them in the wyldernes of Sinai.
1:20 The children of Ruben Israels first sonne, their kynreds & generacions after their fathers houses, in yͤ nombre of their names heade by heade, all yͭ were males, from twentye yeare & aboue, and were able to go forth to the warre,
1:21 were nombred to the trybe of Ruben, sixe and fourtye thousande, and fyue hundreth.
1:22 The children of Simeon their kynreds & generacions after their fathers houses in the nombre of the names heade by heade, all that were males from twetye yeare and aboue, and were able to go forth to the warre,
1:23 were nombred to the trybe of Symeon, nyne and fiftye thousande and thre hundreth.
1:24 The children of Gad their kynreds and generacions after their fathers houses in yͤ nombre of the names, from twentye yeare and aboue, all that were able to go forth to the warre,
1:25 were nombre to the trybe of Gad, fyue and fourtye thousande, sixe hundreth and fiftie.
1:26 The children of Iuda their kynreds and generacions after their fathers houses in yͤ nombre of the names, from twentye yeare and aboue, all that were able to go forth to the warre,
1:27 were nombred to the trybe of Iuda, foure and seuentye thousande, & sixe hundreth.
1:28 The children of Isachar their kynreds & generacions, after their fathers houses in yͤ nombre of the names from twentye yeare & aboue, all that were able to go forth to the warre,
1:29 were nombred to yͤ trybe of Isachar, foure and fiftye thousande and foure hundreth.
1:30 The children of Zabulon their kynreds and generacions after their fathers houses in the nombre of the names from twentye yeare & aboue, all that were able to go forth to the warre,
1:31 were nombred to the trybe of Zabulon, seuen and fiftye thousande and foure hundreth.
1:32 Iosephs children of Ephraim, their kynreds & generacions after their fathers houses in yͤ nombre of the names, from twetye yeare and aboue,
1:33 all yͭ were able to go forth to yͤ warre, were nobred to the trybe of Ephraim, fourtye thousande & fyue hundreth.
1:34 The children of Manasse their kynreds & generacions, after their fathers houses in yͤ nombre of the names from twentye yeare & aboue, all yͭ were able to go forth to the warre,
1:35 were nombred to the trybe of Manasse, two & thirtie thousande & two hundreth.
1:36 The childrē of Ben Iamin their kynreds and generacions, after their fathers houses, in the nombre of the names from twentye yeare & aboue, all that were able to go forth to the warre,
1:37 were nombred to the trybe of Ben Iamin, fyue and thirtie thousande and foure hundreth.
1:38 The children of Dan their kynreds and generacions after their fathers houses, in the nombre of the names,
1:39 from twentye yeares and aboue, all that were able to go forth to the warre, were nombred to the trybe of Dan, two and thre score thousande, and seuen hundreth.
1:40 The children of Asser their kynreds & generacions, after their fathers houses in the nombre of the names, from twentye yeare & aboue, all yͭ were able to go forth to yͤ warre,
1:41 were nombred to the trybe of Asser, one & fourtye thousande and fyue hundreth.
1:42 The childrē of Nephthali, their kynreds and generacions after their fathers houses in the nombre of the names, from twentye yeare & aboue, all that were able to go forth vnto the warre,
1:43 were nombred to the trybe of Nephthali, thre and fiftie thousande and foure hundreth.
1:44 These are they whom Moses and Aaron nombred with yͤ twolue prynces of Israel, wherof euery one was ouer yͤ house of their fathers.
1:45 And the summe of the children of Israel after their fathers houses, from twentye yeare and aboue (what so euer was able to go forth to the warre in Israel)
1:46 was sixe C. thousande, thre thousande, fyue C. & fiftie.
1:47 But the Leuites after the trybe of their fathers, were not nombred amonge them.
1:48 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and saide:
1:49 The trybe of Leui shalt thou not nombre, ner take the summe of them amonge yͤ children of Israel:
1:50 but shalt appoynte them to the Habitacion of wytnesse, and to all yͤ apparell therof, and to all that belongeth therto. And they shall beare the Tabernacle & all the ordinaunce therof, and shal wayte vpon it, and shal pitch their tentes rounde aboute it.
1:51 And whan men shal go on their iourney, the Leuites shal take downe yͤ Tabernacle. And whan the hoost pitch their tetes, they shal set vp the Tabernacle. And yf a straunger preasse nye vnto it, he shall dye.
1:52 The children of Israel shal pitch their tentes, euery one in his awne armye, and by the baner of his awne companye.
1:53 But the Leuites shall pitch rounde aboute the Tabernacle of wytnesse, that there come no wrath vpon yͤ congregacion of the children of Israel: therfore shal the Leuites wayte vpon the Habitacion of wytnesse.
1:54 And the children of Israel dyd all, as the LORDE commaunded Moses.
2:1 And yͤ LORDE spake vnto Moses and Aaron, & sayde:
2:2 The childrē of Israel shal pitch rounde aboute yͤ Tabernacle of wytnesse, euery one vnder his banner & tokens, after their fathers houses.
2:3 On the East syde shall Iuda pitch with his banner & hoost, their captayne Nahasson the sonne of Aminadab.
2:4 And his armie in the summe, foure & seuentie thousande and sixe hundreth.
2:5 Nexte vnto him shal the trybe of Isachar pitch, their captayne Nathaneel the sonne of Zuar:
2:6 and his armye in the summe, foure and fiftye thousande and foure hundreth.
2:7 The trybe of Zabulon also, their captayne Eliab the sonne of Helon:
2:8 his armye in the summe, seuen and fiftie thousande and foure hundreth.
2:9 So yͭ all they which beloge to yͤ hoost of Iuda, be in the summe an C. sixe and foure score thousande, & foure hundreth be longinge to their armye, & they shall go before.
2:10 On the South side shall lye the pauylions & baner of Ruben wͭ their hoost, their captaine Elizur yͤ sonne of Sedeur:
2:11 & his armie in the summe, sixe & fourtie thousande, & fyue C.
2:12 Nexte vnto him shal the trybe of Simeon pitch, their captayne Selumiel yͤ sonne of Zuri Sadai:
2:13 & his armie in yͤ summe, nyne and fiftie thousande, and thre hundreth.
2:14 The trybe of Gad also, their captayne Eliasaph yͤ sonne of Deguel:
2:15 & his armye in the summe, fyue & fourtye thousande, sixe hundreth & fiftie.
2:16 So that all they which belonge to the hoost of Ruben, be in the summe, an hundreth, one & fiftie thousande, foure hudreth and fiftye, belonginge to their armye. And they shall be the seconde in the iourney.
2:17 After that shall the Tabernacle of wytnesse go wͭ the hoost of the Leuites eue in yͤ myddes amoge the hoostes: & as they lye in their tentes, so shal they go forth also, euery one in his place vnder his baner.
2:18 On the West syde shall lye yͤ pauylions & baner of Ephraim wͭ their hoost: their captayne shalbe Elisama sonne of Amihud,
2:19 and his armye in the summe, fourtye thousande and fyue hundreth.
2:20 Nexte vnto him shal yͤ trybe of Manasse pitch, their captayne Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur:
2:21 his armye in the summe, two and thirtie thousande & two hudreth.
2:22 The trybe of Ben Iamin also, their captayne Abidan the sonne of Gedeoni:
2:23 his armye in the summe, fyue and thirtie thousande & foure hundreth.
2:24 So yͭ all they which belonge to the hoost of Ephraim, be in the summe, an hundreth thousande, eight thousande, & an hudreth, belonginge to his armie. And they shal be the thirde in the iourney.
2:25 On the North syde shal lye yͤ pauylions & baner of Dan with their hoost: their captayne Ahieser yͤ sonne of Ammi Sadai,
2:26 his armye in the summe, two and sixtye thousande and seue hundreth.
2:27 Nexte vnto him shal the trybe of Asser pitche: their captayne Pagiel yͤ sonne of Ochran,
2:28 his army in the summe, one and fourtie thousande, and fyue hundreth.
2:29 The trybe of Nephthali also, their captayne Ahira the sonne of Enan:
2:30 his armye in the summe, thre & fiftye thousande & foure hudreth.
2:31 So yͭ all they which belonge to the hoost of Dan, be in the summe, an hudreth thousande, seuen & fiftie thousande, & sixe hundreth. And they shalbe the last in the iourney with their baners.
2:32 This is the summe of the children of Israel, after their fathers houses and armyes with their hoostes: euen sixe hundreth thousande, & thre thousande, fyue hudreth & fiftie.
2:33 But yͤ Leuites were not nombred in yͤ summe amonge the childrē of Israel, as yͤ LORDE comaunded Moses.
2:34 And yͤ childrē of Israel dyd all as the LORDE comaunded Moses. And so they pitched vnder their baners, & toke their iourney, euery one in his kynred, acordinge to the house of their fathers.
3:1 These are the generacions of Aaron & Moses, whan yͤ LORDE spake vnto Moses at yͤ same tyme vpon mount Sinai.
3:2 And these are yͤ names of the sonnes of Aron. The firstborne, Nadab: then Abihu, Eleasar & Ithamar.
3:3 These are yͤ names of the sonnes of Aaron, which were anoynted to be prestes, & their handes fylled for yͤ presthode.
3:4 But Nadab & Abihu dyed before yͤ LORDE , wha they offred strauge fyre before yͤ LORDE , in yͤ wildernesse of Sinai, & had no sonnes. But Eleasar and Ithamar executed yͤ prestes office wͭ their father Aaron.
3:5 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
3:6 Bringe hither the trybe of Leui, and set them before Aaron the prest, yͭ they maye serue wͭ him, & wayte vpon him
3:7 & vpo the whole congregacion before yͤ Tabernacle of witnesse, and execute the seruyce of the habitacion,
3:8 and kepe all the apparell of the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and wayte vpon the children of Israel, to mynistre in the seruyce of the habitacion.
3:9 And thou shalt geue yͤ Leuites vnto Aaron and his sonnes for a gift, vnto euery one his awne, from amonge the children of Israel.
3:10 As for Aaron & his sonnes, thou shalt appoynte them to wayte on their prestes office. Yf another preasse therto, he shal dye.
3:11 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and saide
3:12 Beholde, I haue take the Leuites frō amonge the childrē of Israel, for all the first borne that open the Matrix amonge the children of Israel, so that the Leuites shalbe myne.
3:13 For the firstborne are myne, sence yͤ tyme that I smote all the first borne in yͤ lande of Egipte, wha I sanctified vnto me all the first borne in Israel, from me vnto catell, that they shulde be myne. I the LORDE .
3:14 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses in the wyldernesse of Sinai, and sayde:
3:15 Nombre the children of Leui after their fathers houses and kynreds, all that are males of a moneth olde and aboue.
3:16 So Moses nombred them acordinge to the worde of the LORDE , as he had commaunded.
3:17 And these were the children of Leui with their names: Gerson, Rahath, Merari.
3:18 The names of the children of Gerson in their kynreds, were: Libni and Semei.
3:19 The childrē of Rahath in their kynreds were, Amram, Iezehar, Hebron and Vsiel.
3:20 The children of Merari in their kynreds, were Maheli and Musi. These are the kynreds of Leui after their fathers houses.
3:21 These are yͤ kynreds of Gerson: The Libnites and Semeites,
3:22 the summe was founde in nombre, seuen thousande and fyue hundreth, of all that were males of a moneth olde and aboue.
3:23 And the same kynreds of the Gersonites shal pitche behinde the Habitacion on the west syde:
3:24 Let Eliasaph the sonne of Lael be their ruler.
3:25 And they shal waite vpon the Tabernacle of wytnesse, of the habitacion, and of the tent, and couerynges therof, and the hangynge in the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse,
3:26 the hangynge aboute the courte, & the hangynge in yͤ courtedore, which (courte) goeth aboute the habitacion and the altare, and the cordes of it, & all that belongeth to the seruyce therof.
3:27 These are the kynreds of Rahath: The Amramites, the Iezeharites, the Hebronites, and Vsielites,
3:28 all that were males of a moneth olde & aboue, in nombre eight thousande and sixe hundreth, waytinge vpon the Tabernacle of the Sanctuary,
3:29 & shal pitch on the south syde of yͤ Habitacion:
3:30 Let Elisaphan the sonne of Vsiel be their ruler.
3:31 And they shal kepe the Arke, the table, the candilsticke, the altare and all the vessels of the Sanctuary, to do seruyce in, and the vayle, and all that belongeth to the seruice therof.
3:32 But the chefe of all the rulers of the Leuites, shalbe Eleasar the sonne of Aron the prest, ouer them that are apoynted to kepe the watch of the Sanctuary.
3:33 These are yͤ kynreds of Merari: The Mabelites and Musites,
3:34 which were in nombre sixe thousande and two hudreth, all that were males of a moneth olde and aboue:
3:35 Let Zuriel yͤ sonne of Abihail be their ruler, and they shall pitche vpon the north syde of the Habitacion.
3:36 And their office shalbe to kepe the bordes, and barres, and pilers, and sokettes of the Habitacion, and all the apparell therof and that serueth therto:
3:37 yͤ pilers also aboute yͤ courte, with the sokettes, and nales, and cordes.
3:38 But before the Habitacion and before yͤ Tabernacle on the East syde shal Moses & Aaron & his sonnes pytche, that they maye wayte vpon the Sanctuary, & the children of Israel. Yf eny other preasse therto, he shal dye.
3:39 All the Leuites in the summe, whom Moses and Aaron nombred after their kynreds, acordinge to the worde of the LORDE , all that were males, of a moneth olde and aboue, were two and twentye thousande.
3:40 And yͤ LORDE saide vnto Moses: Nombre all the first borne, that are males amonge the children of Israel, of a moneth olde and aboue, and take the nombre of their names.
3:41 And yͤ Leuites shalt thou take out vnto me the LORDE , for all yͤ first borne of yͤ childrē of Israel, & the catell of the Leuites for all the first borne amonge the catell of yͤ children of Israel.
3:42 And Moses nombred all the first borne amoge the childrē of Israel, as the LORDE commaunded him.
3:43 And in the nombre of the names of all the first borne, that were males of a moneth olde & aboue, in their summe, there were foude two and twentye thousande, two hundreth, and thre and seuentye.
3:44 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
3:45 Take the Leuites for all yͤ first borne amonge the childrē of Israel, & the catell of yͤ Leuites for their catell, yͭ the Leuites maye be myne the LORDE S.
3:46 But the redempcion money of the two hundreth thre & seuentye yͭ remayne of the first borne of the children of Israel,
3:47 aboue the nombre of the Leuites, shalt thou take, euen fyue Sycles of euery heade, after the Sycle of the Sanctuary (one Sycle is worth twentye Geras)
3:48 & the money yͭ remayneth ouer their nobre, shalt thou geue vnto Aaron and his sonnes.
3:49 Then toke Moses yͤ redempcion money (that remayned ouer aboue the nombre of the Leuites)
3:50 from yͤ first borne of the childrē of Israel, euen a thousande, thre hundreth, and fyue and thre score Sycles, after yͤ Sycle of the Sanctuary,
3:51 & gaue it vnto Aaron and his sonnes, acordinge to the worde of the LORDE , as the LORDE commaunded Moses.
4:1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses & Aaron,
4:2 & sayde: Take yͤ summe of the childrē of Rahath from amonge the childrē of Leui, after their kynreds & fathers houses
4:3 from thirtie yeare and aboue vntill fiftye yeare, all that are mete for the warre, that they maye do the worke in the Tabernacle of witnesse.
4:4 This shal be the office of the children of Rahath in the Tabernacle of wytnesse, which is most holy.
4:5 Whan the hoost breaketh vp, Aaron and his sonnes shall go in, and take downe the vayle, and couer the Arke of wytnesse therwith,
4:6 and laye the couerynge of doo skynnes vpon it, and sprede a whole yalowe clothe aboue theron, and put his staues therin.
4:7 And vpon the shewe table they shal sprede a yalowe clothe also, and set ther on the disshes, spones, flatpeces and pottes to poure out and in, and the daylie bred shal lye vpon it,
4:8 and they shall sprede a purple clothe ther ouer, and couer it with a couerynge of doo skynnes, and put the staues of it therin.
4:9 And they shal take a yalowe clothe, and couer the cadilsticke of light therwith, and his lampes, with his snoffers and outquenchers, and all the oyle vessels that belonge to the seruyce,
4:10 and aboute all this shal they put a couerynge of doo skynnes, and put it vpon staues.
4:11 So shal they sprede a yalowe clothe ouer the golden altare also, and couer the same with a couerynge of doo skynnes, and put it vpon staues.
4:12 All the vessels that they occupye in the Sanctuary, shal they take, and put a yalowe clothe ther ouer, & couer them with a couerynge of doo skynnes, and put them vpon staues.
4:13 They shal swepe the asshes also from the altare, and sprede a clothe of scarlet ouer it, and set all his vessels theron,
4:14 that they occupye vpon it: colepames, fleshokes, shouels, basens, with all the apparell of the altare, and they shal sprede a couerynge of doo skynnes theron, and put his staues therto.
4:15 Now whan Aaron and his sonnes haue done this, and haue couered the Sanctuary & all the ornametes therof, whan the hoost breaketh vp, then shal the children of Rahath go in, that they maye beare it, and the Sanctuary shall they not touche, lest they dye. This is the charge of the childrē of Rahath in the Tabernacle of wytnesse.
4:16 And Eleasar the sonne of Aaron yͤ prest, shal haue the office, to prepare the oyle for the light, and the spyces for the incense, and the daylie meatofferynge, and the anoyntinge oyle, to order the whole habitacion, & all that therin is, in the Sanctuary and the ornamentes therof.
4:17 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses and Aaron, & sayde:
4:18 ye shal not destroye the trybe of the kynred of the Rahathites amoge the Leuites,
4:19 but this shal yͤ do with them, yͭ they maye lyue & not dye, yf they touche the most holy. Aaron and his sonnes shal go in, and appoynte euery one vnto his office & charge.
4:20 But they shal not go in, presumptuously to loke vpo yͤ Sanctuary, lest they die.
4:21 And yͤ LORDE spake vnto Moses and Aaron & sayde:
4:22 Take the summe of the children of Gerson also, after their fathers house & kynred,
4:23 from thirtye yeare & aboue, vntyll fiftye yeare, & appoynte them all yͭ are mete for the warre, to haue an office in the Tabernacle of wytnesse.
4:24 This shalbe the office of the kynred of the Gersonites, eue to serue & to beare.
4:25 They shal beare the curtaynes of the habitacion and of the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and his couerynge and the coueringe of doo skynnes, that is aboue theron, and the hanginge in the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse,
4:26 and the hanginge aboute the courte, which goeth aboute the habitacion and the altare, and their cordes, and all the instrumentes yͭ serue for the, and all that belongeth to their occupienge.
4:27 Acordinge vnto the worde of Aaron and of his sonnes, shal all the office of the children of Gerson be done, what so euer they shall beare and occupye. And ye shal se, that they wayte vpon all their charge.
4:28 This shal be yͤ office of yͤ kinred of yͤ childrē of yͤ Gersonites in yͤ Tabernacle of witnes. And their waytinge shal be vnder yͤ hade of Ithamar, the sonne of Aaro the prest.
4:29 The children of Merari after their kynred and fathers house, shalt thou appoynte also,
4:30 from thirtie yeare and aboue, vnto fiftie yeare, all that are mete for the warre, yͭ they maye haue an office in the Tabernacle of wytnesse.
4:31 But vpon this charge shall they wayte acordinge to all their office in yͤ Tabernacle of witnesse, that they beare the bordes of the Habitacion, and the barres, and pilers, and sokettes:
4:32 the pilers of the courte also rounde aboute, and the sokettes and nales and cordes, with all their apparell, acordynge to all their seruyce. And vnto euery one shall yͤ appoynte his porcion of charge to waite vpon the apparell.
4:33 Let this be the office of the kynred of the children of Merari, all that they shall do in the Tabernacle of wytnesse vnder the hande of Ithamar the sonne of Aaron the prest.
4:34 And Moses and Aaron with the captaynes of the congregacion, nombred the children of yͤ Rahathites, acordinge to their kynreds and houses of their fathers,
4:35 from thirtie yeare and aboue, vntyll fyftye, all that were mete for the warre, to haue offyce in the Tabernacle of wytnesse.
4:36 And the summe was, two thousande, seuen hundreth and fyftie.
4:37 This is the summe of the kynred of the Rahathites (which all had seruyce in the Tabernacle of witnesse) whom Moses and Aaron nombred, acordynge to the worde of the LORDE by Moses.
4:38 The children of Gerson were nombred also in their kynreds and fathers houses
4:39 from thirtie yeare and aboue vntyll fyftie, all that were mete for the warre, to haue office in yͤ Tabernacle of witnesse,
4:40 and the summe was two thousande, syxe hundreth and thirtie.
4:41 This is yͤ summe of the kinred of the childrē of Gerson, which all had to do in the Tabernacle of wytnesse, whom Moses and Aaron nombred, acordinge to yͤ worde of yͤ LORDE .
4:42 The children of Merari were nombred also acordinge to their kynreds and fathers houses,
4:43 from thirtie yeare and aboue vntyll fyftye, all that were mete for the warre, to haue office in the Tabernacle of witnesse,
4:44 & the summe was thre thousande, and two hundreth.
4:45 This is the summe of the kynred of the childrē of Merari, whom Moses and Aaron nombred, acordinge to the worde of the LORDE by Moses.
4:46 The summe of all the Leuites, whom Moses and Aaron with the captaynes of Israel tolde, after their kinreds and fathers houses,
4:47 from thyrtie yeare and aboue vntyll fyftye, all that wente in to do euery one his office, and to beare the burthen in yͤ Tabernacle of wytnesse,
4:48 was eight thousande fyue hundreth and foure score,
4:49 which were nombred acordinge to the worde of the LORDE by Moses, euery one to his office & charge, as the LORDE commaunded Moses.
5:1 And yͤ LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
5:2 Commaunde the children of Israel, yͭ they put out of the hoost all yͤ lepers, and all that haue yssues, and that are defyled vpon the deed,
5:3 both men and wome shall they putt out of the hoost, that they defyle not their tentes, wherin I dwell amonge them.
5:4 And yͤ children of Israel dyd so, and put them out of the hoost, as yͤ LORDE had sayde vnto Moses.
5:5 And the LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde:
5:6 Speake vnto the children of Israel & saye vnto them: Whan a man or woman doth a synne to eny body, and offendeth therwith agaynst the LORDE , then hath that soule a trespace vpon it.
5:7 And they shall knowlege their synne, that they haue done, and shall make amendes for their trespace, euen with the whole summe, and put yͤ fifth parte more therto, and geue it vnto him, agaynst whom they haue trespaced.
5:8 But yf there be noman to make the amendes vnto for the offence yͭ he hath trespaced agaynst him, then shal the reconcylynge be made vnto the LORDE for the prest, besydes the ramme of the attonemet, wherwith he shalbe reconcyled.
5:9 Likewyse all the Heueofferynges of all that the children of Israel halowe vnto the LORDE , and offre vnto the prest, shall be his.
5:10 And who so haloweth eny thinge, it shalbe his. And who so geueth the prest eny thinge, it shal be his also.
5:11 And the LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde:
5:12 Speake to the children of Israel, and saye vnto them: Whan eny mans wife goth asyde, and trespaceth agaynst him,
5:13 & eny mā lye with her fleshlye, and the thinge be yet hyd from his eyes, and is not come to light that she is defiled, and he can brynge no witnesse agaynst her (for she was not take therin)
5:14 and the sprete of gelousye kyndleth him, so that he is gelous ouer his wife: whether she be vncleane or not vncleane,
5:15 then shal he brynge her vnto the prest, and brynge an offerynge for her, euen the tenth parte of an Epha of barlye meele, and shal poure no oyle theron, ner put frankensence vpon it: for it is an offerynge of gelousy, and an offeringe of remembraunce, that remembreth synne.
5:16 Then shall the prest brynge her, and sett her before the LORDE ,
5:17 and take of the holy water in an earthen vessell, and put of yͤ dust that is on the floore of the habitacion, in to the water.
5:18 And he shal set the wife before yͤ LORDE , and vncouer hir heade, and the offeringe of remembraunce which is an offeringe of gelousy, shall he laye vpon hir handes. And the prest shal haue in his hande bytter cursinge water, and shal coniure the wife, & saye vnto her:
5:19 Yf no man haue lye with the, and thou hast not gone asyde from thy hußbande, to defyle thy self, then shall not these bytter cursinge waters hurte the.
5:20 But yf thou hast gone asyde from thy hußbande, so that thou art defyled, and some other man hath lyen with the besyde thy hußbande,
5:21 then shall the prest coniure the wife with this curse, and shal saye vnto her: The LORDE sett the to a curse and a coniuracion amonge thy people, so that the LORDE make thy thye rotte, and thy wombe to berst.
5:22 So go this cursed water in to thy body, that yͥ wombe berst, and thy thye rotte. And the wife shal saye: Amen Amen.
5:23 So the prest shall wryte this curse in a byll, and wash it out with the water,
5:24 and shall geue the wife of the bytter cursinge waters to drynke.
5:25 And wha the cursinge water is gone in her, so yͭ it is bytter vnto her then shal the prest take the gelousy offerynge out of the wyues hande, and waue it for a meatofferynge before the LORDE , and offre it vpon the altare:
5:26 namely, he shall take an handfull of the meatofferynge for hir remebraunce, & burne it vpo the altare, & then geue the wife the water to drinke.
5:27 And wha she hath dronken the water, yf she be defyled and haue trespaced agaynst hir hußbande, then shal the cursinge water go in to her, and be so bytter, that hir wombe shal berst, and hir thye shall rotte, and the wife shal be a curse amonge hir people.
5:28 But yf the same wife be not defyled, but is cleane, then shall it do her no harme, so that she maye be with childe.
5:29 This is the lawe of gelousy, whan a wyfe goeth asyde from hir hußbande, and is defyled:
5:30 Or whan yͤ sprete of gelousy kyndleth a man, so that he is gelous ouer his wyfe, yͭ he brynge her before the LORDE , and that yͤ prest do all wͭ her acordinge vnto this lawe.
5:31 And yͤ man shalbe giltlesse of the synne, but the wife shall beare hir myßdede.
6:1 And the LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde:
6:2 Speake vnto the children of Israel, and saye vnto them: Whan a man or woman separateth them selues, to vowe a vowe of abstinence vnto the LORDE ,
6:3 he shal absteyne from wyne and stroge drynke. Vyneger of wyne & of stronge drynke shal he not drynke, ner that is pressed out of grapes: he shall nether eate fresh ner drye grapes, so longe as his abstinence endureth.
6:4 Morouer he shall eate nothinge that is made of the vyne tre, from the wyne cornels vnto the hulle.
6:5 As longe as the vowe of his abstynence endureth, there shall no rasoure come vpon his heade, tyll the tyme be out which he absteyneth vnto the LORDE , for he is holy. And he shall let the heer of his heade growe, and stonde bare openly.
6:6 All the tyme ouer yͭ he absteyneth vnto the LORDE , shal he go to no deed.
6:7 Nether shal he defyle him self at yͤ death of his father, of his mother, of his brother, or of his sister. For the abstinence of his God is vpon his heade,
6:8 and yͤ whole tyme of his abstinence shall he be holy vnto the LORDE .
6:9 And yf it chaunce eny man to dye sodenly before him, then shal yͤ heade of his abstynence be defyled. Therfore shal he shaue his heade in the daye of his clensynge, that is vpon the seuenth daye:
6:10 and vpon yͤ eight daye shall he brynge two turtill doues, or two yonge pigeons, vnto the prest before yͤ dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse.
6:11 And the prest shall make the one a synofferynge, and the other a burntofferynge, and make an attonement for him, because he defyled himself vpon yͤ deed, and so shal he halowe his heade the same daye,
6:12 that he maye holde out the tyme of his abstinence vnto the LORDE , and he shall brynge a lambe of a a yeare olde for a trespaceofferynge. But yͤ daies afore shal be but lost, because his abstinence was defyled.
6:13 This is the lawe of the absteyner. Whan the tyme of his abstinence is out, he shal be brought before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse.
6:14 And he shal brynge his offeringe vnto the LORDE , euen an he lambe of a yeare olde without blemysh for a burntofferinge, & a she lambe of a yeare olde without blemysh for a synofferynge, and a ramme wͭ out blemish for an healthofferynge,
6:15 & a maude wͭ vnleuended cakes of fyne floure myngled with oyle, and swete wafers anoynted with oyle, & their meatofferinges & drynkofferynges.
6:16 And the prest shall brynge it before the LORDE , and shal make his synofferynge and his burntofferynge,
6:17 and yͤ ramme shal he make an healthofferynge vnto the LORDE , with yͤ maunde of the vnleuended bred. His meatofferynge and drinkofferinge shal he make also.
6:18 And he shall shaue the heade of the absteyners abstinence before the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and shall take the heade heer of his abstinence, and cast it vpon the fyre that is vnder yͤ healthofferynge.
6:19 And the sodden shulder of the ramme shall he take, and an vnleuended cake out of the maunde, and a swete wafer, and laye them vpon the handes of the absteyner: (after that he hath shauen of his abstinence.)
6:20 And he shal Waue them before the LORDE . This is holy for the prest with the Wauebrest, and Heueshulder. After that, maye the absteyner drynke wyne.
6:21 This is the lawe of the absteyner, which voweth his offeringe vnto the LORDE for his abstynence, besydes that, which his hande can get. As he hath vowed, so shall he do acordinge to the lawe of his abstinence.
6:22 And the LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde:
6:23 Speake vnto Aaron and his sonnes, and saye: Thus shal yͤ saye vnto the childrē of Israel, whan yͤ blesse them.
6:24 The LORDE blesse the, and kepe the.
6:25 The LORDE make his face to shyne vpo the, and be mercifull vnto the.
6:26 The LORDE lift vp his countenaunce vpon the, and geue the peace.
6:27 For they shal put my name vpo the children of Israel, that I maye blesse them.
7:1 And whan Moses had set vp the Habitacion and anoynted it, and sanctifyed it with all the apparell therof: and had anoynted and halowed the altare also with all his vessels,
7:2 Then offred the captaynes of Israel, which were the rulers in their fathers houses. For they were the captaynes amonge yͤ kynreds, and stode ouer the that were nombred.
7:3 And they brought their offerynges before the LORDE , sixe couered charettes, and twolue oxen, for euery two captaynes a charett, and an oxe for euery one, and brought them before the habitacion.
7:4 And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses:
7:5 Take it of them, that it maye serue for the mynistracion of the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and geue it vnto the Leuites, vnto euery one acordinge to his office.
7:6 Then toke Moses the charettes and oxen, and gaue them vnto the Leuites.
7:7 Two charettes and foure oxen gaue he vnto yͤ children of Gerson acordinge to their office:
7:8 and foure charettes and eight oxen gaue he vnto the children of Merari acordinge to their office, vnder the hande of Ithamar the sonne of Aaron the prest.
7:9 But vnto the children of Rahath he gaue nothynge, because they had an holy office vpon them, and must beare vpo their shulders.
7:10 And the captaines offred to the dedicacion of the altare, in the daye whan it was anoynted, and offred their giftes before the altare.
7:11 And yͤ LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Let euery captayne brynge his offerynge vpon his daye to the dedicacion of the altare.
7:12 On the first daye, Nahasson the sonne of Aminadab, of the trybe of Iuda, offred his gifte.
7:13 And his gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thyrtie Sycles: A syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferinge:
7:14 And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense:
7:15 A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferynge,
7:16 an he goate for a synofferynge:
7:17 And for an healthofferynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fyue lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Nahasson the sonne of Aminadab.
7:18 On the seconde daye offred Nathaneel the sonne of Zuar, the captayne of Isachar
7:19 his gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full of fyne floure myngled with oile for a meatofferinge:
7:20 And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense:
7:21 A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a rame, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferynge,
7:22 an he goate for a synofferynge:
7:23 And for an healthofferynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fyue lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Nathaneel the sonne of Zuar.
7:24 On the thirde daye, the captayne of the children of Zabulon, Eliab the sonne of Helon.
7:25 His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge:
7:26 And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense:
7:27 A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferynge,
7:28 an he goate for a synofferynge:
7:29 And for an healthofferinge two oxen, fyue rammes, fiue he goates, and fiue lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Eliab the sonne of Helon.
7:30 On the fourth daye, the captayne of the children of Ruben, Elizur the sonne of Sedeur.
7:31 His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge:
7:32 And a golde spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense:
7:33 A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferinge,
7:34 an he goate for a synofferynge:
7:35 And for an healthofferynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, & fyue lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Elizur the sonne of Sedeur.
7:36 On the fifth daye, the captayne of yͤ children of Simeon, Selumiel the sonne of Zuri Sadai.
7:37 His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A siluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferinge:
7:38 And a golde spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incese:
7:39 A bullocke from amoge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferinge,
7:40 & an he goate for a synofferynge:
7:41 And for an healthofferynge two oxe, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fiue lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifts of Selumiel the sonne of Zuri Sadai.
7:42 On the sixte daye, the captayne of yͤ children of Gad, Eliasaph the sonne of Deguel.
7:43 His gifte was a siluer charger, worth an hudreth & thirtie Sicles: A syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of yͤ Sanctuary) both full of fine floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge:
7:44 And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense:
7:45 A bullocke from amonge yͤ greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferinge,
7:46 an he goate for a synnofferynge:
7:47 And for an health offerynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fyue lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Eliasaph the sonne of Deguel.
7:48 On the seuenth daye the captayne of the children of Ephraim, Elisama, the sonne of Amihud.
7:49 His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after yͤ Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge:
7:50 And a golde spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense:
7:51 A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a rame, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferynge,
7:52 an he goate for a synofferynge:
7:53 And for an healthofferynge two oxe, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fyue lambes of a yeare olde. This is yͤ gifte of Elisama the sonne of Amihud.
7:54 On the eight daye, the caytayne of the children of Manasse, Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur.
7:55 His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of yͤ Sanctuary) both full of fyne floure myngled wͭ oyle for a meatofferynge:
7:56 And a golde spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incese.
7:57 A bullocke from amoge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferynge,
7:58 an he goate for a synofferynge.
7:59 And for an healthofferynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, & fyue lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur.
7:60 On the nyenth daye, the captayne of the children of Ben Iamin, Abidan the sonne of Gedeoni.
7:61 His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge:
7:62 And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incese:
7:63 A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferynge:
7:64 (Omitted Text)
7:65 And for an healthofferynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fyue lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Abidan the sonne of Gedeoni.
7:66 On the tenth daye, the captayne of the children of Dan, Ahieser the sonne of Ammi Sadai.
7:67 His gifte was a siluer charger, worth an hundreth & thirtie Sycles: A syluer boule, worth seuentie Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sactuary) both full of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge:
7:68 And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense:
7:69 A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferynge,
7:70 an he goate for a synofferynge:
7:71 And for an healthofferynge two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, & fyue lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Ahieser the sonne of Ammi Sadai.
7:72 On the eleuenth daye, the captayne of yͤ childrē of Asser, Pagiel the sonne of Ochra:
7:73 His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A syluer boule, worth seuentie Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sactuary) both full of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge:
7:74 And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incese:
7:75 A bullocke from the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferynge,
7:76 an he goate for a synofferynge:
7:77 And for an healthofferynge two oxe, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fyue lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Pagiel the sonne of Ochran.
7:78 On the twolfte daye, the captayne of the children of Nephtali, Ahira the sonne of Enan.
7:79 His gifte was a syluer charger, worth an hundreth and thirtie Sycles: A syluer boule, worth seuentye Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary) both full of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge:
7:80 And a golden spone, worth ten Sycles of golde, full of incense:
7:81 A bullocke from amonge the greate catell, a ramme, a lambe of a yeare olde for a burntofferinge,
7:82 an he goate for a synnofferinge:
7:83 And for an health offeringe two oxen, fyue rammes, fyue he goates, and fyue lambes of a yeare olde. This is the gifte of Ahira the sonne of Enan.
7:84 This is yͤ dedicacion of the altare, what tyme as it was anoynted, vnto the which yͤ captaynes of Israel offered these twolue syluer chargers, twolue syluer boules, twolue spones of golde:
7:85 euery charger conteynynge an hudreth and thirtie Sycles of syluer, and euery boule seuentye Sycles. So that yͤ summe of all the syluer in the vessels, was two thousande and foure hundreth Sycles (after the Sycle of the Sanctuary).
7:86 And the twolue spones of golde full of incense, conteyned euery one ten Sycles, after the Sycle of the Sanctuary: So that the summe of the golde in the spones, was an hundreth and twentye Sycles.
7:87 The summe of the catell for the burntofferinges, was twolue bullockes, twolue rammes, twolue labes of a yeare olde with their meatofferinges: And twolue he goates for synnofferinges.
7:88 And the summe of the catell for the healthofferinges, was foure and twetye oxen, thre score rammes, and thre score he goates, thre score labes of a yeare olde. This is the dedicacion of the altare, after that it was anoynted.
7:89 And whan Moses wente in to the Tabernacle of wytnes, yͭ he might be commoned withall, he herde the voyce speakynge vnto him frō of the Mercy seate, which was vpo the Arke of witnes betwixte the two Cherubins, from thence was he comoned withall.
8:1 And the LORDE talked with Moses, & sayde:
8:2 Speake to Aaron, & saye vnto him: Whan thou settest vp yͤ lapes, thou shalt set the so, that they maye all seue geue light aboue vpo yͤ candilsticke.
8:3 And Aaron dyd so, & set yͤ lampes vpo yͤ candilsticke, as yͤ LORDE comaunded Moses.
8:4 The worke of yͤ cadilsticke was of beate golde, both yͤ shaft & floures therof: Acordynge to yͤ visio that the LORDE had shewed Moses, euen so made he the candelsticke.
8:5 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
8:6 Take the Leuites frō amonge the children of Israel, & clense them.
8:7 But thus shalt thou do with them, that thou mayest clense them. Thou shalt sprenkle purifienge water vpon them, and lett a rasure go ouer their whole body, and washe their clothes, and then are they cleane.
8:8 Then shall they take a yonge bullocke, and his meatofferynge of fyne floure myngled with oyle. And another yonge bullocke shalt thou take for a synofferinge.
8:9 And thou shalt brynge the Leuites before the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and gather together the whole congregacion of yͤ children of Israel,
8:10 and brynge the Leuytes before the LORDE . And the children of Israel shall laye their handes vpon the Leuites.
8:11 And Aaron shal waue yͤ Leuites before the LORDE for the children of Israel, that they maye mynistre in the seruyce of the LORDE .
8:12 And the Leuites shall laye their handes vpon the heedes of the bullockes, and the one shalbe made a synnofferynge, the other a burntofferinge vnto the LORDE , to make an attonement for the Leuites.
8:13 And thou shalt set the Leuites before Aaron and his sonnes, and waue them before the LORDE ,
8:14 and so shalt thou separate them from yͤ children of Israel, that they maye be myne.
8:15 The shall they go in, that they maye do seruyce in the Tabernacle of witnesse. Thus shalt thou clense the, & waue them:
8:16 for they are my gifte of the children of Israel, and I haue taken them vnto me for all that openeth the Matrix, namely for the first borne of all the children of Israel.
8:17 For euery first borne amonge the children of Israel is myne, both of men and of catell, sens the tyme that I smote all the first borne in the lande of Egipte, and sanctified them vnto myself,
8:18 and toke the Leuites for all the first borne amonge the childrē of Israel,
8:19 and gaue them for a gifte vnto Aaro and his sonnes from amonge the children of Israel, yͭ they shulde do the seruyce of the children of Israel in the Tabernacle of witnesse, to make attonemet for the children of Israel, that there be not a plage amonge the children of Israel, yf they wyll come nye yͤ Sanctuary.
8:20 And Moses with Aaron and the whole congregacio of the childrē of Israel, dyd wͭ the Leuites all as the LORDE had commauded Moses.
8:21 And they purified the Leuites, and waßshed their clothes. And Aaron waued them before the LORDE , and made attoment for them, that they might be cleane.
8:22 After that wente they in, to do their office in the Tabernacle of witnesse before Aaron and his sonnes: as the LORDE commauded Moses concernynge the Leuites, euen so dyd they with them.
8:23 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses & sayde:
8:24 This is it that belongeth vnto the Leuites: From fyue and twentye yeare and aboue, shal they go in to the office of the Tabernacle of witnesse.
8:25 But frō fyftie yeare forth, they shal ceasse from the waitinge of the seruyce therof, and shall mynister nomore,
8:26 but shal appoynte their brethren to waite and to serue in the Tabernacle of wytnesse: but the office shal not they execute. Thus shalt thou do with the Leuites in their seruyces, that euery one maye wayte vpon his awne charge.
9:1 Annd the LORDE spake vnto Moses in the wildernesse of Sinai, in yͤ first moneth of the seconde yeare that they were departed out of the lande of Egipte, & sayde:
9:2 Let the children of Israel kepe Easter in his season,
9:3 euen vpon the fourtene daye of this moueth at euen, in his season shall they kepe it, acordynge to all the statutes & lawes therof.
9:4 And Moses spake to yͤ childrē of Israel, yͭ they shulde kepe Easter.
9:5 And they kep Easter vpo the fourtene daye of the first moneth at euen in the wildernes of Sinai. Acordinge to all that the LORDE comaunded Moses, euen so dyd the children of Israel.
9:6 Then were there certayne men defyled of a deed man, so that they coulde not kepe Easter vpon that daye: these came before Moses and Aaron the same daye,
9:7 and sayde vnto him: We are defiled of a deed ma: wherfore shulde we be despysed, that we must not bringe oure giftes in his season amonge the children of Israel?
9:8 Moses sayde vnto them: Stonde styll, I wil heare what the LORDE commaundeth you.
9:9 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
9:10 Speake vnto the children of Israel, & saie: Wha eny man is defyled of a deed coarse, or is gone farre from you ouer the felde, or is amonge youre kynßfolkes, yet shall he kepe Easter,
9:11 but in the seconde moneth vpo yͤ fourtene daye at euen, and they shal eate it with vnleuended bred and sowre sawse,
9:12 and shall leaue none of it vntyll the mornynge, ner breake eny bone therof, and shal kepe it acordinge to all yͤ maner of yͤ Easter.
9:13 But he that is cleane, and not gone in a iourney, and is negligent to kepe the Easter, the same soule shal be roted out from amoge his people: because he brought not his gifte to the LORDE in his season, he shal beare his synne.
9:14 And whan there dwelleth a straunger amonge you, he shal kepe Easter also vnto the LORDE , & shal holde it acordinge to yͤ ordinaunce and lawe of yͤ Easter. This statute shal be vnto you alike, to the straunger as to him that is borne in the londe.
9:15 And yͤ same daye yͭ the Habitacion was set vp, a cloude couered it vpo the Tabernacle of witnesse, & at euen there was a symilitude of fyre vpon the Habitacion vntill the mornynge.
9:16 So came it to passe allwaye, yͭ the cloude couered it by daye, & the symilitude of fyre by night.
9:17 And whan the cloude was take vp from the Habitacion, then the children of Israel wente on their iourney. And loke in what place the cloude abode, there the childrē of Israel pitched their tentes.
9:18 Acordinge to the worde of the LORDE toke the children of Israel their iourney, and acordinge to his worde pitched they their tentes. So longe as the cloude abode vpon the Habitacion, they laye styll.
9:19 And whan the cloude taried many dayes vpon the Habitacion, the childrē of Israel wayted vpon the LORDE , & wente not on their iourney.
9:20 And whan it chaunced that the cloude abode vpo yͤ Habitacion eny space of dayes, then pitched they acordinge to the worde of the LORDE , & after the worde of the LORDE wente they on their iourney.
9:21 Whan the cloude was there from the euenynge vntyll the mornynge, and so was taken vp, then wete they on their iourney: and whether it was take vp by daye or by night, they iourneyed.
9:22 But whan it taried vpon the habitacion two dayes, or a moneth, or a longe season, then laye the children of Israel, and iourneyed not: and so whan it was taken vp, they wente on their iourney.
9:23 For acordinge to the mouth of the LORDE they saye, and after the mouth of the LORDE they iourneyed, so yͭ they kepte the LORDE S watch, acordinge to the worde of the LORDE by Moses.
10:1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
10:2 Make the two trompettes of beaten syluer, that thou mayest vse them, to call the cogregacion together, and whan the hoost shal breake vp.
10:3 Whan they blowe with both, then shall the whole congregacion gather them selues together vnto the before the dore of the Tabernacle of witnesse.
10:4 Whan they blowe but with one, then the captaynes, the rulers ouer the thousandes in Israel shal gather them selues together vnto the.
10:5 Whan yͤ trompe, then shal the hoostes that lye on the East syde, breake vp.
10:6 And whan yͤ trompe the seconde tyme, the hoostes that lye on the South syde, shal breake vp. For ye shall trompe, whan they shal take their iourneys.
10:7 But whan yͤ congregacion is to be gathered together, ye shal blowe, and not trompe.
10:8 This blowinge wͭ the trompettes shal the sonnes of Aaron the prest do. And it shall be yor lawe for euer amonge youre posterities.
10:9 Whan yͤ go to a battayll in youre londe agaynst youre enemies yͭ vexe you, ye shall trompe with the trompettes, that ye maye be remembred before the LORDE yor God, and delyuered from youre enemies.
10:10 Like wyse whan yͤ are mery, and in youre feast dayes, & in youre new Monethes, ye shal blowe with the trompettes ouer youre burntsacrifices & healthofferinges, yͭ it maie be a remembraunce vnto you before youre God. I am the LORDE youre God.
10:11 Vpon the twentye daye in the seconde moneth of the seconde yeare, arose the cloude from the habitacion of witnesse.
10:12 And the childrē of Israel wente on their iourney out of the wyldernesse of Sinai, and the cloude abode in the wyldernesse of Paran,
10:13 First brake vp (acordinge to the worde of the LORDE by Moses.)
10:14 Namely, the baner of the hoost of Iuda wente forth first with their armies, and ouer their hoost was Nahasson the sonne of Aminadab.
10:15 And ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of Isachar was Nathaneel the sonne of Zuar.
10:16 And ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of Zabulon was Eliab the sonne of Elon.
10:17 And the habitacion was taken downe, and the children of Gerson and Merari bare the habitacion.
10:18 After that wente the baner of the hoost of Ruben with their armies, and ouer their hoost was Elizur the sonne of Sedeur.
10:19 And ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of Simeon was Selumiel the sonne of Zuri Sadai.
10:20 And Eliasaph the sonne of Deguel ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of Gad.
10:21 Then wente the Rahathites forwarde also, and bare the Sanctuary, and caused yͤ habitacion be set vp agaynst they came.
10:22 After that wente the baner of the hoost of the children of Ephraim with their armies, and ouer their hoost was Elisama the sonne of Amihud.
10:23 And Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of Manasse.
10:24 And Abidan the sonne of Gedeoni ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of Ben Iamin.
10:25 After that wente the baner of the hoost of the children of Dan with their Armyes, (and so were all the hoostes vp) and Ahieser the sonne of Ammi Sadai was ouer their hoost.
10:26 And Pagiel yͤ sonne of Ochran, ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of Asser.
10:27 And Ahira the sonne of Enan ouer the hoost of the trybe of the children of Nephthali.
10:28 Thus the childrē of Israel wete forth with their armyes.
10:29 And Moses spake vnto his brother in lawe, Hobab the sonne of Raguel of Madian: We go vnto the place, of the which yͤ LORDE sayde: I wil geue it you: Come now with vs therfore, and we wil do yͤ best with the, for the LORDE hath promysed good vnto Israel.
10:30 But he answered: I wil not go wͭ you, but wil go in to myne awne londe vnto my kynred.
10:31 He sayde: Oh nay, leaue vs not: for thou knowest where is best for vs to pytche in the wyldernesse, and thou shalt be oure eye.
10:32 And yf thou goest with vs, loke what good the LORDE doth vnto vs, the same wil we do vnto the.
10:33 So they departed from the mount of the LORDE thre dayes iourney, & the Arke of the LORDE S couenaunt wente before them those thre dayes iourney, to shewe the where they shulde rest.
10:34 And yͤ cloude of the LORDE was ouer them in the daye tyme, whan they wete out of yͤ tetes.
10:35 And whan the Arke wente forth, Moses sayde: Aryse LORDE , let thine enemies be scatered, and let them that hate the, flye before the.
10:36 And whan it rested, he sayde: Come agayne O LORDE vnto the multitude of the thousandes of Israel.
11:1 And whan yͤ people waxed vnpaciet, it displeased sore yͤ eares of yͤ LORDE . And whan the LORDE herde it, his wrath waxed whote, & the fyre of yͤ LORDE burnt amoge them, so yͭ it cosumed the vttemost of yͤ hoost.
11:2 The cryed the people vnto Moses. And Moses prayed vnto the LORDE . So yͤ fyre quenched.
11:3 And the place was called Tabera, because the fyre of the LORDE burnt amonge them.
11:4 Then the comon sorte of people yͭ was amoge them, fell a lustinge, and sat & wepte wͭ the children of Israel, and sayde: Who wyll geue vs flesh to eate?
11:5 We remembre the fish, the we ate in Egipte for naught, & Cucumbers, Melouns, lekes, onyons, & garleke:
11:6 But now is oure soule dryed awaye, oure eyes se nothinge then the Manna.
11:7 The Manna was like Coriader sede, and to loke vpon, like Bedellion.
11:8 And the people ranne here and there, & gathered it, & grounde it in Milles, and beate it in morters, and baked it in panes, and made cakes of it, and it had a taist like an oyle cake.
11:9 And whan yͤ dew fell vpon the tetes in the night, yͤ Manna fell therwith.
11:10 Now whan Moses herde the people wepe amoge their kynreds, euery one in his tet dore, then the wrath of the LORDE waxed exceadinge whote. And it greued Moses also.
11:11 And Moses sayde vnto the LORDE : Why vexest thou thy seruaunte? And why fynde not I fauoure in yͥ sight, yͭ thou layest yͤ burthen of all this people vpo me?
11:12 Haue I the coceaued all this people, or begotten them, that thou shuldest saye vnto me: Cary them in thine armes (as a nurse beareth a childe) vnto the londe, that thou hast sworne vnto their fathers?
11:13 Where shal I get flesh, to geue all this people? They wepe before me, and saye: Geue vs flesh, that we maye eate.
11:14 I am not able to beare all this people alone, for it is to heuy for me.
11:15 And yf thou wylt deale thus wͭ me: O kyll me then, yf I haue founde fauoure in thy sight, that I se not my wrechednesse.
11:16 And the LORDE saide vnto Moses: Gather vnto me seuentye men amonge the Elders of Israel, whom thou knowest yͭ they are the Elders in yͤ people and officers ouer them, and brynge them before the Tabernacle of witnesse, and set them there with the:
11:17 then wil I come downe, and talke with the euen there, & take of thy sprete that is vpon the, and putt it vpon them, that they maye beare the burthen of the people with the, yͭ thou beare not all alone.
11:18 And vnto yͤ people thou shalt saye: Sactifye yor selues agaynst tomorow, yͭ ye maye eate flesh: for youre wepynge is come into the eares of the LORDE , yͤ that saye: Who shal geue vs flesh to eate? for we were well at ease in Egipte. Therfore shal the LORDE geue you flesh to eate,
11:19 not one daye, not two, not fyue, not ten, not twentye dayes longe,
11:20 but a moneth longe, tyll it go out at youre noses, and tyll yͤ lothe it: euen because ye haue refused the LORDE , which is amonge you, and haue wepte before him, & sayde: Wherfore wente we out of Egipte?
11:21 And Moses sayde: Sixe hundreth thousande fote men are there of the people amoge whom I am, and thou sayest: I wyll geue you flesh to eate a moneth loge.
11:22 Shal the shepe and oxen be slayne to be ynough for them? Or shal all the fishes of the see be gathered together, to be sufficient for them?
11:23 The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Is the LORDE S hande shortened then? But now shalt thou se, whether my wordes shall be fulfilled in dede, or no?
11:24 And Moses wete out, and tolde the people yͤ worde of the LORDE , and gathered the seuentye men amonge the Eldest of the people, & set them rounde aboute the Tabernacle.
11:25 Then came the LORDE downe in a cloude, & spake vnto him, & toke of the sprete yͭ was vpon him, & put it vpon the seuentie Elders. And whan the sprete rested vpon them, they prophecied, and ceassed not.
11:26 But in the hoost there remayned yet two men, of whom the one was called Eldad, yͤ other Medad, & the sprete rested vpo them. For they were wrytten vp also, & yet were they not gone out vnto the Tabernacle, and they prophecied in the hoost.
11:27 Then ran there a lad, & tolde Moses, & sayde: Eldad and Medad prophecie in the hoost.
11:28 Then answered Iosua yͤ sonne of Nun Moses seruaunte (whom he had chosen) and sayde: My lorde Moses, for bydde them.
11:29 But Moses sayde vnto him: Art thou gelous for my sake? wolde God, yͭ all the people of yͤ LORDE coulde prophecie, and that yͤ LORDE wolde geue them his sprete.
11:30 So Moses and the Elders of Israel gat them to the hoost.
11:31 Then wente out the wynde from yͤ LORDE , & caused quayles to come from the see, & scatred the ouer the hoost, here a dayes iourney, there a dayes iourney rounde aboute yͤ hoost, two cubytes hye aboue yͤ earth.
11:32 Then the people stode vp all that daye and all yͭ night, and all the nexte daye, and gathered quayles: and he that gathered the leest, gathered ten Homers, & they kylled them rounde aboute the hoost.
11:33 But whyle yͤ flesh was yet betwene their tethe, & or euer it was vp, the wrath of the LORDE waxed whote amonge the people, and slewe them with an exceadinge greate slaughter.
11:34 Therfore is the same place called the graues of lust, because the voluptuous people were buried there.
11:35 From the lustgraues toke the people their iourney vnto Hazeroth, and abode at Hazeroth.
12:1 And Miriam & Aaron spake agaynst Moses because of his wife the Morian which he had taken, because he had take a Morian to wife,
12:2 and they sayde: Doth the LORDE speake onely thorow Moses? Speaketh he not also by vs? And the LORDE herde it.
12:3 But Moses was a very meke man, aboue all men vpon earth.
12:4 And haistely spake the LORDE vnto Moses, and to Aaron, and to Miriam: Go out yͤ thre vnto yͤ Tabernacle of wytnesse. And they wente out all thre.
12:5 Then came the LORDE downe in the cloudy piler, & stode in the dore of the Tabernacle, & called Aaron & Miriam, & they both wete out.
12:6 And he sayde: Heare my wordes: Yf eny man be a prophet of the LORDE , vnto him wil I shewe my self in a vision, or wil speake vnto him in a dreame.
12:7 But not so wͭ my seruaunt Moses, which is faithfull in all my house.
12:8 Mouth to mouth speake I vnto him, & he seyth the LORDE in his fashion, not thorow darke wordes or licknesses: Wherfore were yͤ not afrayed then to speake agaynst my seruaunt Moses?
12:9 And yͤ wrath of the LORDE waxed whote ouer them, & he turned him awaye,
12:10 and yͤ cloude also departed from the Tabernacle. And beholde, then was Miriam become leporus, as it were snowe. And Aaron turned him vnto Miriam, and sawe that she was leporous,
12:11 and sayde vnto Moses: Oh my lorde, put not the synne vpon vs, which we haue foolishly committed and synned,
12:12 that she be not as one that commeth deed out of his mothers wombe: It hath eaten vp half hir flesh allready.
12:13 But Moses cried vnto the LORDE , & sayde: Oh God, heale her.
12:14 The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Yf hir father had spytte in hir face, shulde she not be ashamed seuen dayes? Let her be shut out of yͤ hoost seue dayes, after yͭ let her be receaued agayne.
12:15 So Miriam was shut out of the hoost seue dayes, & the people wente no farther, tyll Miriam was receaued againe.
12:16 Afterwarde departed the people from Hazeroth, and pitched in yͤ wildernesse of Paran.
13:1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
13:2 Sende forth men to spye out yͤ lande of Canaan (which I wil geue vnto yͤ children of Israel) of euery trybe of their fathers a man, and let them all be soch as are captaynes amonge them.
13:3 Moses sent the out of the wildernes of Paran, acordinge to the worde of the LORDE , soch as were all heades amonge the children of Israel, and these are their names:
13:4 Samma the sonne of Zacur, of the trybe of Ruben.
13:5 Saphat the sonne of Hori, of the trybe of Simeon.
13:6 Caleb yͤ sonne of Iephune, of the trybe of Iuda.
13:7 Igeal the sonne of Ioseph, of the trybe of Isachar.
13:8 Hosea the sonne of Nun, of yͤ trybe of Ephraim.
13:9 Palti the sonne of Raphu, of the trybe of Ben Iamin.
13:10 Gadiel the sonne of Sodi, of yͤ trybe of Zabulon.
13:11 Gaddi the sonne of Susi, of the trybe of Ioseph of Manasse.
13:12 Ammiel the sonne of Gemalli, of the trybe of Dan.
13:13 Sethur yͤ sonne of Michael, of the trybe of Asser.
13:14 Nahebi the sonne of Vaphsi, of the trybe of Nephtali.
13:15 Guel the sonne of Machi, of the trybe of Gad.
13:16 These are the names of the men, whom Moses sent forth to spye out the lande. As for Hosea the sonne of Nun, Moses called him Iosua.
13:17 Now whan Moses sent the forth to spye out the lande of Canaan, he sayde vnto the: Go vp southwarde, and get you vp to the mountaynes,
13:18 and loke vpon the londe how it is: and the people that dwell therin, whether they be stronge or weake, fewe or many:
13:19 and what maner of lande it is that they dwell in, whether it be good or bad: & what maner of cities they be that they dwell in, whether they be fenced with walles, or not:
13:20 and what maner of lande it is, whether it be fatt or leane, and whether there be trees therin, or not. Be of a good corage, and bringe of the frutes of the londe. It was euen aboute the tyme, that grapes are first rype.
13:21 They wente vp, & spyed the lande, from yͤ wildernes of Zin; vntyll Rehob, as me go vnto Hemath.
13:22 They wente vp also towarde the south, and came vnto Hebron, where Ahiman was, and Sesai and Thalmai, the children of Enack (Hebron was buylded seuen yeare before Zoan in Egipte.)
13:23 And they came to the ryuer of Escol, and there they cut downe a cluster of grapes, and caused two to beare it vpon a staffe, pomgranates also and fygges.
13:24 The place is called the ryuer of Escol, because of the cluster of grapes, which the children of Israel cut downe there.
13:25 And whan they had spyed out the lande, they turned bake againe after fourtye daies,
13:26 and wente, and came to Moses and Aaron, & to the whole congregacion of yͤ children of Israel in to yͤ wyldernesse of Paran, eue vnto Cades, and brought them worde agayne, and to the whole congregacion, how it stode, and let them se the frute of the lande,
13:27 and tolde them, and sayde: We came in to yͤ lande, whither yͤ sent vs, where it floweth with mylke and hony, and this is the frute therof:
13:28 sauynge that stronge people dwell therin, and the cities are exceadinge stronge and greate. And we sawe the children of Enack there also.
13:29 The Amalechites dwell in the south countre, the Hethites, and Iebusites and Amorites dwell vpon the mountaynes, but the Cananites dwell by the see, and aboute Iordane.
13:30 Howbeit Caleb stylled yͤ people that was agaynst Moses, and sayde vnto them: Let vs go vp, and conquere the lande, for we are able to ouercome it.
13:31 But the men that wente vp with him, sayde: We are not able to go vp agaynst that people, for they are to stronge for vs.
13:32 And of the lande that they had searched, they brought vp an euell reporte amonge the childrē of Israel, and saide: The lade that we haue gone thorow to spye out, eateth vp the indwellers therof: and all the people that we sawe therin, are men of greate stature.
13:33 We sawe giauntes there also, yee giauntes as the children of Enack: and we semed in oure sighte as yͤ greshoppers, and so dyd we in their sighte.
14:1 Then the whole cogregacion toke on, and cryed, and the people wepte yͭ night.
14:2 And all the childrē of Israel murmured agaynst Moses and Aaron, and the whole congregacion sayde vnto them: Oh that we had dyed in the lande of Egipte, or that we might dye yet in this wyldernesse.
14:3 Wherfore bryngeth the LORDE vs in to this lande, that oure wyues shulde fall thorow the swerde, and ouer children be a praye? Is it not better, that we go agayne in to Egipte?
14:4 And they sayde one to another: Let vs make a captayne, and go into Egipte agayne.
14:5 But Moses & Aaron fell vpo their faces before yͤ whole cogregacion of the multitude of the childrē of Israel.
14:6 And Iosua yͤ sonne of Nun, & Caleb yͤ sonne of Iephune (which also had spyed out the lande) rente their clothes,
14:7 & spake to the whole cogregacion of the children of Israel: The londe yͭ we haue walked thorow to spye it out, is a very good lande.
14:8 Yf the LORDE haue lust vnto vs, he shal brynge vs in to the same londe, & geue it vs, which is a lade that floweth with mylke & hony.
14:9 But in anye wyse rebell not yͤ agaynst the LORDE , & feare not yͤ people of this lande, for we wil eate the vp as bred. Their defence is departed frō them, but the LORDE is wͭ vs, be not yͤ afrayed of them.
14:10 And all the people, bad stone them wͭ stones. Then appeared the glory of the LORDE in the Tabernacle of witnesse vnto all the children of Israel,
14:11 & the LORDE sayde vnMoses: How longe shal this people blaspheme me? And how longe wil it be, or they beleue me, for all the tokes that I haue shewed amonge them?
14:12 I wil smyte them with pestilence & destroye the, & wil make of the a greater & mightier people then this is.
14:13 But Moses sayde vnto yͤ LORDE : Then shal yͤ Egipcians heare it (for wͭ thy power hast thou brought this people from amoge the)
14:14 so shal it be tolde the inhabiters of this lande also, which haue herde, yͭ thou O LORDE art amonge this people, yͭ thou art sene from face to face, & that thy cloude stondeth ouer them, and that thou goest before them in the cloudy piler on the daye tyme, and in the fyrie piler on the night season.
14:15 Yf thou shuldest now slaye this people as one man, then the Heythen that haue herde so good reporte of the, shulde saye:
14:16 The LORDE was not able to brynge the people in to the londe, that he sware vnto them, therfore hath he slayne them in the wyldernes.
14:17 So let the power of the LORDE now be greate, acordinge as thou hast spoken and sayde:
14:18 The LORDE is of longe sufferaunce and of greate mercy, and forgeueth synne and trespace, and leaueth no man innocent, & vysiteth the myßdede of the fathers vpon the children in to the thirde and fourth generacion.
14:19 O be gracious now vnto the synne of this people acordinge to thy greate mercy, like as thou hast forborne this people also, euer from Egipte vnto this place.
14:20 And the LORDE sayde: I haue forgeue it, as thou hast saide.
14:21 But as truly as I lyue, all yͤ worlde shalbe full of my glory.
14:22 For of all yͤ men that haue sene my glory & my tokens, which I dyd in Egipte and in the wildernesse, and tempted me new ten tymes, & haue not herkened vnto my voyce,
14:23 there shall not one se the londe that I sware vnto their fathers: nether shal eny of them that haue blasphemed me, se it.
14:24 But my seruaut Caleb, because there is another maner sprete with him, & because he hath folowed me, him wil I brynge in to the lande, which he hath gone thorow, & his sede shal conquere it,
14:25 and yͤ Amalechites also and the Cananites, that dwell in the lowe countrees. Tomorow turne you, and get you to the wyldernesse, in the waye towarde the reed see.
14:26 And yͤ LORDE spake vnto Moses & Aaron, & sayde:
14:27 How loge shal this euell multitude murmur agaynst me?
14:28 For I haue herde the murmuringe of the childrē of Israel, yͭ they haue murmured agaynst me. Tell them therfore: As trulye as I lyue (sayeth yͤ LORDE ) I wil do vnto you, euen as ye haue spoken in myne eares:
14:29 Youre carcases shal lye in this wildernesse. And all yͤ that were nombred from twentye yeare and aboue, which haue murmured agaynst me,
14:30 shall not come in to the lande (cocernynge the which I lift vp my hade, yͭ I wolde let you dwell therin) saue Caleb yͤ sonne of Iephune, and Iosua the sonne of Nun.
14:31 Youre children, of whom yͤ sayde: They shalbe a spoyle, them wyll I brynge in, so yͭ they shal knowe the lande, which ye haue refused.
14:32 But yͤ with youre carcases shall lye in this wildernesse,
14:33 and yor children shal wander in this wildernesse fourtye yeares, & beare yor whordome, tyll yor carcases be waisted in the wildernesse,
14:34 acordinge to the nombre of yͤ fourtye dayes, wherin yͤ spyed out the londe. A daye for a yeare, so yͭ fourtye yeares ye shall beare youre myßdede, that ye maye knowe what it is, whan I withdrawe my hande.
14:35 Euen I the LORDE haue sayde it, & wil do it in dede vnto all this euell congregacion, that haue lift vp them selues agaynst me: In this wildernesse shal they be consumed, and there shal they dye.
14:36 So there dyed and were plaged before the LORDE all the me, whom Moses sent to spye out the lade, & came agayne, and made the whole cogregacion to murmur agaynst it, because they brought vp a myßreporte of the lande,
14:37 that it was euell.
14:38 But Iosua the sonne of Nun, and Caleb yͤ sonne of Iephune were left alyue, of the men that wente to spye out the lande.
14:39 And Moses spake these wordes vnto all the children of Israel. The toke the people greate sorowe.
14:40 And they arose early in yͤ mornynge, and wente vp to the toppe of yͤ mountayne, and sayde: Lo, here are we, and will go vp to the place, wherof the LORDE hath sayde: for we haue synned.
14:41 But Moses sayde: wherfore go yͤ on this maner beyonde yͤ worde of the LORDE ? It shall not prospere with you:
14:42 go not vp (for yͤ LORDE is not amoge you) yͭ ye be not slayne before yor enemies.
14:43 For the Amalechites and Cananites are there before you, & ye shal fall thorow yͤ swerde, because ye haue turned yor selues from the LORDE , and the LORDE shal not be with you.
14:44 But they were blynded to go vp to the toppe of the mountaine: neuertheles the Arke of the LORDE S couenaunt & Moses came not out of the hooste.
14:45 Then came downe yͤ Amalechites & Cananites which dwelt vpon that mountayne, and smote them and hewed them, euen vnto Horma.
15:1 And the LORDE talked with Moses, and sayde:
15:2 Speake to the childrē of Israel, & saye vnto them: Whan yͤ come in to the lande of youre dwellinge, which I shal geue you,
15:3 and wil do sacrifice vnto the LORDE , whether it be a burntofferynge, or an offrynge for a speciall vowe, or a frewyll offerynge, or youre feast offerynges, that ye maye make a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE , of oxen or of shepe.
15:4 He yͭ wil offre now his gifte vnto yͤ LORDE , shal brynge for the meatofferinge a teth deale of fyne floure myngled with oyle of the fourth parte of an Hin,
15:5 and wyne for yͤ drynkofferynge the fourth parte of an Hin also: to the burntofferinge, or eny other offeringe, whan a lambe is offred.
15:6 But wha there is a ramme offred, thou shalt make the meatofferynge two teth deales of fyne floure myngled with oyle, of the thirde parte of an Hin,
15:7 and yͤ thirde parte of an Hin of wyne also for a drynkofferinge: this shalt thou offre for a swete sauor vnto the LORDE .
15:8 But yf thou wilt offre an oxe for a burntofferynge, or for a speciall vowe offerynge, or for an healthofferinge vnto the LORDE ,
15:9 thou shalt brynge to the oxe, the meatoffrynge, euen thre tenth deales of fyne floure mingled with half an Hin of oyle, & half an Hin of wyne for a drynkoffrynge.
15:10 This is an offerynge of a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE .
15:11 Thus shalt thou do with an oxe, with a ramme, with a lambe, and with a goate.
15:12 Acordinge as the nombre of the offerynges is, therafter shall the nombre of the meatofferynges and drynkofferynges be also.
15:13 He that is one of youre selues, shall do this, that he maye offre a sacrifice of a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE .
15:14 And yf there dwell a straunger with you, or is amoge youre kynßfolkes, and wil do an offerynge vnto the LORDE for a swete sauoure, the same shal do as yͤ do.
15:15 Let there be one statute for the whole cogregacion, both vnto you and to the straungers. A perpetuall statute shal it be vnto youre posterities, that the straunger be eue as yͤ before yͤ LORDE .
15:16 One lawe, and one ordinaunce shalbe vnto you and to the straunger that dwelleth with you.
15:17 And the LORDE talked with Moses, & sayde:
15:18 Speake to the children of Israel, and saye vnto them: Whan yͤ come in to the lande, in to yͤ which I shal brynge you,
15:19 so that yͤ eate the bred of the londe, ye shal heue vp an Heueofferynge vnto the LORDE ,
15:20 namely, a cake of the firstlinges of youre dowe shall yͤ geue for an Heueofferynge: as the Heueofferynge of the barne,
15:21 euen so shal yͤ geue the firstlinges of youre dowe also vnto the LORDE , for an Heueofferynge amonge youre posterities.
15:22 And whan yͤ thorow ignoraunce ouer se eny of these commaundementes, which the LORDE hath spoken by Moses,
15:23 and all yͭ the LORDE hath commaunded you by Moses (from the daye that the LORDE beganne to commaunde for youre posterities)
15:24 and the cogregacion do ought ignorauntly, the shal the whole congregacion offre a yonge bullocke from amonge the greate catell to a burntofferynge, for a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE , with his meatofferynge and drynkofferynge as the maner is, and an he goate for a synofferynge.
15:25 And so shal the prest make an attonement for the whole congregacion of the children of Israel, and it shalbe forgeuen them: for it is an ignoraunce. And they shal brynge these their giftes for an offerynge vnto the LORDE , and their synofferynge before the LORDE for their ignoraunce,
15:26 and it shalbe forgeuen the whole congregacion of the childrē of Israel, & the straunger also yͭ dwelleth amonge you, for so moch as all the people is in soch ignoraunce.
15:27 Yf one soule synne thorow ignoraunce, the same shal brynge a she goate of a yeare olde for a synofferynge.
15:28 And the prest shall make an attonement for soch an ignoraunt soule with the synofferinge for the ignoraunce before the LORDE , that he maye reconcyle him, and it shal be forgeuen him.
15:29 And it shal be one lawe, (that ye shal do for yͤ ignoraunce) both vnto him that is borne amonge the children of Israel, and to the straunger that dwelleth amonge you.
15:30 But yf a soule do ought presumptuously, whether he be one of youre selues or a straunger, he hath despysed the LORDE : yͤ same soule shalbe roted out from amoge his people:
15:31 because he hath despysed the worde of the LORDE , and hath left his commaundement vndone: that soule shall vtterly perishe, his synne shalbe vpon him.
15:32 Now whyle the children of Israel were in the wyldernesse, they founde a man gatherynge stickes vpon the Sabbath daye.
15:33 And they that founde him gatherynge stickes, brought him vnto Moses and Aaron, and before the whole congregacion.
15:34 And they put him in preson, for it was not declared what shulde be done vnto him.
15:35 The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: The man shall dye the death, the whole congregacion shal stone him without the hoost.
15:36 Then the whole cogregacion brought him out of yͤ hoost, and stoned him that he dyed, as yͤ LORDE commaunded Moses.
15:37 And yͤ LORDE sayde vnto Moses:
15:38 Speake to the childrē of Israel, & saye vnto the, yͭ they make them gardes vpon yͤ quarters of their garmentes amonge all yor posterities, and put yalowe rybandes vpon the gardes in yͤ quarters.
15:39 And yͤ gardes shal serue you, yͭ ye maye loke vpon the, and remembre all the comaundementes of the LORDE , & do them: that yͤ order not youre selues after yͤ meanynge of youre awne hert, ner go awhorynge after youre awne eyes.
15:40 Therfore shal yͤ remembre and do all my commaundementes, and be holy vnto youre God.
15:41 I am the LORDE youre God, which brought you out of the lande of Egipte, to be yor God. Euen I the LORDE youre God.
16:1 And Corah the sonne of Iezehar the sonne of Kahath, the sonne of Leui, with Dathan and Abiram the sonne of Eliab, and On the sonne of Peleth, yͤ sonnes of Rube,
16:2 tode vp agaynst Moses, with certayne men amonge the childrē of Israel, two hundreth & fyftie captaynes of the congregacion, councelers, & famous men.
16:3 And they gathered them selues agaynst Moses & Aaro & sayde vnto them: yͤ make to moch adoo, for all the congregacion is holy euery one, and the LORDE is amonge them: Why lifte yͤ youre selues vp then aboue the congregacion of the LORDE ?
16:4 Whan Moses herde yͭ, he fell vpo his face,
16:5 & saide vnto Corah, & to all his company: Tomorow shal yͤ LORDE shewe who is his, & who is holy to come vnto him. Who so euer he choseth, yͤ same shal come vnto him.
16:6 This do: Take yͤ censors, thou Corah & all yͥ copanye,
16:7 & do fyre therin, & put incense theron tomorow before the LORDE : then whom so euer the LORDE choseth, the same shal be holy. yͤ make to moch a doo, yͤ children of Leui.
16:8 And Moses sayde vnto Corah: Heare yͤ childrē of Leui,
16:9 it not ynough vnto you, yͭ yͤ God of Israel hath separated you frō yͤ multitude of Israel, yͭ ye shulde come nye him, to do the seruyce of the dwellynge place of the LORDE , and stonde before the people to mynister vnto them?
16:10 He hath caused the and all thy brethren the childrē of Leui with the, to come nye vnto him: and now yͤ seke the presthode also.
16:11 Thou and all thy copany conspyre agaynst the LORDE . What is Aaron, that ye shulde murmur against him?
16:12 And Moses sent to call Datha & Abira yͤ sonnes of Eliab. But they saide: We wil not come vp.
16:13 Is it to litle yͭ thou hast brought vs out of yͤ lande of Egipte (yͭ floweth wͭ mylke & hony) to kyll vs in yͤ wildernesse: but thou must raigne ouer vs also?
16:14 How goodly well hast thou brought vs in to a lande, that floweth wͭ milke and hony, & geue vs feldes and vyniardes in possession? Wilt thou put out these mens eyes? We will not come vp.
16:15 Then was Moses very wroth, & saide vnto yͤ LORDE : Turne yͤ not vnto their meatofferinges. I haue not take so moch as an Asse frō the, nether haue I hurte eny of the.
16:16 And Moses sayde vnto Corah: Tomorow be thou & all yͥ companye before yͤ LORDE , thou, and they, & Aaron.
16:17 And take euery one his censer, and put incense therin, and come before the LORDE , euery one with his censer (that is two hundreth and fiftye censers) and both thou and Aaron take either his censer.
16:18 And euery one toke his censer, and put fyre therin, and layed incense theron, and came before the dore of the Tabernacle of witnes, and Moses and Aaron also.
16:19 And Corah gathered yͤ whole congregacio agaynst the before the dore of the Tabernacle of witnes. But yͤ glory of the LORDE appeared before yͤ whole congregacion.
16:20 And yͤ LORDE spake vnto Moses & Aaron, & sayde:
16:21 Separate youre selues frō this congregacio, yͭ I maye shortly consume them.
16:22 And they fell vpon their faces, & sayde: O God, thou God of the spretes of all flesh, yf one man haue synned, wilt thou therfore be wroth ouer the whole congregacion?
16:23 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & saide:
16:24 Speake to the congregacio, and saye: Come vp from yͤ dwellynge of Corah, and Dathan, and Abiram.
16:25 And Moses stode vp, & wente vnto Dathan & Abiram, & the Elders of Israel folowed him,
16:26 & he spake to yͤ cogregacio, & saide: Departe frō yͤ tentes of these vngodly me & touche nothinge yͭ is theirs, yͭ yͤ perishe not in eny of their sinnes.
16:27 And they gat them vp from the dwellynge of Corah, Dathan, & Abiram. But Dathan and Abira came out, and stode in the dore of their tentes, with their wyues, and sonnes and children.
16:28 And Moses sayde: Hereby shal ye knowe that the LORDE hath sent me, to do all these workes, and that I haue not done them of myne awne hert.
16:29 Yf these men dye the comon death of all men, or be vysited as all men are vysited, then hath not the LORDE sent me.
16:30 But yf the LORDE make a new thinge, and the earth open hir mouth, and swalowe them with all that they haue, so yͭ they go downe quycke in to hell, the shal ye knowe, that these men haue blasphemed the LORDE .
16:31 And wha he had spoke out all these wordes, yͤ groude cloue asunder vnder the,
16:32 & the earth opened hir wouth, & swalowed the, wͭ their houses, & all the me yͭ were wͭ Corah, & all their substauce,
16:33 and they wente downe quycke in to the hell, with all that they had. And the earth closed vpo them, & so they perished from amonge yͤ congregacio.
16:34 And all Israel yͭ were aboute the, fled at yͤ crye of the, for they sayde: That yͤ earth swalowe not vs also.
16:35 Morouer the fyre came out frō the LORDE , and consumed the two hundreth and fyftye men, that offred the incense.
16:36 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
16:37 Speake to Eleasar yͤ sonne of Aaron yͤ prest, yͭ he take vp yͤ censers out of yͤ burninge, & scater yͤ fyre here & there
16:38 (For the censers of these synners are halowed thorow their soules) yͭ they maye be beate in to thinne plates, & fastened vpon yͤ altare. For they are offred before yͤ LORDE , & halowed: and they shalbe a token vnto yͤ childrē of Israel.
16:39 And Eleasar the prest toke yͤ brasen censers which they yͭ were burnt, had offred, & bet the to plates, to fasten the vpon yͤ altare
16:40 for a remebraunce vnto yͤ children of Israel yͭ no straunger (and he that is not of yͤ sede of Aaron) come nye to offre incense before the LORDE , yͭ it happe not vnto him as vnto Corah and his companye, acordynge as the LORDE sayde vnto him by Moses.
16:41 On the nexte morow murmured yͤ whole congregacion of yͤ childrē of Israel against Moses & Aaro, & saide: ye haue slayne yͤ people of yͤ LORDE .
16:42 And whan the cogregacio was gathered agaynst Moses & Aaro, they turned the towarde yͤ Tabernacle of witnes And beholde, the yͤ cloude couered yͤ Tabernacle, & yͤ glory of yͤ LORDE appeared.
16:43 And Moses & Aaro wete in before yͤ Tabernacle of witnes.
16:44 And yͤ LORDE spake vnto Moses & sayde:
16:45 Get you out of this cogregacion, I wil shortly consume the. And they fell vpon their faces.
16:46 And Moses sayde vnto Aaron: Take the ceser & put fyre therin frō of the altare, & laye incese theron, & go soone to the cogregacion, & make an attonement for them. For the wrath is gone out from the LORDE , and the plage is begone amonge the people.
16:47 And Aaron dyd as Moses sayde, & ranne in the myddest amonge yͤ congregacio. And beholde, yͤ plage was begone. And he burnt incese & made an attonemet for the people,
16:48 & stode betwene the deed & the lyuynge, and the plage ceassed.
16:49 But there were fourtene thousande, and seue hundreth deed in the plage, besydes them that dyed aboute the busynesse of Corah.
16:50 And Aaron came agayne vnto Moses before the dore of the Tabernacle of witnesse. And the plage ceassed.
17:1 And yͤ LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde
17:2 Speake to the children of Israel, & take of the twolue staues, of euery captayne of his fathers house one, and wryte euery mans name vpon his staffe.
17:3 But Aarons name shalt thou wryte vpon the staffe of Leui. For euery heade of their fathers house shal haue a staffe.
17:4 And laye the in the Tabernacle of witnesse, before the witnesse where I testifie vnto you.
17:5 And loke whom I shall chose, his staffe shal florishe, yͭ I maye stylle the grudginges of the children of Israel, which they grudge agaynst you.
17:6 And Moses spake vnto the childrē of Israel, & all their captaynes gaue him twolue staues, euery captayne a staffe, after yͤ house of their fathers. And Aarons staffe was amonge their staues also.
17:7 And Moses layed the staues before the LORDE in the Tabernacle of witnesse.
17:8 On the morow wha Moses wete in to yͤ Tabernacle of witnesse, he foude yͭ Aaros rodde of the house of Leui florished, and brought forth blossoms, & bare allmondes.
17:9 And Moses brought forth all yͤ staues frō yͤ LORDE before all yͤ childrē of Israel, that they might se it. And they toke euery mā his staffe.
17:10 The LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Bringe Aaros staffe againe before the wytnesse, yͭ it maye be kepte for a toke to the children of rebellion, that their murmuringes maye ceasse frō me, lest they dye.
17:11 Moses dyd as yͤ LORDE comaunded him.
17:12 And yͤ childrē of Israel sayde vnto Moses: Beholde, we cosume awaie, we are destroied, & perishe.
17:13 Who so cometh nye yͤ dwellynge place of yͤ LORDE , he dyeth. Shal we the vtterly cosume awaie?
18:1 And the LORDE sayde vnto Aaron: Thou & thy sonnes, & thy fathers house wͭ the shal beare the myßdede of yͤ Sactuary: & thou & thy sonnes wͭ the, shall beare the myßdede of yor presthode.
18:2 But thy brethren of the trybe of Leui yͥ father, shal come nye the, & be ioyned vnto the, that they maye mynistre vnto ye. But thou & thy sonnes wͭ the, shal mynistre before yͤ Tabernacle of witnesse.
18:3 And they shal wayte vpo yͤ seruyce & vpon yͤ seruyce of the whole Tabernacle. But nye vnto the vessels of yͤ Sactuary & to the altare, shall they not come, yͭ both they & yͤ dye not:
18:4 howbeit they shal be ioyned vnto the, to wayte vpo the mynistracion in the Tabernacle of witnesse, in all the seruice of the Tabernacle. And there shal no straunger come nye vnto you.
18:5 Therfore wayte now vpon the seruyce of the Sanctuary, and vpon the seruyce of the altare, that there come no more wrath vpon the children of Israel.
18:6 For lo, I haue take yor brethre the Leuites frō amonge the children of Israel, to be youre gifte, for a presente vnto yͤ LORDE , to do yͤ seruyce in yͤ Tabernacle of witnes.
18:7 As for ye, and yͥ sonnes with the, ye shal waite vpon youre prestes office, that ye maye ministre in all maner busynes of the altare, and within the vayle: for yor prestes office geue I vnto you for a gifte to do seruyce. Yf a straunger come nye, he shall dye.
18:8 And the LORDE sayde vnto Aaron: beholde, I haue geuen the my Heueofferynges: And all that the children of Israel halowe, haue I geuen vnto the, and to thy sonnes for a perpetuall dewtye.
18:9 This shalt thou haue of the most holy thinges that they offer. All their giftes with all their meatofferinges, and with all their synofferynges, and wͭ all their trespace offerynges, that they geue me, the same shal be most holy vnto the and yͥ sonnes.
18:10 In the most holy place shalt thou eate it. All that are males shall eate therof: For it shal be holy vnto the.
18:11 The Heue offerynge of their giftes in all the Waueofferynges of the children of Israel, haue I geuen vnto the also, and to thy sonnes, and to thy doughters for a perpetuall dewtye. Who so is cleane in thy house, shal eate therof.
18:12 All the fat of the oyle, and all yͤ fat of the wyne and corne of their firstlinges, that they geue vnto the LORDE , haue I geuen vnto ye.
18:13 The first frutes of all that is in their londe, which they bringe vnto the LORDE , shal be thine. Who so euer is cleane in thine house, shal eate therof.
18:14 All dedicate thinges in Israel shal be thine.
18:15 All that breaketh the Matrix amonge all flesh, which they brynge vnto the LORDE , whether it be man or beest, shalbe thine. But so, that thou cause the firstborne of mā to be redemed, and that thou cause the first borne of vncleane beestes to be redemed also
18:16 (They shal redeme it whan it is a moneth olde, and shall geue it lowse for money, euen for fyue Sycles, after the Sycle of the Sanctuary, which Sycle is worth twentye Geras.)
18:17 But the first frutes of an oxe, or lambe, or goate shalt thou not cause to be redemed for they are holy. Their bloude shalt thou sprenkle vpon the altare, and their fat shalt thou burne for an offerynge of a swete sauoure vnto yͤ LORDE .
18:18 Their flesh shalbe thine, like as yͤ Wauebrest and yͤ right shulder is thine also.
18:19 All the Heueofferinges that yͤ childrē of Israel halowe vnto yͤ LORDE , haue I geuen vnto the, & to thy sonnes, & to thy doughters with the for a perpetuall dewtie. This shalbe a salted couenaut for euer before yͤ LORDE , vnto the and thy sede with the.
18:20 And the LORDE sayde vnto Aaro: Thou shalt inheret nothinge in their londe, ner haue eny porcio amonge them: for I am yͥ porcion, and thine enheritaunce amoge the children of Israel.
18:21 Vnto the children of Leui haue I geuen all the tithes in Israel to inheritaunce, for yͤ seruyce which they do vnto me in the Tabernacle of witnesse,
18:22 that from hece forth the children of Israel come not nye the Tabernacle of witnes, to lade them selues with synne, and to dye:
18:23 But the Leuites shal do the seruyce in the Tabernacle of witnes, & shal beare their synne, for a perpetuall lawe amonge youre posterities. And they shall inheret none inheritaunce amonge the children of Israel.
18:24 For yͤ tithes of the childrē of Israel, which they Heue vnto yͤ LORDE , haue I geuen vnto the Leuites for an heretage. Therfore haue I sayde vnto them, that they shall inheret no inheritannce amonge the children of Israel.
18:25 And yͤ LORDE talked wͭ Moses, & saide:
18:26 Speake to the Leuites, & saye vnto them: Wha yͤ take of yͤ childrē of Israel yͤ tithes, yͭ I haue geuen you of the for yor inheritauce, ye shal take an Heueofferinge of the same vnto the LORDE , euen the tenth of the tithe.
18:27 And the same yor Heueofferynge shall yͤ reken, as though yͤ gaue corne out of the barne, and fullnesse out of the wynepresse.
18:28 Thus shal yͤ geue an Heueofferynge vnto the LORDE of all yor tithes, which yͤ take of the children of Israel, yͭ yͤ maie geue the same Heueofferynge of yͤ LORDE , vnto Aaro yͤ prest.
18:29 And all yͭ yͤ geue of yͤ tythes, & halowe vnto yͤ LORDE for a gifte, yͤ same shall be his of the best.
18:30 And saye thou vnto them: Whan yͤ thus Heue vp yͤ fat therof, it shalbe rekened vnto the Leuites as the increace of the barne, and as the increace of the wine presse.
18:31 And ye maye eate it in all places, yͤ & yor children: for it is youre rewarde for youre seruyce in the Tabernacle of witnesse:
18:32 and ye shal not lade synne vpon you in the same, whan yͤ Heue the fat therof, and vnhalowe not the halowed thinges of the children of Israel, and ye shal not dye.
19:1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses & Aaro & sayde:
19:2 This custome shall be a lawe, which the LORDE hath comaunded, & sayde: Speake vnto yͤ children of Israel, yͭ they brynge vnto yͤ a reed cow without spot, wherin is no blemysh, & vpon who there came neuer yock:
19:3 and ye shal geue her vnto Eleasar the prest, which shall brynge her without the hooste, and cause her to be slayne there before him.
19:4 And Eleasar yͤ prest shal take of hir bloude with his fynger, and sprenckle it seuen tymet straight towarde the dore of the Tabernacle of witnesse, and cause the cow to be burnt before him,
19:5 both hir ?kynne and hir flesh, and hir bloude also with hir donge.
19:6 And the prest shal take Ceder wodd and ysope, and purple woll, and cast it vpo the cow as she burneth,
19:7 & he shal washe his clothes, and bathe his body with water, and the go in to the hoost, and be vncleane vntyll yͤ eue.
19:8 And he that burnt her, shal wash his clothes also with water, and bathe his body in water, & be vncleane vntyll yͤ euen.
19:9 And one yͭ is cleane, shal gather vp the aßshes of yͤ cow, and poure them without the hoost in a cleane place, that they maye be kepte there, for sprenklinge water to the congregacion of the childrē of Israel, for it is a synofferinge.
19:10 And he that gathered vp the aßshes of the cow, shall wash his clothes, and be vncleane vntyll the euen. This shalbe a perpetuall lawe vnto yͤ children of Israel, and to the straungers that dwell amonge you.
19:11 Who so now toucheth a deed ma, shal be vncleane seuen dayes:
19:12 the same shall purifie himself herewith, on the thirde daye and on the seuenth daie, and then shall he be cleane. And yf he puryfye not himself on the thirde daye, & on the seuenth daye, the shall he not be cleane.
19:13 But wha eny mā toucheth a deed personne, and wil not purifie himself, he defyleth the dwellynge of the LORDE , and the same soule shal be roted out of Israel, because the sprenklinge water is not sprenkled vpon him: and he is vncleane, as longe as he letteth not himself be pourged therof.
19:14 This is the lawe. Whan a mā dyeth in yͤ tente, who so euer goeth in to the tente, and all yͭ is in the tente, shal be vncleane seue daies.
19:15 And euery open vessel that hath no lydd nor couerynge, is vncleane.
19:16 And who so euer toucheth one yͭ is slayne wͭ the swerde vpon yͤ felde, or eny other deed, or a deed mans bone, or a graue, yͤ same is vncleane seue dayes.
19:17 So now for the vncleane personne, they shal take of yͤ aßshes of this burntsynofferinge, & put springinge water theron in to a vessell,
19:18 and a cleane man shall take ysope, & dyppe it in the water, and sprenkle it vpon the tente, and vpon all the vessels, and all the soules that are therin. Likewyse also vpon him, yͭ hath touched a deed mans bone, or a slayne personne, or a deed body, or a graue.
19:19 And he that is cleane, shal sprenkle vpon the vncleane, yͤ thirde daye, & the seueth daie, & purifye him on yͤ seueth daye. And he shal washe his clothes, & bathe him self wͭ water, and so at euen he shalbe cleane.
19:20 But he yͭ is vncleane, and wil not purifye him self, yͤ same soule shal be roted out of yͤ cogregacion. For he hath defyled the Sanctuary of the LORDE , & is not sprekled wͭ spreklinge water, therfore is he vncleane. And this shalbe a perpetuall lawe vnto the. And he yͭ sprenkled wͭ the spreklinge water, shall wash his clothes also.
19:21 And who so euer toucheth the spreklinge water, shal be vncleane vntill the euen.
19:22 And what so euer he toucheth, shalbe vncleane: & loke what soule he toucheth, shalbe vncleane vntill the euen.
20:1 And the childrē of Israel came wͭ the whole cogregacion into the wildernesse of Zin in the first moneth, & the people abode at Cades. And there dyed Miriam, & was buried there.
20:2 And the congregacion had no water, & they gathered them selues together agaynst Moses & Aaron,
20:3 & the people chode with Moses, & sayde: Wolde God yͭ we had perished, whan oure brethre perished before the LORDE .
20:4 Wherfore haue yͤ brought the congregacion of the LORDE in to this wildernesse, yͭ we shulde dye here with oure catell?
20:5 And wherfore haue yͤ brought vs out of Egipte in to this place, where men can not sowe, where are nether fygges, ner vynes, ner pomgranates, & where there is no water to drynke?
20:6 And Moses & Aaron wete frō the congregacion vnto yͤ dore of yͤ Tabernacle of witnesse, & fell vpon their faces. And the glory of the LORDE appeared vnto them.
20:7 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
20:8 Take the staffe, & gather the cogregacion together, thou & thy brother Aaron, & speake vnto the rocke before their eyes, & it shall geue his water. And thus shalt thou prouyde the water out of the rocke, & geue the congregacion drynke, and their catell also.
20:9 The toke Moses the staffe before yͤ LORDE , as he commaunded him,
20:10 & Moses & Aaron gathered the congregacion together before the rocke, & sayde vnto the: Heare yͤ rebellions: Shal we prouyde you water out of this rocke?
20:11 And Moses lift vp his hande, & smote yͤ rocke wͭ the staffe two tymes. Then came yͤ water out abudantly, so yͭ the cogregacion dranke, and their catell also.
20:12 But the LORDE sayde vnto Moses & Aaron: Because ye beleued me not, to sanctifye me before yͤ childrē of Israel, ye shal not bringe this congregacion in to the londe that I shal geue the.
20:13 This is yͤ water of strife, where the children of Israel stroue wͭ the LORDE and he was sanctified vpon them.
20:14 And Moses sent messaungers frō Cades vnto yͤ kynge of yͤ Edomites: This worde sendeth the yͥ brother Israel: Thou knowest all yͤ trauayle that happened vnto vs,
20:15 how that oure fathers wente downe in to Egipte, & how we haue dwelt in Egipte a longe tyme, & how the Egipcians dealte euell with vs & or fathers.
20:16 And we cryed vnto yͤ LORDE which herde oure voyce, and sent his angell, & hath brought vs out of Egipte: And beholde, we are at Cades in yͤ cite without the borders of yͥ londe.
20:17 O let vs go thorow thy londe, we wyl not go thorow yͤ feldes ner vynyardes, ner drynke the water out of the foutaynes. We wyl go the hye strete, and turne nether to yͤ right hande ner to yͤ lefte, tyll we be come past yͤ borders of thy countre.
20:18 But the Edomite answered him: Thou shal not go by me, or I wyl come agaynst yͤ with yͤ swerde.
20:19 The children of Israel saide vnto him: We wil go yͤ como hye waye, & yf we or oure catell drynke of thy water, we wil paye for it: we wil do nothinge, but passe thorow on fote onely.
20:20 But he sayde: Thou shalt not go thorow, And the Edomites came out against them with a mightie people & a stroge hande.
20:21 Thus yͤ Edomites denied to graute Israel passage thorow the borders of the lande. And Israel turned awaye from them.
20:22 And the children of Israel brake vp frō Cades, and came with the whole congregacion vnto mount Hor.
20:23 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses & Aaron at mount Hor harde vpon the coastes of yͤ lande of yͤ Edomites, & sayde:
20:24 Let Aaro be gathered vnto his people: for he shal not come in to yͤ lande yͭ I haue geuen vnto yͤ children of Israel, because ye were dishobedient vnto my mouth at the water of strife.
20:25 Take Aaron and Eleasar and his sonne, and brynge them vp vnto mount Hor,
20:26 and strype Aaron out of his vestimentes, and put the vpon Eleasar his sonne and there shall Aaron be gathered (vnto his people) and dye.
20:27 Then dyd Moses as the LORDE comaunded him, and they wente vp vnto Mount Hor in yͤ sight of the whole congregacion.
20:28 And Moses toke Aarons clothes, & put the vpon Eleasar his sonne. And Aaron dyed there, euen aboue vpon the mount.
20:29 And Moses & Eleasar came downe from the mount. And whan the whole congregacion sawe that Aaron was awaye, they mourned for him thirtie daies thorow out the whole house of Israel.
21:1 And whan Arad the kynge of the Cananites (which dwelt towarde the south) herde, that Israel came in by yͤ waie yͭ the spyes had founde out, he fought agaynst Israel, and toke some of them presoners.
21:2 Then vowed Israel a vowe vnto yͤ LORDE , and sayde: Yf thou wylt geue this people vnder my hande, I wyll vtterly destroye their cities.
21:3 And the LORDE herde yͤ voyce of Israel, and delyuered them the Cananites, and they vtterly destroyed them wͭ their cities also. And he called the place Horma.
21:4 Then departed they frō mount Hor on yͤ waye towarde the reed see, that they might go aboute the lande of the Edomites. And the soules of the people faynted by the waie
21:5 and they spake agaynst God and agaynst Moses: Wherfore hast thou brought vs out of the lande of Egipte, to slaye vs in the wildernesse? For here is nether bred ner water, and oure soule lotheth this lighte meate.
21:6 Than sent the LORDE fyrie serpentes amonge the people, which bote the peple, so that there dyed moch people in Israel.
21:7 The came they vnto Moses, and sayde: We haue synned, because we haue spoken agaynst the LORDE and agaynst the. Praye thou vnto the LORDE , that he take awaye the serpentes from vs. And Moses prayed for the people.
21:8 Then sayde the LORDE vnto Moses: Make the a brasen serpente, and set it vp for a token. Who so euer is bytten, and loketh vpon it, shal lyue.
21:9 Then made Moses a serpent of brasse, and set it vp for a token: and whan a serpent had bytten eny man, he behelde the brasen serpente, and recouered.
21:10 And the children of Israel departed, and pitched in Oboth.
21:11 And from Oboth they wente on, and pitched in Igim by Abarim in the wyldernesse ouer agaynst Moab, on the Eastsyde.
21:12 From thence departed they, & pitched by the ryuer of Sared.
21:13 From thence departed they, and pitched on this syde Arnon, which is in the wyldernesse, and commeth out of the coastes of the Amorites. For Arnon is the border betwixte Moab and yͤ Amorites.
21:14 Wherfore it is spoken in the boke of the warres of the LORDE : And go with violence both on the ryuer of Arnon,
21:15 & on the founteyne of the riuer, which boweth downewarde to dwell at Ar, & leaneth theron, to be the border of Moab.
21:16 And from thence they came to the well. This is the well, wherof the LORDE spake vnto Moses: gather the people together, I wil geue them water.
21:17 Then sange Israel this songe, and they sange one after another ouer the well:
21:18 This is the well, that the prynces dygged: the nobles amonge the people haue digged it thorow yͤ teacher and their staues. And from this wildernes they wente vnto Mathana,
21:19 & from Mathana vnto Nahaliel, and from Nahaliel to Bamoth,
21:20 and frō Bamoth vnto the valley that lieth in yͤ felde of Moab at the toppe of Pisga, and turneth towarde the wyldernesse.
21:21 And Israel sent messaungers vnto Siho the kynge of the Amorrites, & caused to saye vnto him:
21:22 Let me go thorow yͤ lande, we wyl not turne in to yͤ feldes ner in to the vynyardes: nether will we drynke the water of the welles, yͤ hye strete wil we go, till we be past the borders of thy countre.
21:23 Howbeit Sihon wolde not geue the children of Israel licence to go thorow the coastes of his londe, but gathered all his people together, and wente out agaynst Israel in the wyldernesse. And whan he came to Iaheza, he fought agaynst Israel.
21:24 Neuerthelesse Israel smote him with the edge of the swerde, and conquered his lande from Arnon vnto Iabock, and vnto the children of Ammon. For the borders of the children of Ammon were stroge.
21:25 So Israel toke all these cities, and dwelt in all the cities of yͤ Amorites, namely at Heßbon, and in the townes belonginge therto.
21:26 For Heßbon the cite was Sihons the kynge of the Amorites, and he had foughten before with the kynge of the Moabites, and conquered all his londe from him vntyll Arnon.
21:27 Wherfore it is sayde in the prouerbe: Come vnto Heßbon, let vs buylde and prepare yͤ cite of Sihon.
21:28 For there is a fyre gone out of Heßbon, and a flamme from the cite of Sihon, which hath consumed Ar of yͤ Moabites, and the citisens of yͤ toppe of Arnon.
21:29 Wo vnto the Moab, thou people of Camos art vndone. His sonnes are put to flighte, & his doughters brought captyue vnto Sihon the kynge of the Amorites.
21:30 Their glory is come to naught from Heßbon vnto Dibon: waisted are they vnto Nopha, which reacheth vnto Mediba.
21:31 Thus dwelt Israel in the lande of the Amorites.
21:32 And Moses sent out spyes vnto Iahesar, & they toke the townes belongynge therto, & coquered the Amorites yͭ were therin.
21:33 And they turned, & wente vp the waye towarde Basan. Then Og the kynge of Basan wete out agaynst them wͭ all his people, to fight in Edrei.
21:34 And yͤ LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Feare him not, for I haue geuen him wͭ his lande & people in to thy hande, & thou shalt do with him, as thou dyddest with Sihon the kynge of the Amorites, which dwelt at Heßbon.
21:35 And they smote him, & his sonnes, & all his people (so yͭ there remayned none) & coquered the londe.
22:1 Afterwarde wete yͤ children of Israel, & pitched in yͤ felde of Moab beyonde Iordane by Iericho.
22:2 And whan Balac yͤ sonne of Ziphor sawe all that Israel had done vnto the Amorites,
22:3 and that the Moabites were sore afrayed of the people (yͭ was so greate) and that the Moabites stode in feare of the children of Israel,
22:4 he sayde vnto yͤ Elders of the Madianites: Now shal this heape licke vp all that is aboute vs, eue as an oxe licketh vp the grasse in the felde. (And Balac yͤ sonne of Ziphor was kynge of the Moabites at that tyme.)
22:5 And he sent out messaungers vnto Balaam the sonne of Beor, which was an interpreter. (The same dwelt by the water of the lande of yͤ children of his people) that they shulde call him, and he caused to saye vnto him: Beholde, there is come out of Egipte, a people, which couereth yͤ face of yͤ earth, and lyeth ouer agaynst me.
22:6 Come now therfore, and curse me this people, for they are to mightie for me, yf peraduenture I might be able to smyte them, and to dryue them out of the lande. For I wote, that whom thou blessest, he is blessed: and whom thou cursest, he is cursed.
22:7 And the Elders of the Moabites wente on with yͤ Elders of the Madianites, and had the rewarde of yͤ soyth sayenge in their handes, and they came vnto Balaam, & tolde him the wordes of Balaac.
22:8 And he saide vnto the: Tary here all night, & I will bringe you worde agayne, euen as the LORDE shal saye vnto me. So yͤ prynces of yͤ Moabites abode with Balaam.
22:9 And God came vnto Balaam, & sayde: What men are these, which are with ye?
22:10 Balaam sayde vnto God: Balac yͤ sonne of Ziphor the kynge of the Moabites hath sent vnto me:
22:11 Beholde, there is a people come out of Egipte, and couereth the face of the earth, come now therfore, & curse me the, yf peradueture I maye be able to fighte with them, & to dryue the out.
22:12 But God sayde vnto Balaam: Go not with them, & curse not that people, for they are blessed.
22:13 Then rose Balaam vp in the mornynge, & sayde vnto the prynces of Balac: Get you vnto youre londe, for the LORDE wyll not suffer me to go with you.
22:14 And the prynces of yͤ Moabites gat the vp, came to Balac, & saide: Balaam refuseth to come wͭ vs.
22:15 Then sent Balac yet a greater copany of prynces, & more honorable the they.
22:16 Whan they came to Balaam, they tolde him: Balac yͤ sonne of Ziphor sendeth yͤ this worde: Oh refuse not to come vnto me,
22:17 for I wyll promote the vnto hye honoure, & wil do what so euer thou sayest vnto me. Come I praye the, curse me this people.
22:18 Balaam answered, & sayde vnto yͤ seruautes of Balac: Yf Balac wolde geue me his house full of syluer & golde, yet coulde I not go beyonde yͤ worde of the LORDE my God, to do litle or greate.
22:19 Neuertheles tary yͤ here this night, yͭ I maye were, what the LORDE wil saye more vnto me.
22:20 Then came God to Balaam by night, & saide vnto him: Yf the men are come to call the, get the vp then, and go with the: but what I shal saye vnto the, that shalt thou do.
22:21 Then rose Balaam vp in the mornynge, & sadled his Asse, & wente wͭ the prynces of yͤ Moabites.
22:22 But the wrath of God waxed whote, because he wete. And the angell of yͤ LORDE stode in the waye, to withstode him. But he rode vpo his Asse, & two seruauntes wͭ him.
22:23 And yͤ Asse sawe yͤ angell of yͤ LORDE stodinge in yͤ waye, & his swerde drawen in his hade. And yͤ Asse turned a syde out of yͤ waye, & wete in to the felde. But Balaam smote her, yͭ she shulde go in the waye.
22:24 Then stode the angell of the LORDE in yͤ pathe by the vynyardes, where there were walles on both the sydes.
22:25 And whan yͤ Asse sawe the angell of the LORDE , she wrenshed vnto the wall, & thrust Balaams fote vnto the wall. And he smote her agayne.
22:26 The wete the angell of the LORDE farther, & stode in a narow place, where there was no waye to turne, nether to the righte hade ner to yͤ lefte.
22:27 And whan the Asse sawe the angell of the LORDE , she fell downe vnder Balaam. Then was Balaams wrath furious, & smote the Asse with a staffe.
22:28 Then opened the LORDE the mouth of yͤ Asse, and she sayde vnto Balaam: What haue I done vnto the, that thou hast smytten me now thre tymes?
22:29 Balaam sayde vnto yͤ Asse: Because thou hast mocked me. Oh yͭ I had a swerde now in my hande, I wolde kyll the.
22:30 The Asse sayde vnto Balaam: Am not I thine Asse, which thou hast rydden vpon in yͥ tyme vnto this daye? Was I euer wonte to do so vnto the? He sayde: No.
22:31 Then opened the LORDE the eyes of Balaam, yͭ he sawe yͤ angell of the LORDE stondinge in yͤ waye, & a drawe swerde in his hade. And he enclyned him selfe, & bowed downe wͭ his face.
22:32 And the angell of the LORDE sayde vnto him: Wherfore hast thou smytte thine Asse now thre tymes? Beholde, I am come out to resiste ye, for yͥ waye is frowarde, & cotrary vnto me.
22:33 And yͤ Asse sawe me, & auoyded frō me thre tymes: or els yf she had not turned asyde frō me, I had slayne the, & saued the Asse alyue.
22:34 Then sayde Balaam vnto yͤ angell of yͤ LORDE : I haue synned, for I wyst not, that thou stodest in the waye agaynst me. And now yf it displease ye, I wil turne agayne.
22:35 The angell of yͤ LORDE saide vnto him: Go with the me: but thou shalt speake nothinge els, then yͭ I shal saye vnto ye. So Balaam wente forth wͭ the princes of Balac.
22:36 Whan Balac herde yͭ Balaam came, he wente out to mete him (in the cite of the Moabites yͭ lieth on the coaste of Arnon, which is on yͤ vttemost border)
22:37 & sayde vnto him: Dyd not I sende for yͤ to call the? Wherfore camest thou not then vnto me? Thinkest thou yͭ I am not able to promote yͤ vnto honor?
22:38 Balaam answered him: Lo, I am come vnto yͤ But how can I saye eny thinge els, the yͭ God putteth in my mouth? yͭ I must speake
22:39 So Balaam wente with Balac, and they came vnto the cite on the vttemost border of his lande.
22:40 And Balac slewe oxen and shepe, and sent for Balaam, and for the prynces that were with him.
22:41 And in the mornynge, Balac toke Balaam, and they wete vp to the hye place of Baal, that from thece he might se vnto the vttemost parte of yͤ people
23:1 . And Balaam sayde vnto Balac: Buylde me here seuen altares, and prouyde me here seuen bullockes, and seue rammes.
23:2 Balac dyd as Balaam sayde. And both Balac and Balaam offred, on euery altare a bullocke & a ramme.
23:3 And Balaam sayde vnto Balac: Stonde thou by yͥ burntofferynge, I wil go, yf happly the LORDE wil mete me, & call me, yͭ I maye tell the, what so euer he sheweth me. And he wente his waye, as he sayde.
23:4 And yͤ LORDE mett Balaam. And Balaam saide vnto him: Seuen altares haue I prepared, and offred on euery altare a bullocke and a ramme.
23:5 The LORDE put yͤ worde in Balaams mouth, and sayde: Go agayne vnto Balac, and saye on this wise.
23:6 And whan he came agayne vnto him, beholde, he stode by his burntofferynge, with all yͤ prynces of the Moabites.
23:7 Then toke he vp his parable, & sayde: Balac the kynge of the Moabites hath caused to fet me out of Syria from the moutaynes towarde the East, (& sayde:) Come, curse me Iacob: come, defye me Israel.
23:8 How shall I curse, whom God curseth not? How shal I defye, whom yͤ LORDE defyeth not?
23:9 For frō yͤ toppe of yͤ stonye rockes I se him, & from the hilles I beholde him. Beholde, yͤ people shal dwell by theselues, & shal not be rekened amoge the Heithe.
23:10 Who can tell the dust of Iacob, & the nombre of the fourth parte of Israel? My soule die yͤ death of yͤ righteous, and my ende be as the ende of these.
23:11 The saide Balac vnto Balaam: What doest thou vnto me? I caused to set yͤ for to curse myne enemies, & beholde, thou blessest the.
23:12 He answered & saide: Must I not kepe & speake yͭ, which the LORDE putteth in to me mouth?
23:13 Balac saide vnto him: Come wͭ me yet vnto another place, frō whence thou mayest se yͤ vttemost parte of them, & not se them all, and curse me them there.
23:14 And he toke him vp to a fre place, eue vnto the toppe of Pisga, & buylded seuen altares, and offered on euery altare a bullocke & a ramme.
23:15 And he sayde vnto Balac: Stonde so by thy burntoffrynge, whyle I go yonder.
23:16 And the LORDE mett Balaam, & put the worde in his mouth, & sayde: Go agayne vnto Balac, & saye on this wyse.
23:17 And whan he came to him agayne, beholde, he stode by his burntofferynge with the prynces of the Moabites. And Balac sayde vnto him: What hath the LORDE sayde?
23:18 And he toke vp his parable, & sayde: Ryse vp Balac & heare, marke my testimony wͭ thine eares thou sonne of Ziphor.
23:19 God is not a man yͭ he shulde lye, ner a mans childe yͭ eny thinge shulde repente him. Shulde he saye and not do? Shulde he speake & not make it good?
23:20 Beholde, I am brought hither to blesse, I blesse, & can not go backe there fro.
23:21 There is no weerynesse sene in Iacob, nether eny laboure in Israel. The LORDE his God is wͭ him, & the kynges trompet is amoge the.
23:22 God hath brought the out of Egipte, his stregth is as of an Vnicorne.
23:23 For there is no Sorcerye in Iacob, & no Soyth sayer in Israel. Whan the tyme cometh, it shalbe saide vnto Iacob, & to Israel, what God doth.
23:24 Beholde, the people shall ryse vp as a Lyonesse, & heue vp him self as a Lyon. He shal not lye downe, tyll he eate of the pray, and drynke the bloude of the slayne.
23:25 Then sayde Balac vnto Balaam: Thou shalt nether curse him ner blesse him.
23:26 Balaam answered, & sayde vnto Balac: Haue I not tolde the: All yͭ the LORDE speaketh, yͭ must I do?
23:27 Balac saide vnto him: Oh come, I wil brynge yͤ to another place, yf it maye happly please God, yͭ thou mayest curse the there.
23:28 And he brought him vp to the toppe of mount Peor, yͭ boweth towarde the wyldernesse.
23:29 And Balaam sayde vnto Balac: Buylde me here seuen altares, and prouyde me seuen bullockes and seuen rammes.
23:30 Balac dyd as Balaam sayde, and offered on euery altare a bullocke vnd a ramme.
24:1 Now whan Balaam sawe yͭ it pleased the LORDE , that he shulde blesse Israel, he wente not (as he dyd before) to seke witches, but set his face straight towarde the wyldernesse,
24:2 lifte vp his eyes, and sawe Israel, how they laye acordinge to their trybes, and the sprete of God came vpon him,
24:3 and he toke vp his parable, and sayde: Thus sayeth Balaam the sonne of Beor:
24:4 Thus sayeth the man whose eyes are opened: Thus sayeth he which heareth the wordes of God, which sawe the vision of yͤ Allmightie: which fell downe, and his eyes were opened.
24:5 How goodly are thy tetes O Iacob, and thy habitacions O Israel?
24:6 Euen as the brode valleys, as the gardens by the waters syde, as yͤ tentes which the LORDE hath plated, & as the Ceder trees vpon yͤ water.
24:7 The water shal flowe out of his boket, and his sede shalbe a greate water. His kynge shalbe hyer then Agag, & his kyngdome shalbe exalted.
24:8 God hath broughte hi out of Egipte, his strength is as of an vnicorne. He shal eate vp the Heithen his enemies, and grynde their bones to poulder, and shute thorow them with his arowes.
24:9 He hath layed him downe as a Lyon and as a Lyonesse. Who wyll rayse him vp? Blessed be he, yͭ blesseth the: and cursed, that curseth the.
24:10 The was Balac furious i wrath against Balaam, & smote his hades together, & sayde vnto him: I haue called the, yͭ thou shuldest curse myne enemies, and beholde, thou hast blessed the now thre tymes:
24:11 & now get the hece to yͥ place. I thoughte yͭ I wolde promote the vnto honoure, but the LORDE hath kepte the backe from that worshipe.
24:12 Balaam answered him: Tolde not I thy messaungers (whom thou sendedst vnto me) & sayde:
24:13 Yf Balac wolde geue me his house full of syluer and golde, yet coulde I not go beyonde the worde of the LORDE , to do either euell or good after myne awne hert: but what yͤ LORDE speaketh, that must I speake also.
24:14 And now beholde, for so moch as I go to my people, come therfore, I wyll shewe the what this people shal do vnto yͥ people after this tyme.
24:15 And he toke vp his parable, and sayde: Thus sayeth Balaam the sonne of Beor: Thus sayeth yͤ man, whose eyes are opened:
24:16 Thus sayeth he which heareth the wordes of God, & yͭ hath the knowlege of yͤ hyest, eue he yͭ sawe yͤ visio of yͤ Allmightie, & fell downe, & his eyes were opened:
24:17 I shal se him, but not now: I shal beholde him, but not nie at hade. There shal a starre come out of Iacob, & a cepter shall come vp out of Israel, and shal smyte yͤ rulers of the Moabites, and ouercome all the children of Seth.
24:18 Edom shalbe his possession, and Seir shalbe his enemies possessio, but Israel shal do manfully.
24:19 Out of Iacob shal come he yͭ hath dominion, and shall destroye the remnaunt of the cities.
24:20 And wha he sawe yͤ Amalechites, he toke vp his parable, & sayde: Amalec the first amoge the Heithe, but at yͤ last thou shalt perishe vtterly.
24:21 And whan he sawe the Kenites, he toke vp his parable, & sayde: Stroge is yͥ dwellinge, and on a rocke hast thou put thy nest,
24:22 neuertheles thou shalt be a burninge vnto Kain, tyll Assur take yͤ presoner.
24:23 And he toke vp his parable agayne, & sayde: Alas, who shal lyue, wha God doth this?
24:24 And shippes out of Citim shall subdue Assur and Eber. He himself also shal perishe vtterly.
24:25 And Balaam gat him vp, and departed, and came againe vnto his place, and Balac wente his waye also.
25:1 And Israel dwelt in Sittim, and the people beganne to commytte whordome with the doughters of the Moabites,
25:2 which called the people vnto the sacrifice of their goddes. And the people ate and worshipped their goddes,
25:3 and Israel submytted him self vnto Baal Peor. Then the wrath of the LORDE waxed whote vpon Israel,
25:4 and he sayde vnto Moses: Take all the rulers of the people, and hange them vp vnto the LORDE agaynst yͤ Sonne, that the terryble wrath of the LORDE maye be turned awaye from Israel.
25:5 And Moses sayde vnto the iudges of Israel: Euery man slaye his captayne, that haue submytted them selues vnto Baal Peor.
25:6 And beholde, one of the childrē of Israel wete in against his brethre, & ioyned him self to a Madianitish woma, in yͤ sighte of Moses & of the whole cogregacion of yͤ childrē of Israel, which weped before the dore of yͤ Tabernacle of wytnesse.
25:7 Whan Phineas yͤ sonne of Eleasar the sonne of Aaron yͤ prest sawe yͭ, he rose vp out of the congregacion, & toke a swerde in his hande,
25:8 & wente after the man of Israel in to the whore house, & thrust the thorow, both the man of Israel and the woman, eue thorow the bely of her. Then ceassed the plage from the children of Israel,
25:9 and there were slayne in the plage foure and twentye thousande.
25:10 And yͤ LORDE spake vnto Moses, & saide:
25:11 Phineas the sonne of Eleasar the sonne of Aaron yͤ prest, hath turned my wrath awaie from the childrē of Israel thorow his gelousy for my sake amonge them, yͭ I shulde not cosume the childrē of Israel in my gelousy.
25:12 Wherfore saye: beholde, I geue him my couenaunt of peace,
25:13 and he shal haue it, & his sede after him, eue the couenaunt of an euerlastinge presthode, because he was gelous for his Gods sake, and made an attonement for the children of Israel.
25:14 The man of Israel that was slayne with the Madianitish woman, was called Simri the sonne of Salu, a captayne of the house of the father of the Simeonites.
25:15 The Madianitish woman also that was slayne, was called Coßbi, yͤ doughter of Zur, which was a ruler of the people of a kynred amonge the Madianites.
25:16 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
25:17 Vexe the Madianites, & smyte them,
25:18 for they haue vexed you with their wyles, wherby they haue bigyled you thorow Peor, and thorow their sister Coßbi the doughter of a captayne of yͤ Madianites, which was slayne in the daye of the plage, for Peors sake, and the plage came after.
26:1 And whan the giltye bloude was shed, the LORDE sayde vnto Moses & vnto Eleasar yͤ sonne of Aaron yͤ prest:
26:2 Take the summe of the whole cogregacion of the childrē of Israel from twentye yeare & aboue, after their fathers houses, all yͭ are able to go forth to the warre in Israel.
26:3 And Moses & Eleasar the prest spake vnto them (in the felde of the Moabites besyde Iordane ouer against Iericho)
26:4 namely vnto all the that were twentye yeare olde & aboue, as the LORDE comaunded Moses. And these are yͤ childrē of Israel, that came out of Egipte.
26:5 Ruben yͤ first borne sonne of Israel. The childree of Ruben were, Hanoch: of whom cometh yͤ kynred of the Hanochites. Pallu: of whom cometh the kynred of the Palluites.
26:6 Hesron: of whom cometh the kynred of the Hesronites. Carmi: of whom cometh yͤ kynred of the Carmites.
26:7 These are the kynreds of the Rubenites. And the nombre of the was, thre & fourtye thousande, seuen hundreth & thirtye.
26:8 But the childrē of Pallu were, Eliab.
26:9 And the children of Eliab were Nemuel, and Dathan and Abiram. This is yͭ Dathan & Abira, those famous men in the congregacion, which stode vp agaynst Moses and Aaron in the copany of Corah, whan they rose vp agaynst the LORDE ,
26:10 & the earth opened hir mouth, and swalowed the wͭ Corah, wha the copany dyed, what tyme as the fyre consumed two hundreth & fiftye men, & they became a toke.
26:11 But the children of Corah dyed not.
26:12 The childrē of Simeon in their kynreds were, Nemuel: of who cometh the kynred of yͤ Nemuelites. Iamin: of whom cometh yͤ kynred of yͤ Iaminites. Iachin: of who cometh the kynred of the Iachinites.
26:13 Sera: of whom cometh yͤ kynred of the Sarahites. Saul: of whom commeth the kynred of the Saulites.
26:14 These are the kynreds of the Simeonites, two & xx.M. & two hundreth.
26:15 The childrē of Gad in their kynreds were Zephon: of whom cometh yͤ kynred of yͤ Zephonites. Haggi: of whom cometh the kynred of yͤ Haggites. Suni: of whom cometh yͤ kynred of yͤ Sunites.
26:16 Aseni: of whom commeth yͤ kynred of the Asenites. Eri: of who cometh the kynred of the Erinites.
26:17 Arod: of whom cometh the kynred of the Arodites. Ariel: of whom cometh yͤ kynred of yͤ Arielites.
26:18 These are the children of Gad, in their nombre fourtye thousande and fyue C.
26:19 The children of Iuda, Er & Onan, which both dyed in the lade of Canaan.
26:20 But yͤ children of Iuda in their kyndreds, were, Sela: of whom cometh the kynred of the Selanites. Phares: of whom cometh the kynred of the Pharesites. Serah: of whom cometh yͤ kynred of yͤ Serahites.
26:21 The childrē of Phares, were Hesron: of whom commeth the kynred of the Hesronites. Hamul: of whom cometh the kynred of the Hamulites.
26:22 These are the kynreds of Iuda, in their nombre, sixe and seuentye thousande and fyue hundreth.
26:23 The children of Isachar in their kynreds were, Thola: of whom commeth the kynred of the Tholaites. Phuua: of whom cometh yͤ kynred of the Phuuaites.
26:24 Iasub: of who commeth the kynred of the Iasubites. Simron: of whom cometh the kynred of yͤ Simronites.
26:25 These are the kynreds of Isachar, in nombre, foure and thre score thousande, & thre hundreth.
26:26 The children of Zabulon in their kynreds were, Sered, of whom cometh the kynred of yͤ Seredites. Elon: of whom cometh yͤ kynred of yͤ Elonites. Iahelel: of whom cometh the kynred of the Iahelites.
26:27 These are yͤ kynreds of Zabulon, in their nobre, thre score thousande, and fyue hundreth.
26:28 The children of Ioseph in their kynreds were, Manasses & Ephraim.
26:29 The childrē of Manasse were, Machir: of whom commeth the kynred of the Machirites. And Machir begat Gilead: of whom cometh yͤ kynred of yͤ Gileadites.
26:30 And these are yͤ childrē of Gilead, Hieser: of whom cometh the kynred of yͤ Hieserites. Helech: of whom cometh yͤ kynred of the Helechites.
26:31 Asriel: of whom commeth the kynred of the Asrielites. Siche: of whom cometh the kynred of yͤ Sichemites.
26:32 Simida: of who cometh yͤ kynred of yͤ Simidites. Hepher: of whom cometh yͤ kynred of yͤ Hepherites.
26:33 And Zelaphead was yͤ sonne of Hepher, & had no sonnes, but doughters, whose names were: Mahela, Noa, Hagla, Milca and Thyrza.
26:34 These are the kynreds of Manasse, in their nombre, two and fiftye thousande and seuen hundreth.
26:35 The childrē of Ephraim in their kynreds were, Suthelah: of whom cometh yͤ kynred of the Suthelahites. Becher: of whom cometh yͤ kynred of the Becherites. Thahan: of whom cometh the kynred of the Thahanites.
26:36 The childrē of Suthelah were, Eran: of whom cometh yͤ kynred of yͤ Eranites.
26:37 These are yͤ kynreds of the childrē of Ephraim, in their nombre, two and thirtie thousande and fyue hundreth. These are the childrē of Ioseph in their kynreds.
26:38 The childrē of Ben Iamin in their kynreds were, Bela: of whom cometh yͤ kynred of the Belaites. Aßbel: of whom cometh yͤ kynred of the Aßbelites. Ahiram: of whom cometh the kynred of the Ahiramites.
26:39 Supham: of whom cometh the kynred of the Suphamites. Hupham: of whom commeth the kynred of the Huphamites.
26:40 And the childrē of Bela were, Ard & Naeman: of whom commeth the kynred of the Aroites & Naemanites.
26:41 These are the children of Ben Iamin in their kynreds, in nombre, fyue & fourtye thousande and sixe hundreth.
26:42 The childrē of Dan in their kynreds were, Suham: of whom cometh the childrē of yͤ Suhamites. These are yͤ kynreds of Dan in their generacions,
26:43 & they were all together in nombre, foure and thre score thousande & foure hundreth.
26:44 The childrē of Asser in their kynreds were, Iemna: of whom cometh the kynred of the Iemnites. Iesui: of whom commeth the kynred of the Iesuites. Bria: of whom cometh the kynred of the Bryites.
26:45 And yͤ childrē of Bria, were Heber: of whom commeth the kynred of the Hebrites. Melchiel: of who commeth the kynred of the Melchielites.
26:46 And the doughter of Asser was called Sarah.
26:47 These are the kynreds of the children of Asser, in their nombre, thre and fiftye thousande and foure hundreth.
26:48 The childrē of Nephtali in their kynreds were, Iaheziel: of whom cometh the kynred of the Iahezielites Guni: of whom cometh yͤ kynred of yͤ Gunites.
26:49 Iezer: of whom cometh yͤ kynred of the Iezerites. Sillem: of who cometh yͤ kynred of yͤ Sillemites.
26:50 These are yͤ kynreds of the childrē of Nephtali in their generacions, in their nombre, fyue & fourtye thousande and foure hundreth.
26:51 This is the summe of the children of Israel: sixe hundreth thousande, a thousande seuen hundreth and thirtye.
26:52 And yͤ LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
26:53 Vnto these shalt thou deuyde the lode to enheritaunce, acordinge to the nombre of yͤ names.
26:54 To many shalt thou geue the more enheritaunce, and to few the lesse, vnto euery one shall be geue acordinge to their nombre:
26:55 yet shall the londe be deuyded by lott. Acordinge to yͤ names of the trybes of their fathers shal they enheret it:
26:56 for after the lot shalt thou deuyde their enheritaunce, both betwixte many and fewe.
26:57 And this is the summe of the Leuites in their kynreds. Gerson: of whom cometh the kynred of the Gersonites. Rahath: of who cometh the kynred of the Rahathites. Merari: of whom cometh yͤ kynred of yͤ Merarites.
26:58 These are yͤ kynreds of Leui, the kynred of yͤ Libnites, yͤ kynred of yͤ Hebronites, yͤ kynred of the Mahelites, yͤ kynred of the Musites, the kynred of the Corahites. Rahath begat Amram.
26:59 And Amrams wife was called Iochebed a doughter of Leui, which was borne him in Egipte: And vnto Amram she bare Aaron & Moses, & Miriam their sister.
26:60 And vnto Aaron were borne Nadab, Abihu. Eleasar & Ithamar.
26:61 As for Nadab & Abihu, they dyed, whan they offred straunge fyre before yͤ LORDE .
26:62 And the summe of the was thre & twentye thousande, all males frō fyue monethes & aboue. For they were not nombred amoge the childrē of Israel, for there was no enheritaunce geuen the amonge the children of Israel.
26:63 This is yͤ summe of yͤ childrē of Israel, who Moses & Eleasar the prest nombred in the felde of the Moabites besyde Iordane ouer agaynst Iericho:
26:64 Amonge whom there was not one of the summe of those children of Israel, whom Moses & Aaron the prest nombred in the wildernesse of Sinai.
26:65 For yͤ LORDE sayde vnto the, yͭ they shulde dye in the wildernesse. And there was not one of them lefte, saue Caleb the sonne of Iephune and Iosua the sonne of Nun.
27:1 And the doughters of Zelaphead yͤ sonne of Hepher yͤ sonne of Gilead, the sonne of Machir, the sonne of Manasse, amonge the kynreds of Manasse the sonne Ioseph (whose names were, Mahela, Noa, Hagla, Milca, & Thirza)
27:2 came & stode before Moses & Eleasar the prest, & before the rulers & the whole congregacion, euen before the dore of yͤ Tabernacle of witnesse, & sayde:
27:3 Oure father is deed in the wildernesse, & was not in the company of them yͭ rose vp agaynst yͤ LORDE in the cogregacion of Corah: but dyed in his awne synne, and had no sonnes.
27:4 Wherfore shulde or fathers name perishe then amonge his kynred, though he haue no sonne? Geue vs a possession also amonge oure fathers brethren.
27:5 Moses broughte their cause before yͤ LORDE .
27:6 And the LORDE sayde vnto him:
27:7 The doughters of Zelaphead haue spoke righte. Thou shalt geue the a possession to inheret amonge their fathers brethren, & shalt turne their fathers enheritaunce vnto them.
27:8 And saye vnto the childrē of Israel: Whan a mā dyeth & hath no sonne, ye shall turne his enheritaunce vnto his doughter.
27:9 Yf he haue no doughter, ye shal geue it vnto his brethre.
27:10 Yf he haue no brethren, ye shal geue it vnto his fathers brethren.
27:11 Yf he haue no fathers brethre, ye shal geue it vnto his nexte kynßfolke which beloge vnto him in his kynred, yͭ they maye possesse it. This shalbe an ordynaunce and a perpetuall lawe vnto the children of Israel, as the LORDE comaunded Moses.
27:12 And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Get the vp in to this mount Abarim, & beholde the lode, which I shal geue vnto the childrē of Israel.
27:13 And whan thou hast sene it, thou shalt be gathered vnto yͥ people as Aaron yͥ brother was gathered:
27:14 for ye were dishobedient vnto my worde in the wyldernesse of Zin, in yͤ strife of the cogregacion, whan ye shulde haue sanctified me, thorow the water before them. This is the water of stryfe at Cades in the wyldernesse of Zin.
27:15 And Moses spake vnto the LORDE & sayde:
27:16 O let the LORDE God of the spretes of all flesh set a mā ouer the congregacion,
27:17 which maye go in & out before them, & to leade the out & in, yͭ the congregacion of the LORDE be not as the shepe without a shepherde.
27:18 And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Take vnto the Iosua the sonne of Nun, which is a man in whom is the sprete, and put thine handes vpon him,
27:19 & set him before Eleasar the prest, and before the whole congregacion, and geue him a charge in their sighte,
27:20 & beutyfye him with thy bewty, that the whole congregacion of the children of Israel maye be obediet vnto him.
27:21 And he shal stonde before Eleasar the prest, which shall axe councell for him after the maner of the lighte, before the LORDE . At the mouth of him shall both he and all the children of Israel with him, and the whole congregacion go in and out.
27:22 Moses dyd as the LORDE comaunded him, & toke Iosua, and set him before Eleasar the prest, and before all the congregacion,
27:23 and layed his handes vpon him, and gaue him a charge, as the LORDE sayde vnto Moses.
28:1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
28:2 Comaunde yͤ childrē of Israel, & saye vnto the: The offerynge of my bred which is my offerynge of the swete sauoure, shal yͤ kepe in his due season, that yͤ maie offre vnto me.
28:3 And saye vnto the: These are the offerynges that ye shal offre vnto the LORDE : Lambes of a yeare olde which are without blemysh, euerydaye two for a daylie burntofferynge:
28:4 the one lambe in the mornynge, the other at euen.
28:5 And therto a tenth deale of an Epha of fyne floure for a meatofferynge, myngled with beate oyle of the fourth parte of an Hin,
28:6 this is a daylie burntofferynge, which yͤ offred vpon mout Sinai, for a swete sauoure of a sacrifice unto the LORDE :
28:7 And the drynkofferinge of the same, yͤ fourth parte of an Hin to a lambe, and this shalbe poured in the Sanctuary for a gifte vnto the LORDE .
28:8 The other lambe shalt thou prepare at eue (like as the meatofferynge in the mornynge) & the drynkofferinge therof, for a sacrifice of a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE .
28:9 On the Sabbath daye, two lambes of a yeare olde without blemysh, & two teth deales of fyne floure myngled with oyle, & the drynk offerynge therof.
28:10 This is the burntofferynge of euery Sabbath, besyde the daylie burntofferynge, wͭ his drynkofferinge.
28:11 And on the first daye of youre monethes ye shal offre a burntofferynge vnto yͤ LORDE : two yonge bullockes, a ramme, seue lambes of a yeare olde without blemysh,
28:12 and all waye thre tenth deales of fyne floure for a meatofferynge myngled with oyle vnto euery bullocke: two tenth deales of fyne floure for a meatofferynge myngled with oyle vnto the ramme:
28:13 and a tenth deale of fyne floure for a meatofferynge myngled with oyle vnto euery lambe. This is the burntofferynge of a swete sauoure, a sacrifice unto yͤ LORDE .
28:14 And their drynkofferynges shalbe, half an Hin of wyne vnto euery bullocke, the thirde parte of an Hin to the ramme, yͤ fourth parte of an Hin to euery lambe. This is the burntofferynge of euery moneth in the yeare.
28:15 There shalbe offered an he goate also for a synofferynge vnto the LORDE , to the daylie burntofferynge with his drynkofferynge.
28:16 And on the fourtene daye of the first moneth is the Easter vnto the LORDE ,
28:17 and on the fyftene daye of the same moneth is the feast. Seue dayes shal vnleuended bred be eaten.
28:18 The first daye shalbe an holy conuocacion: No seruile worke shal yͤ do therin,
28:19 and ye shal offre a burntofferynge vnto the LORDE : two yonge bullockes, one ramme, seuen labes of a yeare olde without blemysh,
28:20 with their meatofferynge: thre tenth deales of fyne floure myngled with oile to either bullocke, and two tenth deales to the ramme,
28:21 and one tenth deale to euery lambe amonge the seuen lambes.
28:22 And an he goate for a synofferinge, to make an attonement for you.
28:23 And these shal yͤ offre in the mornynge, besydes the burntofferynge, which is a daylie burntofferynge.
28:24 After this maner shal yͤ offre yͤ bred euery daye seuen dayes longe for an offeringe of a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE , to the daylie burntofferynge, and drynkofferynge also.
28:25 And the seuenth daye shal be called an holy conuocacion with you: no seruyle worke shal yͤ do therin.
28:26 And the daye of the fyrst frutes (wha yͤ offre the meatofferynge of the moneth vnto yͤ LORDE in youre wekes) shal be an holy couocacion also:
28:27 No worke of bondage shal yͤ do therin. And ye shal offre a burntofferynge for a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE : two yonge bullockes, a ramme, seuen lambes of a yeare olde,
28:28 with their meatofferynges: thre tenth deales of fyne floure myngled with oyle to euery bullocke, two tenth deales to the ramme,
28:29 and one tent deale to euery lambe of the seuen lambes.
28:30 And an he goate to make an attonement for you.
28:31 This shal yͤ do, besydes yͤ daylie burntofferynge with his meatofferynge and his drynkofferinge. Without blemysh shal they be all.
29:1 And the fyrst daye of the seuenth moneth shal be with you an holy couocacion. No seruyle worke shal yͤ do therin, for it is the daye of youre trompet blowinge.
29:2 And ye shal offre a burntofferinge for a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE : a yonge bullocke, a ramme, seuen lambes of a yeare olde without blemish.
29:3 And their meatofferinges: thre tenth deales of fyne floure myngled wͭ oyle to the bullocke, two tenth deales to yͤ rame,
29:4 and one tenth deale vnto euery lambe of yͤ seuen labes.
29:5 An he goate also for a synofferinge, to make an attonemrnt for you,
29:6 beside yͤ burntofferinge of yͤ moneth & his meatofferinge, & besyde yͤ daylie burntofferynge wͭ his meatofferynge & with their drink offeringes, acordinge to the maner of the for a swete sauor. This is a sacrifice vnto the LORDE .
29:7 The tenth daye of this seuenth moneth shalbe an holy conuocacion wͭ you also, and ye shal humble youre soules, and do no seruyle worke therin,
29:8 but offre a burntofferynge vnto the LORDE for a swete sauoure: a yonge bullocke, a ramme, seuen lambes of a yeare olde without blemish,
29:9 wͭ their meatofferinges: thre tenth deales of fine floure myngled with oyle to the bullocke, two tenth deales to the rame,
29:10 & one tenth deale to euery one of the seuen lambes.
29:11 And an he goate for a synofferinge, besyde the synofferinge of the attonemet, and yͤ daylie burntofferige wͭ his meatofferinge, and wͭ his drynkofferinge.
29:12 The fiftenth daye of the seuenth moneth shal be an holy couocacion wͭ you, no seruyle worke shal yͤ do therin, and seue dayes shal yͤ kepe a feast vnto the LORDE .
29:13 And ye shal offre the LORDE a burntofferinge for a sacrifice of a swete sauoure vnto the LORDE : thirtene yonge bullockes, two rames, fourtene labes of a yeare olde without blemish,
29:14 wͭ their meatofferynges: thre tenth deales of fyne floure myngled with oyle to euery one of the thirtene bullockes, two tenth deales to ether of the two rammes,
29:15 & one tenth deale to euery one of the fourtene lambes:
29:16 & an he goate for a synofferynge, besyde yͤ daylye burntofferynge with his meatofferynge and his drynkofferynge.
29:17 On the seconde daye, twolue yonge bullockes, two rammes, fourtene lambes of a yeare olde without blemysh
29:18 wͭ their meatoffeges and drinkofferynges to the bullockes, to the rammes and to the lambes in yͤ nombre of them acordinge to the maner.
29:19 And an he goate for a synofferinge, besyde the daylie burntofferinge with his meatofferinge, and with his drynkofferynge.
29:20 On the thirde daye, eleuen bullockes, two rammes, fourtene lambes of a yeare olde wͭ out blemish,
29:21 with their meatofferinges, and drynkofferinges to the bullockes, to the rammes and to the lambes in their nombre acordinge to the maner.
29:22 And an he goate for a synofferynge, besyde the daylye burntofferinge with his meatofferynge and his drynkofferynge.
29:23 On the fourth daye, ten bullockes, two rames, fourtene lambes of a yeare olde without blemysh,
29:24 with their meatofferynges and drynkofferynges, to the bullockes, to the rames, and to the lambes in their nombre acordynge to the maner.
29:25 And an he goate for a synofferynge, besyde the daylie burntofferinge wͭ his meatofferinge, & his drynk offeringe.
29:26 On the fifth daye, nyne bullockes, two rames, fourtene lambes of a yeare olde without blemysh,
29:27 with their meatofferynges & drinkofferynges to the bullockes, to yͤ rammes & to the lambes in their nombre acordynge to the maner.
29:28 And an he goate for a synofferinge, besyde yͤ daylie burntofferynge with his meatofferynge and his drynkofferynge.
29:29 On the sixte daye, eight bullockes, two rames, fourtene labes of a yeare olde without blemysh,
29:30 with their meatofferynges & drynkofferinges to the bullockes, to the rammes, & to the lambes in their nombre acordinge to the maner.
29:31 And an he goate for a synofferinge, beside the daylie burntofferinge with his meatofferynge and his drynkofferynge.
29:32 On the seuenth daye, seuen bullockes, two rammes, fourtene lambes of a yeare olde wͭ out blemysh,
29:33 with their meatofferinges and drynkofferinges to the bullockes, to the rammes, and to the lambes in their nombre acordynge to the maner.
29:34 And an he goate for a synofferynge, besyde the daylie burntofferinge with his meatofferynge and his drynkofferynge.
29:35 On the eight daye shal yͤ gather the people together, No seruyle worke shall yͤ do therin.
29:36 And ye shall offre a burntofferynge for a sacrifice of a swete sauoure vnto yͤ LORDE . A bullocke, a ramme, seue lambes of a yeare olde without blemysh,
29:37 with their meatofferynges and drynkofferynges to yͤ bullocke to the ramme, and to the lambes in their nobre acordinge to the maner.
29:38 And an he goate for a synofferinge, besyde the daylie burntofferynge with his meatofferynge & his drinkofferynge.
29:39 These thinges shal yͤ do vnto yͤ LORDE in youre feastes, besyde that yͤ vowe and geue of a frewyll for burntofferinges, meatofferynges, drynkofferynges and healthofferinges.
29:40 And Moses tolde the children of Israel all that the LORDE commaunded him.
30:1 And Moses spake vnto the rulers of the trybes of the children of Israel, and saide: This is that the LORDE hath commauded:
30:2 Yf eny man make a vowe vnto the LORDE , or sweare an ooth, so that he binde his soule, he shal not breake his worde, but do all that is proceaded out of his mouth.
30:3 Yf a damsell make a vowe vnto yͤ LORDE , and bynde hirself, whyle she is in hir fathers house, and vnmaried,
30:4 and hir vowe or bonde that she maketh ouer hir soule, commeth to hir fathers eares, & he holde his peace therto, the all hir vowes & bondes yͭ she hath boude hir self withall ouer hir soule, shal stode in effecte.
30:5 But yf hir father forbyd her yͤ same daye that he heareth it, the shal no vowe ner bonde that she hath bounde hir self withall ouer hir soule, be of vayle. And the LORDE shalbe mercifull vnto her, for so moch as hir father forbad her.
30:6 Yf she haue an hußbande, & hath a vowe vpon her, or yf she haue letten go out of hir lippes a bode ouer hir soule,
30:7 & hir hußbande heare it, & holdeth his peace ther at, the same daye that he heareth it, then hir vowe & bonde wherwith she hath boude hir self ouer hir soule, shal stonde in effecte.
30:8 But yf hir hußbande forbyd her the same daye that he heareth it, the is the vowe lowse yͭ she hath vpo hir, & the bonde also that she hath letten go out of hir lippes ouer hir soule, and the LORDE shalbe gracious vnto her.
30:9 The vowe of a wyddowe, & of her yͭ is deuorced, all yͭ she byndeth hir self withall ouer hir soule, shal stonde in effecte vpo her.
30:10 Yf she vowe in hir hußbades house, or binde hir self wͭ an ooth ouer hir soule,
30:11 & hir husbande heare it, & holde his peace therto, and forbyddeth it not, the shal all yͤ same vowe, & all yͭ she hath boude hir self wͭ all ouer hir soule, stode i effecte.
30:12 But yf hir hußbade disanulle it, yͤ same daye yͭ he heareth it, the is it of no value yͭ is proceaded out of hir lippes, which she hath vowed or boude ouer hir soule: for hir hußbade hath made it lowse, & the LORDE shalbe gracious vnto her.
30:13 And all vowes & oothes yͭ bynde to humble yͤ soule, maie hir hußbade stablish or breake, thus:
30:14 Yf he holde his peace therto frō one daie to another, then stablisheth he all hir vowes & bondes, yͭ she hath vpon her, because he helde his peace, the same daye yͭ he herde the.
30:15 But yf he disanulle the after yͭ he hath herde the, then shal he take awaie hir mißdede.
30:16 These are the statutes yͭ the LORDE comaunded Moses betwene a man & his wife, & betwene the father & his doughter, whyle she is yet a damsell in hir fathers house.
31:1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
31:2 Auenge the childrē of Israel of the Madianites, yͭ thou mayest afterwarde be gathered vnto yͥ people.
31:3 The spake Moses vnto the people, & sayde: Harnesse some men amonge you to the warre agaynst the Madianites (yͭ they maye auenge yͤ LORDE vpon the Madianites)
31:4 out of euery trybe a thousande, yͭ out of euery trybe of Israel ye maye sende some to the battayll.
31:5 And from amonge the thousandes of Israel they toke one thousande out of euery tribe, euen twolue thousande prepared vnto the battayll.
31:6 And Moses sent them with Phineas the sonne of Eleasar the prest in to the battayll, and the holy vessels and yͤ trompettes to blowe in his hande.
31:7 And they fought agaynst yͤ Madianites as yͤ LORDE comaunded Moses, & slew all yͤ males,
31:8 & the kynge of the Madianites slew they also amonge the other that were slaine namely, Eui, Rekem, Zur, Hur and Reba, the fyue kynges of the Madianites. And they slew Balaam the sonne of Beor wͭ the swerde.
31:9 And yͤ children of Israel toke the wemen of the Madianites presoners, & their childrē: all their catell, all their substaunce, and all their goodes spoiled they,
31:10 and all their cities of their dwellynges & castels burnt they wͭ fyre.
31:11 And they toke all yͤ spoyles, & all yͭ they coulde catche men & catell,
31:12 and brought the vnto Moses & to Eleasar the prest, and to yͤ congregacion of the children of Israel (namely yͤ presoners, and the catell yͭ were take, and the good that was spoyled) in to the hoost in the felde of the Moabites, which lyeth besyde Iordane ouer against Iericho.
31:13 And Moses and Eleasar the prest and all the captaines of yͤ congregacion, wete out of the hoost to mete the.
31:14 And Moses was angrie at the officers of the hoost, which were captaynes ouer thousandes and hudreds, yͭ came from the battayll,
31:15 and sayde vnto the: Haue yͤ saued all yͤ wemen alyue?
31:16 Beholde, haue not they (thorow Balaams busynes) turned awaye yͤ childrē of Israel to synne agaynst the LORDE vpo Peor, & their came a plage ouer the whole cogregacion of yͤ LORDE ?
31:17 Now therfore slaie all the males amoge yͤ childrē, & kyll all yͤ wemen yͭ haue knowne men & lyen wͭ them.
31:18 But all the wemen chidren yͭ haue knowne no me ner lien wͭ them, kepe those alyue for youre selues.
31:19 And lodge yͤ without the hoost, all yͭ haue slayne any man, or touched the slayne, that on the thirde and seuenth daie yͤ maie purifie yor selues and those whom ye haue taken presoners.
31:20 And all the clothes, and all stuffe that is made of ?kynnes, and all maner furres, and all vessels of wod shal yͤ purifie.
31:21 And Eleasar the prest sayde vnto yͤ captaynes of the hoost, yͭ wente out to the battayll: This is the statute of the lawe, which the LORDE comaunded Moses:
31:22 Golde, siluer brasse, yron, tynne and leed,
31:23 and all that suffreth the fyre, shall yͤ cause to go thorow the fyre, and clense it, that it maye be purified with yͤ sprencklynge water. As for all soch as suffreth not the fyre, ye shal cause it to go thorow yͤ water,
31:24 and shal washe yor clothes vpon the seuenth daye. and the shall ye be cleane. After that shall yͤ come in to the hooste.
31:25 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
31:26 Take the summe of the spoyle of those that are taken, both of wemen and of catell, thou and Eleasar the prest, and the chefe fathers of the congregacion,
31:27 and geue yͤ halfe vnto those that toke the warre vpon them, and wente out to the battayll, and yͤ other halfe to the congregacion.
31:28 And of the men of warre that wente out to yͤ battayll, thou shalt heue vnto the LORDE one soule of fyue hundreth, both of the wemen, oxen, Asses and shepe:
31:29 Of their halfe parte shalt thou take it, and geue it vnto Eleasar the prest for an Heueofferynge vnto the LORDE .
31:30 But of the children of Israels halfe parte, thou shalt take one heade of fyftie, both of the wemen, oxen, Asses and shepe, and of all the catell, and shalt geue them vnto the Leuites, that wayte vpon the habitacio of the LORDE .
31:31 And Moses and Eleasar the prest dyd as the LORDE commaunded Moses.
31:32 And the spoyle and praye which yͤ men of warre had spoyled, was sixe hundreth thousande and fyue and seuentye thousande shepe,
31:33 two and seuentye thousande oxen,
31:34 one & thre score thousande Asses:
31:35 and the wemen yͭ had knowne no men ner lyen wͭ them, were two and thirtie thousande soules.
31:36 And the halfe parte which belonged vnto them that wente to the warre, was in nobre thre hundreth thousande, and seuen and thirtie thousande, and fyue hundreth shepe:
31:37 of the which the LORDE had sixe hundreth, & fyue and seuentye shepe.
31:38 Item sixe and thirtie thousande oxen: wherof the LORDE had two & seuentye.
31:39 Item thirtie thousande fyue hundreth Asses: wherof the LORDE had one & thre score.
31:40 Item sixtene thousande soules of wemen: wherof the LORDE had two & thirtie.
31:41 And Moses gaue this heueofferynge of the LORDE vnto Eleasar the prest, as the LORDE commaunded him.
31:42 As for the other halfe which Moses deuyded vnto the children of Israel frō thorne; men of warre
31:43 (namely yͤ halfe that fell to the congregacion) it was also thre hundreth thousande, and seuen and thyrtie thousande, & fyue hundreth shepe,
31:44 sixe and thirtie thousande oxen,
31:45 thyrtie thousande & fyue hundreth Asses,
31:46 and sixtene thousande wemen soules.
31:47 And of this halfe of the childrē of Israel toke Moses one of euery fyftie, both of the catell & of the wemen, and gaue them vnto yͤ Leuites, that waited vpon the habitacio of the LORDE , as yͤ LORDE comauded Moses.
31:48 And the captaynes ouer yͤ thousandes of the hoost, namely they that were ouer thousandes and ouer hundreds, came forth vnto Moses, and sayde vnto him:
31:49 Thy seruauntes haue taken yͤ summe of yͤ men of warre, that were vnder oure hande, and there lacked not one:
31:50 therfore brynge we a present vnto the LORDE , what euery one hath foude of Iewels of golde, cheynes, bracelettes, rynges, earinges, and taches, that oure soules maye be reconcyled before the LORDE .
31:51 And Moses and Eleasar yͤ prest toke of them yͤ golde of all maner ornamentes.
31:52 And all the golde of the Heueofferynge that they Heued vnto the LORDE , was sixtene thousande and seuen hundreth and fyftye Sycles, of the captaynes ouer thousandes and hundreds.
31:53 For loke what euery one had spoyled, that was his awne.
31:54 And Moses wͭ Eleasar the prest toke the golde of the captaynes ouer thousandes and hundreds, and broughte it in to the Tabernacle of witnesse for a remembraunce of the children of Israel before the LORDE .
32:1 The children of Ruben and the children of Gad had an exceadinge greate multitude of catell, and sawe the londe of Iaeser and Gilead yͭ it was a mete place for catell,
32:2 and came & spake vnto Moses and to Eleasar the prest, and to the captaynes of the congregacion:
32:3 The londe of Atroth, Dibon, Iaesar, Nimra, Heßbo, Eleale, Seban, Nebo, & Beon,
32:4 which the LORDE smote before yͤ congregacion of Israel, is a mete londe for catell, and thy seruauntes haue many catell.
32:5 And they sayde morouer: Yf we haue founde fauoure before the, the geue thy seruauntes this londe in possession, and we wyl not go ouer Iordane.
32:6 Moses sayde vnto them: Youre brethren shall go to the warre, and wyll yͤ tary here?
32:7 Wherfore turne yͤ ye hertes of the children of Israel, that they shulde not go ouer in to the londe that the LORDE shall geue them?
32:8 Thus dyd youre fathers also, whan I sent them out from Cades Bernea, to spye out yͤ londe.
32:9 And whan they were come vp to yͤ ryuer of Escol, and sawe yͤ londe, they turned the hertes of the children of Israel, so yͭ they wolde not into the londe which yͤ LORDE wolde haue geuen them.
32:10 And the LORDE was wroth at the same tyme, & sware, & sayde:
32:11 These men yͭ are come out of Egipte, from twetye yeare olde & aboue, shall not se the lande which I sware vnto Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, because they haue not wholy folowed me:
32:12 saue Caleb yͤ sonne of Iephune yͤ Kenisite, & Iosua yͤ sonne of Nun: for they haue wholy folowed yͤ LORDE .
32:13 So the LORDE was wroth wͭ Israel, & let the wander in the wildernesse fourtye yeares, tyll all yͤ generacion yͭ had done euell before the LORDE , was consumed.
32:14 And beholde, yͤ are rysen vp in youre fathers steade, to increase the nombre of synfull men, & to augmente yet the wrath & indignacion of the LORDE agaynst Israel.
32:15 For yf yͤ turne you backe from folowinge him, he shal yet leaue them more in the wildernes, & so shal yͤ destroye all this people.
32:16 Then stepte they to him, & sayde: we wyll but buylde shepefoldes here for oure shepe & catell, & cities for or children:
32:17 As for oure selues, we will go ready armed before the children of Israel, tyll we haue broughte them vnto their place: Oure childrē shal remayne in the fenced cities, because of yͤ indwellers of the londe.
32:18 We will not turne home agayne, tyll the children of Israel haue taken euery one his inheritaunce in possession:
32:19 for we wyll not inheret with them beyonde Iordane: for or inheritaunce shal fall vnto vs vpon this syde Iordane Eastwarde.
32:20 Moses sayde vnto them: Yf ye wil do this, that yͤ wil harnesse youre selues to the warre before the LORDE ,
32:21 then go ouer Iordane before the LORDE , who so euer is harnessed amonge you, tyll he haue dryuen out his enemies before his face,
32:22 and vntyll the londe be subdued before the LORDE , then shal yͤ returne, & be vngiltye before the LORDE , and before Israel, & so shal ye haue this londe in possession before the LORDE .
32:23 But if yͤ will not do so, beholde, ye shal offende agaynst the LORDE , and be sure, that youre synne shal fynde you out.
32:24 Buylde cities now therfore for youre children, and shepefoldes and stalles for youre shepe and catell, and do as ye haue spoken.
32:25 The childrē of Gad, & the childrē of Ruben sayde vnto Moses: Thy seruauntes shal do as my lorde hath comaunded.
32:26 Oure children, wyues, substaunce, & all or catell, shal be in yͤ cities of Gilead.
32:27 But we yͥ seruauntes will go all harnessed for the warre vnto battaill before yͤ LORDE , as my lorde hath saide.
32:28 The Moses comaunded Eleasar yͤ prest & Iosua the sonne of Nun, & the chefe fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel,
32:29 and saide vnto them: Yf the children of Gad & the children of Ruben go ouer Iordane wͭ you, all prepared to fight before the LORDE , & whan the londe is subdued vnto you, the geue them the londe of Gilead in possessio.
32:30 But yf they go not ouer with you in harnes, then shal they inheret wͭ you in yͤ lode of Canaa.
32:31 The children of Gad and the children of Rube answered, & sayde: As yͤ LORDE hath spoken vnto yͥ seruauntes, so wyll we do:
32:32 we wil go harnessed before the LORDE in to yͤ lade of Canaan, and possesse oure enheritaunce on this syde Iordane.
32:33 So Moses gaue vnto yͤ children of Gad and to the children of Ruben, and to the halfe trybe of Manasse the sonne of Ioseph, yͤ kyngdome of Sihon kynge of the Amorites and the kyngdome of Og the kynge of Basan, the londe with the cities therof in all yͤ coastes of yͤ countre rounde aboute.
32:34 The yͤ children of Gad buylded Dibon, Araroth, Aroer, Atroth,
32:35 Sophan, Iaeser, & Iegabeha,
32:36 Bethnimra, & Betharan, stronge fenced cities, & shepe foldes.
32:37 The children of Ruben buylded Heßbo, Eleale, Kiriathaim,
32:38 Nebo, Baal Meon, & turned yͤ names, & Sibamas & gaue names vnto yͤ cities which they buylded.
32:39 And yͤ children of Machir the sonne of Manasse wente in to Gilead, & conquered it, and droue out the Amorites yͭ were therin.
32:40 Then Moses gaue Gilead vnto Machir yͤ sonne of Manasse, & he dwelt therin.
32:41 Iair yͤ sonne of Manasse, wente and conquered the vyllagies therof, and called them Hauoth Iair.
32:42 Nobah wente, and coquered Kenath, with the townes belonginge therto, and called it Nobah, after his awne name.
33:1 These are yͤ iourneys of the childrē of Israel, which wete out of yͤ lande of Egipte acordinge to their armies, by Moses & Aaro.
33:2 And Moses wrote their goige out as they iourneyed, after yͤ comaundement of yͤ LORDE . And these (namely) are the yourneyes of their outgoinge.
33:3 They departed frō Raemses vpon yͤ fiftene daye of the first moneth (euen the morow after the Easter) thorow an hye hande, so that all the Egipcians sawe,
33:4 and buried then their firstborne, whom the LORDE had slayne amonge them: for the LORDE executed iudgment also vpon their goddes.
33:5 When they were departed from Raemses, they pitched in Sucoth. And frō Sucoth
33:6 they departed, & pitched their tentes in Etha, which lyeth in yͤ edge of yͤ wildernes.
33:7 Fro Etham they departed, and abode in the valley of Hiroth (which lyeth towarde Baal Zephon) & pitched ouer agaynst Migdol.
33:8 From Hyroth they daparted, & wente in thorow yͤ middes of the see into yͤ wyldernes, and wente thre dayes yourney in the wildernes of Etham, & pitched in Marah.
33:9 From Marah they departed, and came vnto Elim, where there were twolue welles of water, and seuentye palme trees, & and there they pitched.
33:10 From Elim they departed, and pitched by the reed see.
33:11 From yͤ reed see they departed, and pitched in the wildernesse of Sin.
33:12 From the wildernes of Sin they departed, and pitched in Daphka.
33:13 Fro Daphka they departed, and pitched in Alus.
33:14 From Alus they departed, and pitched in Raphidim, where the people had no water to drynke.
33:15 From Raphidim they departed and pitched in the wildernes of Sinai.
33:16 From Sinai they departed, and pitched at the Lustgraues.
33:17 Fro the Lustgraues they departed, and pitched in Hazeroth.
33:18 From Hazeroth they departed, & pitched in Rithma.
33:19 From Rithma they departed, and pitched in Rimon Parez.
33:20 From Rimon Parez they departed, and pitched in Libna.
33:21 From Libna they departed, and pitched in Rissa.
33:22 Fro Rissa they departed, & pitched in Kehelatha.
33:23 Fro Kehelatha they departed, & pitched in mout Sapher.
33:24 From mout Sapher they departed, & pitched in Harada.
33:25 Fro Harada they departed, pitched in Makeheloth.
33:26 From Makeheloth they departed, & pitched in Tahath.
33:27 From Tahath they departed, and pitched in Tharah.
33:28 From Tharah they departed, and pitched in Mitka.
33:29 From Mitka they departed, and pitched in Hasmona.
33:30 From Hasmona they departed, and pitched in Mosseroth.
33:31 From Mosseroth they departed, and pitched in Bne Iaekon.
33:32 From Bne Iaekon they departed, and pitched in Horgadgad.
33:33 From Horgadgad they departed, & pitched in Iathbatha.
33:34 From Iathbatha they departed, and pitched in Abrona.
33:35 From Abrona they departed, and pitched in Ezeon gaber.
33:36 From Ezeon gaber they departed, and pitched in yͤ wildernes of Zin, which is Cades.
33:37 From Cades they departed, and pitched at mount Hor, on the border of the londe of Edom.
33:38 Then Aaron the prest wente vp vnto mount Hor (acordynge to the commaundement of the LORDE ) and died there in the fourtyeth yeare, after yͭ the children of Israel departed out of the londe of Egipte, in the first daie of the fifte moneth,
33:39 wha he was an hundreth and thre and twentye yeare olde.
33:40 And Arad the kynge of the Cananites, which dwelt in the south countre of Canaa herde yͭ the children of Israel came.
33:41 And from mount Hor they departed, and pitched in Zalmona.
33:42 From Zalmona they departed, and pitched in Phimon.
33:43 From Phimon they departed, and pitched in Oboth.
33:44 From Oboth they departed, and pitched in Igim by Abarim vpon the border of the lode of yͤ Moabites.
33:45 From Igim they departed, and pitched in Dibon Gad.
33:46 From Dibo Gad they departed, and pitched in Almon Diblathama.
33:47 Fro Almon Diblathama they departed and pitched in the mountaynes of Abarim ouer agaynst Nebo.
33:48 From the moutaynes of Abarim they departed, and pitched in yͤ felde of the Moabites besyde Iordane ouer agaynst Iericho.
33:49 Fro Beth haiesmoth vnto the playne of Sitim laye they in the felde of the Moabites.
33:50 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses in the felde of the Moabites, by Iordane ouer agaynst Iericho, and sayde:
33:51 Speake to the children of Israel, and saie vnto them: Wha yͤ are come ouer Iordane in the lande of Canaan,
33:52 ye shal dryue out all the inhabiters before youre face, and plucke downe all their pilers, and all their ymages of metall, and destroye all their hye places:
33:53 that ye maye so take the londe in possession and dwell therin For I haue geue you the londe to enioye it.
33:54 And the londe shall yͤ deuyde out by lott amonge youre kynreds. Vnto those that are many, shall yͤ deuyde the more: And vnto them that are fewe, shall yͤ deuyde the lesse. Euen as the lott falleth there vnto euery one, so shal he haue it, acordinge to the trybes of their fathers.
33:55 But yf yͤ wyll not dryue out the inhabiters of yͤ lande before yor face, then they who yͤ suffre to remayne, shall be come thornes in youre eyes, and dartes in youre sydes, & shall vexe you in the londe where yͤ dwell.
33:56 Then wil it come to passe, that I shal do vnto you euen as I thought to do vnto them.
34:1 Annd the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
34:2 Commaunde the childrē of Israel, and saye vnto them: Whan yͤ come into the londe of Canaan, the londe yͭ falleth to youre inheritaunce, shall haue hir borders in the londe of Canaan.
34:3 The South quarter shall begynne at the wyldernesse of Zin by Edom, so that youre South quarter be from the edge of the Salt see, which lyeth towarde the South:
34:4 and that yͤ same quarter fet a compasse from the South vp to Acrabim, & go thorow Zimma: & that his outgoinge be from the South vnto Cades Barnea, & reache vnto Hazor Adar, and go thorow Azmona,
34:5 and stretch out from Azmona vnto the ryuer of Egipte, and that the ende therof be at the greate see.
34:6 But the West quarter shal be this: namely the greate see, let yͭ be youre border towarde the West.
34:7 The North quarter shalbe this: ye shall compasse from the greate see vnto mount Hor.
34:8 And frō mount Hor ye shall compasse tyll a man come vnto Hemath, that the outgoynge therof be the coast of Zedada,
34:9 and that the border of the same go out vnto Siphron, and that the goynge out of it be at Hazor Enan. Let this be youre North quarter.
34:10 And youre East quarter shall yͤ copasse from Hazor Enan vnto Sephan,
34:11 & let the coaste go downe from Sephan and Ribla on the East syde of Ain. The let it go downe, & reache vnto the syde of the see of Chinereth East warde,
34:12 and come downe by Iordane, so yͭ the goynge out of it be the Salt see. Let this be youre londe with the borders therof rounde aboute.
34:13 And Moses commaunded the children of Israel, and sayde: This is youre londe that ye shal deuyde out amonge you by lott, which the LORDE hath commaunded to geue vnto the nyne trybes, and to the halfe trybe.
34:14 For the trybe of the children of Ruben after their fathers house, and the trybe of the children of Gad acordinge to their fathers house, and the half trybe of Manasse haue receaued their porcion.
34:15 hus the two trybes and the halfe trybe haue their enheritaunce allready, on this syde Iordane, ouer agaynst Iericho, Eastwarde.
34:16 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses, and sayde:
34:17 These are yͤ names of the men, which shal deuyde the londe amonge you. Eleasar the prest, and Iosua the sonne of Nun.
34:18 And the captayne of euery trybe shal yͤ take, to deuyde the londe.
34:19 And these are the names of the men: Caleb the sonne of Iephune of the trybe of Iuda.
34:20 Semuel the sonne of Ammihud of the trybe of Simeon.
34:21 Elidad yͤ sonne of Cislon of the trybe of Ben Iamin
34:22 Buki the sonne of Iagli of the trybe of the childrē of Dan.
34:23 Hamuel the sonne of Ephod, of
34:24 Elizaphan the sonne of Parnach, of the trybe of the childrē of Zabulon. the trybe of the children of Manasse amonge the children of Ioseph.
34:25 Remuel the sonne of Siphthan, of the trybe of the children of Ephraim.
34:26 Palthiel the sonne of Asan, of the trybe of the childrē of Isachar.
34:27 Abihud the sonne of Selomi, of yͤ trybe of the children of Asser.
34:28 Pedahel the sonne of Ammihud, of the trybe of the children of Nephtali.
34:29 These are they whom yͤ LORDE commaunded, that they shulde deuyde the inheritaunce vnto the children of Israel in the londe of Canaan.
35:1 And the LORDE spake vnto Moses in the felde of the Moabites by Iordane ouer agaynst Iericho, & sayde:
35:2 Commaunde the childrē of Israel, that they geue vnto yͤ Leuites of the inheritauce of their possession, cities to dwell in. The suburbes also aboute the cities shal yͤ geue vnto the Leuites,
35:3 that they maye dwell in the cities, and in the suburbes to haue their catell, and substaunce, and all their beestes.
35:4 The suburbes which yͤ geue vnto yͤ Leuites, shal reache frō the wall of yͤ cite outwarde, a M. cubites rounde aboute.
35:5 Thus ye shal measure without the cite on yͤ East syde, two thousande cubites: & on yͤ South syde, two thousande cubites: & on yͤ West syde, two thousande cubites: & on yͤ North syde, two thousande cubites, so yͭ the cite be in the myddes. This shal be their suburbes.
35:6 And amoge the cities which ye shal geue vnto the Leuites, ye shall geue the sixe fre cities, that he which comitteth a slaughter, maie flye thither. Besydes the same ye shal geue the yet two & fourtie cities:
35:7 so yͭ all yͤ cities which yͤ geue vnto yͤ Leuites, be eight & fourtye wͭ their suburbes.
35:8 And of yͤ same ye shal geue the more, from the yͭ haue moch in possession amonge the children of Israel: & the lesse from them, that haue litle in possession. Euery one (acordinge to his enheritaunce that is deuyded vnto him) shall geue of his cities vnto the Leuites.
35:9 And the LORDE talked wͭ Moses & saide:
35:10 Speake to the childrē of Israel, & saye vnto the: Whan yͤ come ouer Iordane into yͤ londe of Canaan,
35:11 ye shall chose out cities to be fre cities, yͭ who so comytteth slaughter vnawarres, maye flye thither.
35:12 And soch fre cities shalbe amonge you because of the auenger of bloude, that he which hath commytted slaughter, dye not, tyll he stonde in iudgment before the congregacion.
35:13 And of these cities which ye shall geue, there shalbe sixe fre cities.
35:14 Thre shal yͤ geue on this side Iordane, and thre in the londe of Canaan.
35:15 These are the sixe fre cities, both for yͤ childrē of Israel & for the straungers, & for soch as dwell amoge you, yͭ who so euer hath slaine eny soule vnawarres, maye flye thither.
35:16 He yͭ smyteth eny man wͭ an yron weapo, yͭ he dye, the same is a murthurer, & shal dye the death.
35:17 Yf he cast at him wͭ a stone (wherwith enyman maye be slayne) yͭ he dye therof, then is he a murthurer, and shal dye the death.
35:18 Yf he smyte him wͭ an handweapon of wodd (wherwith eny man maie be slayne) that he dye, then is he a murthurer, and shal dye the death.
35:19 The auenger of bloude shal bringe yͤ murthurer to death. Whan he fyndeth him, he shal slaye him.
35:20 Yf he thrust at him of hate, or cast ought at him with laienge of wayte, or smyte him of envye wͭ his hande, that he dye,
35:21 then shal he that hath slayne him, dye the death: for he is a murthurer. The auenger of bloude shal brynge him to death, as soone as he fyndeth him.
35:22 But yf he thrust him by chaunce, & not of envye, or hurle ought at him without eny layenge of wayte,
35:23 or cast at him with a stone (wherof a man maye dye, & sawe it not) so yͭ he dye, & is not his enemie, nether thought him eny euell,
35:24 the shal the cogregacion iudge betwene him yͭ hath comytted yͤ slaughter, and the auenger of bloude, in soch cases.
35:25 And the cogregacion shal delyuer the deedslayer from the hande of yͤ auenger of bloude, & shal let him come agayne to the fre cite, whither he was fled: & there shall he abyde vnto yͤ death of the hye prest, which was anoynted with yͤ holy oyle.
35:26 But yf the deedsleyer go out of the borders of his fre cite, that he was fled vnto,
35:27 and the auenger of bloude fynde him without yͤ borders of his fre cite, and kyll him, he shal not be gyltye of bloude.
35:28 For he shulde haue bydden in his fre cite vntyll yͤ death of the hye prest, & after yͤ hye prestes death to come agayne vnto the londe of his enheritaunce.
35:29 This shalbe a statute of the lawe vnto you amoge youre posterities in all youre dwellinges.
35:30 The deed slayer shal be slayne at yͤ mouth of witnesses. One witnesse shal not answere ouer a soule to death.
35:31 And ye shal receaue none attonement ouer the soule of the deedslayer (for he is giltye of death) but he shal dye the death.
35:32 And ye shal receaue none attonement of him, which is fled to the fre cite, yͭ he shulde come agayne to dwell in the londe, tyll the hye prest dye.
35:33 And defyle not yͤ ye londe wherin yͤ dwell. For who so is giltye of bloude, defyleth the londe: and the londe can not be reconcyled from the bloude that is shed therin, but onely thorow the bloude of him that shed it.
35:34 Defyle not yͤ the londe that yͤ dwell in, wherin I dwell also. For I am the LORDE , which dwell amoge yͤ children of Israel.
36:1 And yͤ chefe fathers of the kynred of the childrē of Gilead yͤ sonne of Machir (which was the sonne of Manasse of the kynred of the children of Ioseph) came forth, and spake before Moses, and before the captaynes amonge the chefe fathers of the children of Israel,
36:2 and saide: Syr, the LORDE hath commaunded, that ye shulde geue the londe by lott vnto the childrē of Israel to inheret. And thou my lorde hast commaunded thorow the LORDE , that the enheritaunce of or brother Zelaphead shulde be geue vnto his doughters.
36:3 Now yf eny men out of the trybes of Israel take them to wyues, then shal oure fathers enheritaunce be lesse: and as moch as they haue, shal come to yͤ enheritaunce of the trybe that they come vnto. Thus shal the lott of oure inheritaunce be mynished.
36:4 So whan the yeare of Iubilye commeth vnto the childrē of Israel, then shal their enheritaunce come to yͤ enheritaunce of the trybe, where they are. Thus shal oure fathers enheritaunce be mynished, as moch as they haue.
36:5 Moses charged the childrē of Israel (acordinge to the commaundement of the LORDE ) and sayde: The trybe of the children of Ioseph hath sayde righte.
36:6 This is it that yͤ LORDE commaundeth the doughters of Zelaphead, and sayeth: Let them mary as they like best, onely that they mary in yͤ kynred of the trybe of their father,
36:7 that the enheritaunce of the children of Israel fall not frō one trybe to another. For euery one amonge the children of Israel shall cleue to the enheritaunce of the trybe of his father:
36:8 & euery doughter that possesseth eny enheritaunce amonge the trybes of the children of Israel, shal be maryed vnto one of the kynred of the trybe of hir father: yͭ euery one amonge the children of Israel maye enioye his fathers enheritaunce,
36:9 and that the enheritaunce fall not from one trybe to another: but that euery one maye cleue to his awne enheritaunce amonge the trybes of the children of Israel.
36:10 As the LORDE comaunded Moses, eue so dyd yͤ doughters of yͤ Zelaphead,
36:11 Mahela, Thirza, Hagla, Milca & Noa & were maried vnto their fathers brothers sonnes,
36:12 of yͤ kynred of the children of Manasse the sonne of Ioseph. So their enheritauce remayned in the trybe of the kynred of their father.
36:13 These are the commaundemetes & lawes, which yͤ LORDE commaunded by Moses vnto the childrē of Israel, in the felde of the Moabites by Iordane ouer agaynst Iericho.