1:1 These are the wordes that Moses spake vnto all Israel on the other syde Iordane in the wildernesse, in the playne felde towarde the reed see, betwene Paran, Thophel, Laban, Hazeroth, and Disahab,
1:2 eleuen daies iourney from Horeb, by the waye of mount Seir vnto Cades Bernea.
1:3 And it fortuned the first daye of the eleuenth moneth in the fortieth yeare, that Moses spake vnto yͤ children of Israel acordinge vnto all as yͤ LORDE commaunded him,
1:4 after he had smytten Sihon yͤ kynge of the Amorites which dwelt at Hesbon: and Og the kynge of Basan, that dwelt at Astaroth, and at Edrei.
1:5 On the other syde Iordane in yͤ lande of the Moabites, beganne Moses to declare this lawe, and sayde:
1:6 The LORDE or God spake vnto vs vpon mount Horeb, & sayde: ye haue bene loge ynough vpon this mountayne,
1:7 turne you, & departe hence, that ye maye come to the mountaynes of the Amorites, and to all their neghbours in yͤ feldes, vpon mountaynes, and in the valleys towarde the South and towarde the see syde, of the lande of Canaan: and to mount Libanus, euen vnto the greate water Euphrates.
1:8 Beholde, I haue delyuered you the londe, go in, and take it in possession, which the LORDE sware vnto yor fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, that he wolde geue it vnto the, and their sede after them.
1:9 Then saide I vnto you at the same tyme: I am not able to beare you my self alone,
1:10 for the LORDE youre God hath increased you, so that this daye yͤ are as yͤ starres of heauen in multitude.
1:11 (The LORDE God of yor fathers make you yet many thousande tymes mo, & blesse you, as he hath promysed you.)
1:12 How can I alone beare soche cobraunce, & charge, & stryfe amoge you?
1:13 Prouyde here men of wysdome & vnderstondinge, soch as are knowne amonge youre trybes, the wil I set to be heades vnto you.
1:14 Then answered yͤ me, and sayde: It is a good thinge, that thou sayest thou wilt do.
1:15 Then toke I yͤ heades of youre trybes, wyse and famous me, and set them ouer you to be heades, ouer thousandes, ouer hundreds, ouer fiftye and ouer ten: and officers amonge youre trybes.
1:16 And I charged your iudges at yͤ same tyme, & sayde: Heare youre brethre, & iudge righteously betwene euery man and his brother, and the straunger.
1:17 ye shall knowe no personne in iudgment, but shall heare the small as well as the greate, and be afrayed of no man: for the Iudgment is Gods. But yf eny cause be to harde for you, let it be broughte vnto me, yͭ I maye heare it.
1:18 Thus commaunded I you at the same tyme, all yͭ ye shulde doo.
1:19 Then departed we from Horeb, and walked thorow the whole wyldernesse (which is greate and terryble as ye haue sene) by the waye to yͤ mountaynes of the Amorites, as the LORDE oure God commauded vs, and came vnto Cades Bernea.
1:20 Then sayde I vnto you: yͤ are come to yͤ mountaynes of yͤ Amorites, which the LORDE or God shal geue vs.
1:21 Beholde, there the londe before the, which the LORDE thy God hath geue vnto the: Go vp, & conquere it, as yͤ LORDE God of thy fathers hath sayde vnto the: feare not, and be not discoraged.
1:22 Then came ye all vnto me, and sayde: Let vs sende men before vs, to spye vs out the londe, and to brynge vs worde agayne, by what waye we shal go vp, and to what cities we shal come.
1:23 That pleased me well, and I toke twolue men from amonge you, of euery trybe one.
1:24 Which whan they were departed, and wente vp to hye countre, and came to the ryuer Escol, they spyed it out,
1:25 and toke of the frute of yͤ londe with the, and broughte it downe vnto vs, and broughte vs worde agayne, and sayde: It is a good londe, that the LORDE oure God hath geuen vs.
1:26 But yͤ wolde not go vp, and were dishobedient vnto the mouth of the LORDE youre God,
1:27 and murmured in youre tentes, and sayde: Because the LORDE hateth vs, therfore hath be broughte vs out of the londe of Egipte, to delyuer vs in to the handes of the Amorites, to destroye vs.
1:28 Whither shal we go vp? Oure brethren haue discoraged oure hertes, & saide: The people is greater & of hyer stature the we, yͤ cities are greate, & walled euen vp to heauen. Morouer we haue sene there the children of Enakim.
1:29 But I sayde vnto you: Feare not, and be not afrayed of them:
1:30 for the LORDE youre God goeth before you, and shall fighte for you, like as he dealte with you in Egipte before youre eyes,
1:31 and in the wyldernesse: where thou sawest, that the LORDE thy God bare the (euen as a man beareth his sonne) thorow out all the waye that ye haue walked, tyll yͤ came to this place.
1:32 And yet for all this ye haue not beleued on the LORDE youre God,
1:33 which wente before you, to searche you out a place, where ye shulde pitch youre tentes: by night in the fyre (to shewe you the waye, wherin ye shulde go) & on the daye tyme in the cloude.
1:34 Whan the LORDE herde yͤ voyce of yor wordes, he was wroth, and swore, and saide:
1:35 There shall none of this euell generacion se that good londe, which I sware to geue vnto youre fathers,
1:36 excepte Caleb the sonne of Iephune, he shal se it. And vnto him wyl I geue the londe that he hath trodde vpon, & to his children, because he hath perfectly folowed the LORDE .
1:37 The LORDE was angrye wͭ me also for youre sakes, and sayde: Thou also shalt not go in thither.
1:38 But Iosua yͤ sonne of Nun, which stondeth before the, he shal go in thither: Corage him, for he shal deuyde the enheritaunce out vnto Israel.
1:39 And youre childrē, of who yͤ sayde they shulde be a praye, and youre sonnes which this daie vnderstonde nether good ner bad, they shal go in thither, vnto them wil I geue it, and they shall enioye it.
1:40 But as for you, turne you, and take youre iourney to the wyldernesse, euen the waye to the reed see.
1:41 Then answered ye, & sayde vnto me: We haue synned agaynst yͤ LORDE , we wil go vp, and fighte, acordinge to all that the LORDE hath commaunded vs. Now whan yͤ had prepared yor selues, euery one in his harnesse, & were at the poynte to go vp to the mountaynes,
1:42 yͤ LORDE sayde vnto me: Speake vnto them, yͭ they go not vp, & that they fighte not (for I am not amoge you) that ye be not smytten before youre enemies.
1:43 Whan I tolde you this, yͤ wolde not heare, & were dishobedient vnto the worde of the LORDE , and were presumptuous, and wente vp to yͤ mountaines.
1:44 Then the Amorites that dwelt vpon the moutaynes, came out against you, and chaced you, as Bees do, and smote you at Seir, euen vnto Horma.
1:45 Now whan yͤ came againe, and wepte before the LORDE , he wolde not heare youre voyce, and enclyned not his eares vnto you.
1:46 So yͤ abode in Cades a longe season.
2:1 Then turned we vs, and toke oure iourney to the wildernesse, euen the waye to the reed see (as the LORDE sayde vnto me) and compassed mount Seir a longe season.
2:2 And yͤ LORDE saide vnto me:
2:3 ye haue copassed this mountayne now loge ynough, turne you Northwarde,
2:4 and commaude the people, and saye: ye shal go thorow yͤ coastes of youre brethren the children of Esau, which dwell at Seir: & they shal be afrayed of you. But take diligente hede to youre selues,
2:5 that yͤ prouoke them not: for I wyl not geue you one fote bredth of their londe. For mount Seir haue I geuen to the children of Esau to possesse.
2:6 ye shal bye meate of them for moneye, that ye maye eate. And water shal yͤ bye of them for money, that ye maye drynke.
2:7 For the LORDE thy God hath blessed the in all the workes of thy hondes. He hath considered thy iourneyes thorow this greate wyldernesse: and this fortye yeares hath the LORDE thy God bene with the, so that thou hast wanted nothinge.
2:8 Now whan we were departed from or brethren the children of Esau, that dwelt vpon mount Seir, by the waye of the felde from Elath & Ezeon gaber, we turned vs, & wente by the waye of the wyldernesse of yͤ Moabites.
2:9 Then sayde the LORDE vnto me: Thou shalt not vexe the Moabites, ner prouoke the vnto battayll, for I wil not geue the of their londe to possesse.
2:10 For Ar haue I geuen vnto the children of Lot in possession. The Emims dwelt there before tyme, which were a greate stronge people, & hye of stature, as the Enakims:
2:11 and were taken for giauntes, like as yͤ Enakims. And yͤ Moabites called them Emims.
2:12 The Horites also dwelt in Seir afore tyme, & yͤ children of Esau droue them out, and destroyed them before them, & dwelt in their steade: like as Israel dyd in yͤ lode of his possession, that the LORDE gaue them.
2:13 Get you vp now, & go ouer the ryuer Sared. And we wente ouer.
2:14 The tyme that we were goinge frō Cades Barnea, tyll we came ouer the ryuer Sared, was eight & thirtye yeares: tyll all the men of warre were waysted out of the hoost, as the LORDE sware vnto them.
2:15 The hande of the LORDE also was agaynst them, to destroye the out of the hoost, tyll they were consumed.
2:16 And whan all the men of warre were cosumed, so yͭ they were deed amonge the people,
2:17 the LORDE spake vnto me, and sayde:
2:18 This daie shalt thou go thorow the coast of yͤ Moabites by Ar,
2:19 & shalt come nye vnto yͤ children of Ammon, whom thou shalt not vexe ner prouoke. For I wyll not geue the of the lode of the childrē of Ammon to possesse,
2:20 for I haue geue it vnto the childrē of Lot in possession. It was take for a lode of giauntes also, & giauntes dwelt therin afore tyme. And yͤ Ammonites calle the Samsumims,
2:21 which was a people that was greate, many, and of hye stature, as the Enakims. And these yͤ LORDE destroyed before the, and let them possesse the same, so that they dwelt in their steade.
2:22 Like as he dyd with the childrē of Esau, which dwell vpo mount Seir, whan he destroyed the Horites before them: and let them possesse the same, so that they haue dwelt in their steade vnto this daye.
2:23 And the Caphthorims came out of Caphther, and destroyed yͤ Auims (yͭ dwelt at Hazarim euen vnto Gaza) & there dwelt they in their steade.
2:24 Get you vp now, and departe, and go ouer the ryuer Arnon. Beholde, I haue geue Sihon yͤ kynge of the Amorites at Hesbon into thy hande: go to and conquere, and prouoke him vnto battayll.
2:25 This daye wyll I begynne, so that all nacios vnder all the heauen, shal feare & drede ye: In so moch yͭ wha they heare of the, they shal tremble and quake for thy commynge.
2:26 Then sent I messaungers from yͤ wyldernesse of the East vnto Sihon the kynge at Hesbon wͭ peaceble wordes, and caused to saye vnto him:
2:27 I wil go but thorow yͥ lode, I wil go alonge by the hye waye, I wil nether turne to the righte hade ner to yͤ lefte.
2:28 Thou shalt sell me meate for money, that I maye eate: & water shalt thou sell me for money, that I maye drinke. Onely let me go thorow by fote,
2:29 as the children of Esau (which dwell at Seir) dyd vnto me: and the Moabites that dwell at Ar: vntyll I be come ouer Iordane, into the londe which the LORDE oure God shal geue vnto vs.
2:30 But Sihon the kynge at Hesbon wolde not let vs go by him: for the LORDE yͥ God herdened his mynde, & made his hert tough that he mighte delyuer him in to thy hades, as it is come to passe this daye.
2:31 And yͤ LORDE sayde vnto me: Beholde, I haue begonne to delyuer Sihon with his londe before the: go to and coquere, and possesse his lode.
2:32 And Siho came out wͭ all his people to fight agaynst vs at Iahza.
2:33 But the LORDE oure God delyuered him in to oure handes, so that we smote him with his children and all his people.
2:34 Then toke we all his cities at the same tyme, and destroyed vtterly all the cities, men, wemen, and children, and let none remayne:
2:35 saue the catell, which we caught to oure selues, & the spoyle of the cities that we wanne
2:36 from Aroer, which lyeth vpon the ryuer syde of Arnon, and from the cite on the ryuer vnto Gilead. There was no cite that coulde defende it selfe from vs: the LORDE oure God delyuered vs all before vs.
2:37 But vnto the londe of the children of Ammon thou camest not, ner to all that was on the ryuer Iabok, ner to yͤ cities vpo yͤ mountaines, ner vnto what so euer the LORDE oure God forbad vs.
3:1 And we turned vs, & wente vp yͤ waie vnto Basan. And Og yͤ kynge of Basan, came out wͭ all his people to fight agaynst vs at Edrei.
3:2 But the LORDE sayde vnto me: Be not afrayed of him, for I haue delyuered him & all his people wͭ his londe in to thy hande: & thou shalt do wͭ him, as thou dyddest wͭ Sihon kynge of yͤ Amorites, which dwelt at Hesbon.
3:3 Thus yͤ LORDE oure God delyuered Og yͤ kynge of Basan in to oure handes also with all his people: so that we smote him, tyll there was nothinge left ouer vnto him.
3:4 Then wanne we at the same tyme all his cities, & there was not one cite that we toke not from him, euen thre score cities, the whole region of Argob in the kyngdome of Og at Basan.
3:5 All these cities were stroge, with hye walles, gates, and barres, besyde many other vnwalled townes.
3:6 And we vtterly destroyed them, as we dyd with Sihon the kynge at Hesbon. All the cities destroyed we vtterly, and the men, wemen, and children.
3:7 But all the catell and spoyle of the cities caughte we for oureselues.
3:8 Thus toke we at the same tyme the londe out of the honde of the two kynges of the Amorites beyonde Iordane, from the ryuer of Arnon vnto mount Hermon
3:9 (which the Sidons call Sirion, but the Amorites call it Senir)
3:10 all the cities vpon the playne, and all Gilead, and all Basan vnto Salcha and Edrei, the cities of the kyngdome of Og at Basan.
3:11 For onely Og the kynge of Basan remayned ouer of the giauntes. Beholde, his yron bed is here at Rabath amonge the children of Ammon, nyne cubites longe, and foure cubites brode, after the cubite of a man.
3:12 This londe conquered we at the same tyme, from Aroer that lyeth on yͤ ryuer of Arnon. And vnto the Rubenites and Gaddites I gaue halfe mount Gilead with the cities therof:
3:13 but yͤ remnaunt of Gilead, & all Basan the kyngdome of Og, gaue I vnto the halfe trybe of Manasse. The whole region of Argob with all Basan was called the giauntes londe.
3:14 Iair the sonne of Manasse toke all the region of Argob vnto the coastes of Gessuri and Maachati, and Basan called he Hauoth Iair after his awne name, vnto this daye:
3:15 But vnto Machir I gaue Gilead.
3:16 And vnto the Rubenites and Gaddites I gaue one parte of Gilead vnto the ryuer of Arnon (at the myddes of the ryuer is yͤ border) and vnto the ryuer Iabok, which is the border of the children of Ammon:
3:17 the felde also, and Iordane (which is the coaste) from Cinereth vnto the see in the felde, namely, yͤ Salt see vnder mount Pisga, Eastwarde.
3:18 And I commaunded you at the same tyme, and sayde: The LORDE youre God hath geuen you this londe to take possession of it, Go youre waye forth therfore harnessed before youre brethren the children of Israel, all yͤ that be mete for the warre.
3:19 As for youre wyues, and children and catell (for I knowe that ye haue moch catell) let them remayne in youre cities, which I haue geuen you,
3:20 vntyl the LORDE youre God haue broughte yor brethren to rest also as well as you, that they also maye take possession of the londe, which yͤ LORDE youre God shal geue the beyonde Iordane: and then shal yͤ turne agayne to youre awne possession, which I haue geuen you.
3:21 And I warned Iosua at the same tyme, and sayde: Thine eyes haue sene all that the LORDE youre God hath done vnto these two kynges: eue so shal the LORDE do also vnto all yͤ kyngdomes whither thou goest.
3:22 Feare them not, for the LORDE youre God shal fighte for you.
3:23 And I besoughte the LORDE at the same tyme, & sayde:
3:24 O LORDE LORDE , thou hast begonne to shewe yͥ seruaunte thy greatnesse and thy mightie hade. For where is there a God in heauen & earth, that can do after yͥ workes and after thy power?
3:25 O let me go & se yͭ good londe beyonde Iordane, yͭ goodly hye countre, and Libanus.
3:26 But the LORDE was angrie with me for youre sakes, and wolde not heare me, but sayde vnto me: Be content, speake nomore to me of this matter.
3:27 Get the vp to the toppe of mount Pisga, and lifte vp thine eyes towarde the west, and towarde the north, and towarde the south, and towarde yͤ east: and beholde it with thine eies, for thou shalt not go ouer this Iordane.
3:28 And geue Iosua his charge, and corage him, and bolde him, for he shal go ouer Iordane before the people, and shal deuyde vnto them the londe, that thou shalt se.
3:29 And so we abode in the valley ouer agaynst the house of Peor.
4:1 And now herken Israel vnto the ordinauces and lawes, which I teach you that yͤ do them, yͭ ye maye lyue, and come in, & take possession of the londe, which the LORDE God of yor fathers geueth vnto you.
4:2 ye shal put nothinge vnto the worde which I commaunde you, nether do oughte there from, that ye maye kepe the commaundementes of the LORDE youre God, which I commaunde you.
4:3 Youre eyes haue sene what the LORDE hath done wͭ Baal Peor: all them that walked after Baal Peor, hath the LORDE thy God destroied from amonge you.
4:4 But yͤ that cleue vnto the LORDE yor God, are all aliue this daye.
4:5 Beholde I haue taughte you ordinauces and lawes, soch as the LORDE my God commaunded me, that ye shulde do eue so in the londe, into yͤ which ye shal come, to possesse it.
4:6 Kepe them now therfore and do them: for that is youre wysdome and vnderstondinge in the sight of all nacions, which wha they haue herde all these ordinaunces, shall saye: O what a wyse and vnderstondinge folke is this? and how excellent a people?
4:7 For where is there so excellent a nacion, that hath goddes so nye him, as the LORDE oure God is nye vnto vs, as oft as we call vpon him?
4:8 And where is there so excellent a nacion, that hath so righteous ordinaunces and lawes, as all this lawe which I laye before you this daye.
4:9 Take hede to thy selfe now, and kepe well thy soule, that thou forget not the thinges which thine eyes haue sene, and that they departe not out of thy hert all the dayes of thy life. And thou shalt teach them thy children and thy childers children,
4:10 the daye wha thou stodest before the LORDE thy God by mount Horeb, whan the LORDE sayde vnto me: Gather me the people together, that I maye make them heare my wordes, which they shal lerne, that they maye feare me all the dayes of their life vpon earth, & that they also maye teach their children.
4:11 And yͤ came nye, & stode vnder yͤ mount. But the mount burnt euen vnto the myddes of heauen, and there was darknesse, cloudes, and myst.
4:12 And yͤ LORDE spake vnto you out of the myddes of the fyre. The voyce of his wordes yͤ herde, neuerthelesse yͤ sawe no ymage, but herde the voyce onely.
4:13 And he declared vnto you his couenaunt, which he comaunded you to do, namely, the ten verses, and wrote them vpon two tables of stone.
4:14 And the LORDE commmauded me at the same time, to teach you ordinaunces & lawes that yͤ might do ther after in the londe, in to the which yͤ go to possesse it.
4:15 Kepe well youre soules therfore, for yͤ sawe no maner of ymage, in the daye wha the LORDE spake vnto you out of the fyre vpon mount Horeb, that yͤ destroye not youre selues,
4:16 and make you eny ymage, that is like a man, or woman,
4:17 or beest vpon earth, or fethered foule vnder the heauen,
4:18 or worme vpon the grounde, or fysshe in the water vnder yͤ earth:
4:19 yͭ thou lifte not vp thine eyes towarde heauen, and se the Sonne and the Moone & the starres, and the whole hoost of heauē, and be disceaused, and worsh ppe, and serue them: which the LORDE yͥ God hath made to serue all nacios vnder yͤ whole heauē.
4:20 But you hath the LORDE taken, and broughte you out of the yron fornace, namely, out of Egipte, that ye shulde be the people of his enheritaunce, as it is come to passe this daye.
4:21 And the LORDE was angrie with me for youre sakes, so that he sware, yͭ I shulde not go ouer Iordane, ner come in to that good londe, which the LORDE thy God shall geue the to enheritaunce.
4:22 As for me, I must dye in this londe, and shal not go ouer Iordane: But ye shal go ouer, and shall haue that good lode in possession.
4:23 Take hede therfore vnto youre selues, that yͤ forget not the conuenaunt of the LORDE youre God, and that yͤ make no ymages of eny maner of fashion as the LORDE thy God hath commaunded.
4:24 For the LORDE thy God is a consumynge fyre and a gelous God.
4:25 Yf whan ye haue begotten children, and childers children, and haue dwelt in the londe, yͤ marre youre selues, & make you ymages of eny maner of fashion, and do euell in the sighte of yͤ LORDE youre God, to prouoke him:
4:26 I call heauen and earth to recorde ouer you this daie, that ye shall shortly perishe frō the londe, in to yͤ which yͤ go ouer Iordane to possesse it. ye shal not dwell longe therin, but shal vtterly be destroyed.
4:27 And yͤ LORDE shal scater you amonge yͤ nacions and ye shall be left a small people amoge yͤ Heythen, whyther the LORDE shall brynge you.
4:28 There shal yͤ serue goddes, which are yͤ workes of mens handes, euen wodd & stone, which nether se ner heare, ner eate ner smell.
4:29 But yf thou seke the LORDE yͥ God there thou shalt finde him, yee yf thou seke him wͭ thy whole hert and with all yͥ soule.
4:30 Whan thou shalt be strately troubled, & wha all these thinges shal come vpo the in yͤ latter dayes, then shalt thou turne agayne to yͤ LORDE thy God, and be obedient vnto his voice.
4:31 For yͤ LORDE yͥ God is a mercifull God, he shal not forsake the, ner destroye the: nether shall he forget the couenaunt with thy fathers, which he sware vnto them.
4:32 For axe after the tymes past, which haue bene before the, sens the daie yͭ God created man vpon earth, from one ende of the heauē vnto the other, whether there was euer eny soch greate thinge done, or eny soch like herde,
4:33 that a people hath herde yͤ voyce of God speake out of the fyre (as thou hast herde) & yet liued.
4:34 Or whether God assaied to go & take vnto him a people out of yͤ myddes of a nacion, thorow tentacions, thorow tokens, thorow wonders, thorow warre, & thorow a mightie hande, & thorow a stretched out arme, and thorow greate visios, acordinge vnto all as the LORDE youre God hath done with you in Egipte before thine eyes.
4:35 Thou hast sene it yͭ thou mightest knowe that the LORDE is God, and that there is none other but he onely.
4:36 Out of heauen made he the to heare his voyce, that he might nurtoure the: and vpon earth he shewed the his greate feare, & out of yͤ fyre thou herdest his wordes:
4:37 because he loued yͥ fathers, & chose their sede after the. And he brought yͤ out wͭ his presence thorow his mightie power out of Egipte,
4:38 to dryue out (before the) nacions greater and mighter then thou, and to bringe yͤ in, yͭ he might geue the their lode to enheritaunce, as it is come to passe this daye.
4:39 Therfore shalt thou knowe this daye, & turne it into thine herte, that the LORDE is God aboue in heauen, and beneth vpon earth, and that there is no mo.
4:40 Kepe his ornaunces therfore and commaundementes, which I commaunde the this daie, the shal it go well wͭ the and thy children after the, so that thy life shal longe endure in yͤ londe, which the LORDE the God geueth the thy life longe.
4:41 Then separated Moses thre cities beyonde Iordane, towarde the Sonne rysinge,
4:42 yͭ he might flye thither, which had slayne his neghboure vnawarres, & hated him not afore tyme, yͭ he might flye in to one of these cities, & lyue.
4:43 Bezer in yͤ wildernes in the playne countre amonge the Rubenites, & Ramoth in Gilead amoge yͤ Gaddites, & Golan in Basan amonge the Manassites.
4:44 This is the lawe which Moses layed before the children of Israel:
4:45 these are the testimonies, ordinaunces, & lawes, yͭ Moses spake vnto the children of Israel (after they were departed out of Egipte)
4:46 beyonde Iordane in the valley ouer agaynst the house of Peor, in yͤ londe of Sion kynge of yͤ Amorites which dwelt at Hesbon, whom Moses & the childrē of Israel smote after they were departed out of Egipte,
4:47 & conquered his lade, & the londe of Og kynge of Basan, two kynges of the Amorites which were beyonde Iordane towarde the Sonne rysinge
4:48 frō Aroer (which lyeth vpon yͤ ryuer syde of Arnon) vnto mount Sion, which is Hermon:
4:49 & all yͤ playne felde beyonde Iordane eastwarde vnto the see in yͤ plaine felde vnder mount Pisga.
5:1 And Moses called all Israel, & sayde vnto the: Heare Israel the ordinaunces & lawes which I speake in yor cares this daye: lerne them, & kepe the so, that yͤ do therafter.
5:2 The LORDE oure God made a couenaunt with vs at Horeb:
5:3 he made not this couenaunt with oure fathers, but with vs, that are here this daie, and lyue euery one.
5:4 He talked with vs face to face out of the fyre vpo the mount.
5:5 I stode at the same tyme betwixte the LORDE and you, that I mighte shewe you the worde of the LORDE . For ye were afrayed of the fyre, & wente not vp to the mount, and he sayde:
5:6 I am the LORDE thy God, which haue brought the out of the londe of Egipte, out of the house of bondage.
5:7 Thou shalt haue none other goddes in my sighte.
5:8 Thou shalt make the no grauen ymage of eny maner of licknesse of the thinges yͭ are aboue in heauen, & beneth vpon earth, & in the water vnder the earth.
5:9 Thou shalt not honor them, ner serue the. For I yͤ LORDE yͥ God am a gelous God, vysitinge the synne of the fathers vpo the children, vnto the thirde and fourth generacion, of the yͭ hate me:
5:10 & shewe mercye vpon many thousandes yͭ loue me, and kepe my commaundementes.
5:11 Thou shalt not take yͤ name of yͤ LORDE yͥ God in vayne: For yͤ LORDE shal not holde him vngiltie, yͭ taketh his name in vaine.
5:12 Kepe yͤ Sabbath daye, that thou sanctifye it, as the LORDE thy God hath commauded the.
5:13 Sixe daies shalt thou laboure, and do all thy worke,
5:14 but vpon the seuenth daye it is the Sabbath of the LORDE thy God: No maner worke shalt thou do in it, thou, and thy sonne, and thy doughter, and thy seruaunt, and thy mayde, and thine oxe, and thine Asse, and all thy catell, and the straunger which is within thy gates, that thy seruaunt and thy mayde maye rest as well as thou.
5:15 For thou shalt remebre, that thou thyself also wast a seruaunte in the londe of Egipte, and how that the LORDE thy God brought the out from thence with a mightye hande, and a stretched out arme. Therfore hath the LORDE yͥ God commaunded yͤ to kepe the Sabbath daye.
5:16 Honoure thy father and thy mother, as the LORDE thy God hath commaunded the that thou mayest lyue longe vpo earth, and that it maye go well with the in the londe, which the LORDE thy God shall geue the.
5:17 Thou shalt not kyll.
5:18 Thou shalt not breake wedlocke.
5:19 Thou shalt not steale.
5:20 Thou shalt beare no false witnes against thy neghboure.
5:21 Thou shalt not lust after yͥ neghbours wyfe. Thou shalt not lust after thy neghbours house, londe, seruaunt, mayde, oxe, Asse, or what so euer he hath.
5:22 These are the wordes that the LORDE spake to all youre congregacion, vpon the mount out of the fyre of the cloude and darknesse with a greate voyce, and added nothinge therto. And he wrote them vpon two tables of stone, and delyuered the vnto me.
5:23 But whan yͤ herde the voyce out of the darknes, and sawe the mount burne wͭ fyre, yͤ came vnto me all yͤ rulers amonge youre trybes, and youre Elders
5:24 and sayde: Beholde, the LORDE oure God hath shewed vs his glory & his greatnes, and we haue herde his voyce out of yͤ fyre. This daye haue we sene, that God maie talke with a man, and he yet lyue.
5:25 And now wherfore shulde we dye, that this fire shulde cosume vs? Yf we shulde heare the voyce of the LORDE oure God eny more, we shulde dye.
5:26 For what is all fleshe, that it shulde be able to heare yͤ voyce of the lyuynge God speakynge out of yͤ fyre, as we haue done, and yet lyue?
5:27 Go thou and heare all yͭ the LORDE oure God sayeth, and tell us. All yͭ the LORDE sayeth vnto the, that will we heare and do.
5:28 Whan the LORDE herde the voyce of yor wordes which yͤ spake vnto me, he sayde vnto me: I haue herde yͤ voyce of the wordes of this people, which they haue spoken vnto ye. It is all good that they haue spoken.
5:29 But who shal geue them soch an herte, yͭ they maye feare me, & kepe all my comaundementes as longe as they lyue, yͭ it maye go well with them, and with their childrē for euer?
5:30 Go & saye vnto them: Get you in to yor tentes agayne.
5:31 But thou shalt stonde here before me, that I maye tell the all the commaundementes, and ordinauces and lawes which thou shalt teach them yͭ they maye do therafter in the lode, which I shal geue the to possesse.
5:32 Take hede now therfore that yͤ do, as the LORDE yor God hath commaunded you, and turne not asyde nether to yͤ right hande ner to the lefte:
5:33 but walke in all yͤ wayes which the LORDE youre God hath commaunded you, that yͤ maie lyue, and that it maie go well with you, and yͭ ye maye lyue longe in yͤ londe which ye shall haue in possession.
6:1 These are the commaundementes, ordinaunces & lawes which yͤ LORDE yor God hath comaunded, yͭ ye shulde lerne them, & do them, in the londe whyther yͤ go to possesse it,
6:2 that thou mayest feare the LORDE yͥ God, & kepe all his ordinauces & commaundementes, which I commaunde the, thou and yͥ children, and yͥ childers children all yͤ dayes of youre life, that ye maye lyue loge.
6:3 Thou shalt heare (O Israel) & take hede, yͭ thou do therafter, yͭ it maye go well with ye, & that thou mayest multiplye greatly, as yͤ LORDE God of yͥ fathers hath promysed the a londe yͭ floweth wͭ mylke & hony.
6:4 Heare O Israel, the LORDE oure God is one LORDE onely.
6:5 And thou shalt loue the LORDE thy God wͭ all thy hart, with all yͥ soule, & with all thy mighte.
6:6 And these wordes, which I commaude the this daie, shalt thou take to hert,
6:7 & shalt whet them vpon yͥ children, and shalt talke of them, wha thou syttest in thyne house, & whan thou walkest by the waie: whan thou lyest downe, & wha thou rysest vp.
6:8 And thou shalt bynde them for a signe vpon thine hande, and they shall be a token of remebraunce before thine eyes,
6:9 and thou shalt wryte them vpon the postes of thine house, and vpon thy gates.
6:10 Now whan yͤ LORDE yͥ God shal bringe the in to yͤ londe wherof he sware vnto yͥ fathers Abraham, Isaac, & Iacob, and shal geue the greate & goodly cities, which thou hast not buylded:
6:11 and houses full of all goodes, which thou hast not filled: & digged welles which thou hast not digged: and vynyardes and olyue trees, which thou hast not plated, so yͭ thou eatest and art full:
6:12 then bewarre that thou forget not the LORDE , which brought the out of the londe of Egipte, frō the house of bondage:
6:13 but thou shalt feare the LORDE thy God, and him onely shalt thou serue, and sweare by his name.
6:14 And ye shal not folowe the other goddes of the nacions which are aboute you
6:15 (for the LORDE thy God is a gelous God in the myddest of the) that the wrath of the LORDE thy God waxe not whote ouer the, and destroye the from the earth.
6:16 ye shal not tempte yͤ LORDE youre God, as yͤ tempted him at Massa:
6:17 but kepe the commaundementes of the LORDE yor God, and his witnesses, & his ordinaunces, which he hath commaunded the,
6:18 that thou mayest do that which is right & good in yͤ sighte of the LORDE , yͭ thou mayest prospere, and yͭ thou mayest go in & conquere that good londe, which the LORDE sware vnto yͥ fathers,
6:19 that he maye chace out all thine enemies before the, as the LORDE hath sayde.
6:20 Now whan thy sonne axeth the todaye or tomorow, and sayeth: What meane these witnesses, ordinaunces and lawes, that the LORDE oure God hath comaunded you?
6:21 Then shalt thou saye vnto thy sonne: We were Pharaos bondmen in Egipte, and the LORDE brought vs out of Egipte with a mightie hande,
6:22 and the LORDE did greate & euell tokens & wonders in Egipte vpo Pharao and all his house before oure eyes,
6:23 and brought vs from thence, to bringe vs in and to geue vs yͤ londe, that he sware vnto oure fathers.
6:24 And therfore hath the LORDE commaunded vs to do acordinge vnto all these ordinaunces, that we might feare the LORDE oure God, that we might prospere all the dayes of oure life, as it is come to passe this daye.
6:25 And it shall be righteousnes vnto vs before the LORDE oure God, yf we kepe and do all these commaundementes, as he hath commaunded vs.
7:1 Whan yͤ LORDE yͥ God bringeth the in to yͤ londe where in to thou shalt come to possesse it, & roteth out mā nacions before the: the Hethites, Girgosites Amorites, Cananites, Pheresites, Heuites, and Iebusites, seue nacions which are greater and mightier then thou:
7:2 and whan the LORDE thy God delyuereth the before ye, that thou mayest smyte them, thou shalt vtterly destroye them, so that thou make no couenaunt with them, nor shewe them fauoure, and shalt make no mariages with them:
7:3 ye shall not geue youre doughters vnto their sonnes, ner take their doughters vnto youre sonnes.
7:4 For they will make youre sonnes departe frō me, to serue straunge goddes: then shall the wrath of the LORDE waxe whote vpon you, and destroye you shortly.
7:5 But thus shal yͤ do with them: ye shal ouerthrowe their altares, breake downe their pilers, cut downe their groues, & burne their ymages with fyre.
7:6 For thou art an holy people vnto the LORDE thy God. The hath the LORDE thy God chosen, that thou shuldest be his awne peculier people, from amonge all nacions that are vpon the earth.
7:7 It was not because of the multitude of you aboue all nacions, that yͤ LORDE had lust vnto you and chose you. (For ye were the leest amonge all nacions)
7:8 but because he loued you, and that he mighte kepe the ooth, which he sware vnto youre fathers, he broughte you out with a mightie hade, and delyuered you frō the house of bondage, out of the hande of Pharao kynge of Egipte.
7:9 Thou shalt vnderstonde now therfore, that the LORDE thy God is a mightie and true God, which kepeth couenaunt and mercy vnto them that loue him, and kepe his comaundementes, euen thorow out a thousande generacions:
7:10 And rewardeth them that hate him, before his face, that he maye destroye them: and wyll not be longe in tarienge to rewarde them (before his face) that hate him.
7:11 Kepe now therfore the commaundementes, and ordinaunces and lawes, which I commaunde the this daye, that thou do therafter.
7:12 And yf ye shall heare these lawes and kepe them, and do therafter, then shal the LORDE thy God also kepe the couenaunt and mercy with the, which he sware vnto thy fathers:
7:13 and shal loue the, blesse the, and multiplye the: he shal blesse the frute of yͥ wombe, and the frute of thy londe, thy corne, wyne and oyle, the frute of thy kyne, and the frute of thy shepe, in the londe that he sware vnto yͥ fathers to geue the.
7:14 Blessed shalt thou be aboue all nacions, there shal no vnfrutefull personne be in the, ner amonge thy catell.
7:15 The LORDE shall put from the all maner of dysease, and shal brynge vpon the none of yͤ euell sicknesses of Egipte, which thou hast sene, but shall put them vpon all those that hate the.
7:16 Thou shalt brynge to naught all the nacions, which the LORDE thy God shal delyuer the. Thine eye shall not spare them, and their goddes shalt thou not serue, for that shalbe thy decaye.
7:17 Yf thou shalt saye in thyne hert: These nacios are mo then I, how ca I dryue them out?
7:18 Feare them not. Remembre what the LORDE thy God did vnto Pharao and to all the Egipcians,
7:19 thorow greate tentacions (which thou hast sene with thine eyes) thorow tokens and woders, thorow a mightie hande and a stretched out arme, wherwith the LORDE thy God brought the out. Euen so shall the LORDE thy God do vnto all yͤ nacions of who thou art afrayed.
7:20 The LORDE yͥ God also shal sende hornettes amonge them, vntyll they that remayne and hyde them selues from the, be destroyed.
7:21 Be not thou afrayed of them: for the LORDE thy God is in the myddes of the, euen the mightie and fearfull God.
7:22 He (euen the LORDE thy God) shall rote out the nacions before the by litle and litle. Thou canst not consume them at one time, yͭ the beestes of the felde increase not vpon the.
7:23 The LORDE thy God shall delyuer them before the, and shall smite them with a greate slaughter, tyll they be destroyed.
7:24 And he shal delyuer their kynges in to thine hade, and thou shalt destroie their names from vnder heauen. There shal noman make the resistaunce before the, vntyll thou haue destroyed them.
7:25 The ymages of their goddes shalt thou burne with fyre, & shalt not desyre the syluer or golde that is on them or to take it vnto the, that thou snare not thy self therin: for it is abhominacion vnto the LORDE yͥ God.
7:26 Therfore shalt thou not brynge the abhominacion in to thine house, yͭ thou be not damned as it is, but shalt vtterly defye it, and abhorre it, for it is damned.
8:1 All the commaundementes which I commaunde yͤ this daye, shal yͤ kepe, so yͭ yͤ do therafter, that ye maye lyue and multiplye, and come in, and take possession of the lande, which yͤ LORDE sware vnto youre fathers:
8:2 and thynke vpon all yͤ waie thorow the which the LORDE thy God hath led the this fortye yeares in the wyldernesse, that he mighte chasten the, and proue the, to wete whath were in thyne herte, whether thou woldest kepe his comaundemetes or no.
8:3 He chastened the, and let the hunger, and fed the with Manna (which thou and thy fathers knewe not) to make the knowe, that man lyueth not by bred onely, but by all that proceadeth out of the mouth of the LORDE .
8:4 Thy clothes are not waxed olde vpon the, and thy fete are not swolle this fortye yeare.
8:5 Vnderstonde therfore in thine hert, that as a man nurtoureth his sonne, euen so hath the LORDE thy God nurtured the.
8:6 Kepe therfore the commaundementes of the LORDE thy God, that thou walke in his wayes, and feare him.
8:7 For the LORDE thy God bryngeth the in to a good londe: A londe where in are ryuers of water, fountaynes and sprynges, which flowe by the hilles and valleys:
8:8 A londe wherin is wheate, barlye, vines, fygge trees, and pomgranates: A londe wherin growe Olyue trees and honye:
8:9 A londe where thou shalt not eate bred in scarcenes, and where thou shalt lacke nothinge: A lode where yͤ stones are yron, where thou shalt dygge brasse out of hilles:
8:10 That wha thou hast eaten and art fylled, thou mayest praise the LORDE thy God, for that good londe, which he hath geuen the.
8:11 Bewarre now therfore, that thou forget not the LORDE thy God, that thou woldest not kepe his commaundementes, and his ordinaunces, and lawes, which I commaunde the this daye:
8:12 that (whan thou hast eaten & art fylled, and hast buylded goodly houses, & dwellest therin,
8:13 and whan thy beestes and shepe, and syluer, and golde, and all yͭ thou hast, increaseth)
8:14 thine hert ryse not then, and thou forget the LORDE thy God (which brought the out of the londe of Egipte, frō yͤ house of bondage,
8:15 and led yͤ thorow this greate & terrible wyldernes, where were serpentes that spouted fyre, and Scorpions, & drouth, and where there was no water, and brought the water out of the hard flynte,
8:16 and fed the in the wyldernesse with Manna wherof yͥ fathers knewe not, that he might chasten the, and proue the) to do the good afterwarde)
8:17 and lest thou saye in thine hert: My power and the mighte of myne awne hande hath done me all this good:
8:18 But that thou thynke vpon the LORDE thy God. For it is HE, which geueth the power to exercyse strength, that he maye perfourme the couenaunt, which he sware vnto thy fathers, as it is come to passe this daye.
8:19 But yf thou shalt forget the LORDE thy God, and folowe other goddes, and serue them, and worshipe the, I testifye ouer you this daye, that ye shal vtterly perishe.
8:20 Euen as the Heythen whom yͤ LORDE destroyeth before youre face, so shall yͤ perishe also, because yͤ are not obedient vnto the voyce of the LORDE youre God.
9:1 Heare O Israel, This daie shalt thou go ouer Iordane, that thou maiest come in to conquere the nacions, which are greater and mightier then thou, greate cities, walled vp vnto heauen,
9:2 a greate people and of an hye stature, namely the childrē of Enakim, whom thou hast knowne, and of whom thou hast herde saye: Who is able to stonde agaynst the children of Enakim?
9:3 Therfore shalt thou knowe this daye, that the LORDE yͥ God goeth before the, a cosumynge fyre. He shal destroye the, and shall subdue them before the, and shal driue them out, & shortly shall he brynge the to naught, as the LORDE hath promysed the.
9:4 Now whan the LORDE thy God hath expelled them out before the, saye not thou the in thine hert: The LORDE hath brought me in to take possession of this lande for myne awne righteousnes sake, where as yͤ LORDE yet dryueth out the Heithen before the, because of their vngodlynes.
9:5 For thou commest not in to take their londe in possession, for thine awne righteousnes sake, and because of thy right hert: but the LORDE dryueth out these Heythen, for their awne vngodlynesse sake, and that he maye perfourme the worde, which the LORDE hath sworne vnto yͥ fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob.
9:6 Vnderstonde now therfore, that the LORDE yͥ God geueth not the this londe to possesse it, for thine awne righteousnes sake. For thou art a styffnecked people.
9:7 Remembre and forget not, how thou displeasedest the LORDE thy God in the wildernesse. Sence yͤ daye that thou departedst out of the londe of Egipte, tyll yͤ came vnto this place, haue yͤ bene dishobedient vnto the LORDE .
9:8 For in Horeb yͤ angred the LORDE , so that of wrath he wolde haue destroyed you,
9:9 whan I was gone vp to yͤ mount, to receaue the tables of stone, namely the tables of the couenaunt which the LORDE made wͭ you, and I abode fortye dayes & fortye nightes vpon the mount, and ate no bred, & dranke no water:
9:10 and the LORDE gaue me yͤ two tables of stone, wrytten with the fynger of God, and in them was acordinge to all the wordes, which the LORDE sayde vnto you vpon the mount out of the fyre, in the daye of the gatheringe together.
9:11 And after the fortye dayes and fortye nightes, yͤ LORDE gaue me yͤ two tables of stone, namely yͤ tables of the couenaunt,
9:12 and sayde vnto me: vp, & get yͤ downe quyckly from hence, for thy people whom thou broughtest out of Egipte, haue marred the selues, they are soone gone out of the waye, which I commaunded them, and haue made them a molten ymage.
9:13 And the LORDE saide vnto me: I se this people, that it is a styffnecked people:
9:14 let me alone, that I maye destroye them, and put out their name from vnder heauē. I wyl make of the a people mightier and greater the this is.
9:15 And as I turned me, & wente downe frō the mount which brent wͭ fyre, & had yͤ two tables of the couenaunt in both my hades,
9:16 I loked, & beholde, yͤ had synned agaynst yͤ LORDE yor God, so yͭ yͤ had made you a molten calfe, & were soone turned out of yͤ waie which the LORDE had commaunded you.
9:17 Then toke I the two tables, & cast them out of both my handes, & brake the before youre eyes,
9:18 & I fell before the LORDE (euen as at the first tyme) fortye dayes & fortye nightes, & nether ate bred, ner drake water, because of all youre synnes which yͤ had synned, whan yͤ dyd soch euell in the sighte of the LORDE , to prouoke him vnto wrath.
9:19 For I was afrayed of the wrath and indignacion, wherwith the LORDE was angrie wͭ you, euen to haue destroyed you. And the LORDE herde me at that tyme also.
9:20 Morouer the LORDE was very angrie wͭ Aaron, so that he wolde haue destroyed him, but I made intercession for Aaron also at yͤ same tyme.
9:21 As for youre synne (namely, the calfe that yͤ had made) I toke it, and burnt it with the fyre, and smote it a sunder, & grynde it in peces, euen vnto dust, and cast the dust in to the broke that descended from the mount.
9:22 yͤ displeased the LORDE also, at Tabera, and at Massa, and at the lustgraues,
9:23 and wha he sent you from Cades Barnea, and sayde: Go vp, and conquere the londe which I haue geuen you. And ye were disobedient vnto the mouth of the LORDE youre God, and beleued not on him, and herkened not vnto his voyce:
9:24 for ye haue bene disobediet vnto the LORDE , as longe as I haue knowne you.
9:25 The fell I before yͤ LORDE fortye daies and fortye nightes, which I laye there. For yͤ LORDE sayde, he wolde destroye you.
9:26 But I made intercession vnto the LORDE , and sayde: O LORDE LORDE , destroye not yͥ people and thine enheritaunce, which thou thorow thy greate power hast delyuered, and broughte out of Egipte with a mightie hade.
9:27 Remembre thy seruauntes Abraham, Isaac and Iacob. Loke not vpon the stubburnesse, and vngodlynesse and synne of this people
9:28 (that the londe wherout thou hast broughte vs, saye not: The LORDE was not able to bringe them in to the lande, that he promysed them, and because he hated them, therfore hath he broughte them out, to destroye the in the wyldernesse:)
9:29 For they are thy people & thine enheritaunce, which thou hast broughte out wͭ thy greate power, and with thy stretched out arme.
10:1 At the same tyme sayde the LORDE vnto me: Hew yͤ two tables of stone like vnto the first, and come vp vnto me in to the mount, and make yͤ an Arke of wod,
10:2 and in the tables I wyll wryte the wordes, that were in the first, which thou brakest, and thou shalt laye them in the Arke.
10:3 So I made an Arke of Fyrre tre, and hewed two tables of stone (like as the first were) & wente vp into the mount, and yͤ two tables were in my hande.
10:4 Then wrote he in yͤ tables (acordinge as the first wrytinge was) the ten verses, which the LORDE spake vnto you out of the fyre vpon the mountayne, at the tyme of the gatheringe together. And the LORDE gaue the vnto me.
10:5 And I turned me, & wente downe from the mount, and layed the tables in the Arke which I had made, that they mighte be there, as the LORDE commaunded me.
10:6 And the childrē of Israel departed from Beroth & Bue Iackan vnto Mosera (there dyed Aaron, & there was he buried: & Eleasar his sonne became prest in his steade.)
10:7 Fro thence they departed from Gadgad. From Gadgad to Iathbath, a londe of ryuers of water.
10:8 At the same season the LORDE separated out the trybe of Leui, to beare the Arke of the LORDE S couenaunt, and to stonde before the LORDE , to mynister vnto him, and to prayse his name vnto this daye.
10:9 Therfore shal the Leuites haue no porcion ner enheritaunce with their brethren: for the LORDE is their enheritaunce, as the LORDE thy God hath promysed them.
10:10 But I taried vpo the mount (like as afore) euen fortye dayes and fortye nightes, and the LORDE herde me at that tyme also, and wolde not destroye the.
10:11 But he sayde vnto me: Vp, & get the forth, yͭ thou mayest go before the people, yͭ they maye come in, and coquere the lode, which I sware vnto their fathers to geue them.
10:12 Now Israel, what requyreth the LORDE thy God of the, but yͭ thou feare the LORDE thy God, and that thou walke in all his wayes, & loue him, & serue the LORDE yͥ God with all thy hert, & with all thy soule:
10:13 and yͭ thou kepe the comaundementes of yͤ LORDE , & his ordinaunces, which I comaunde the this daye, yͭ thou mayest prospere?
10:14 Beholde, the heauen & the heauen of all heaues and the earth, and all yͭ is therin, is yͤ LORDE S yͥ God.
10:15 Yeth hath he had a pleasure vnto yͥ fathers, to loue the: and hath chosen their sede after the, namely you, aboue all nacions, as it is come to passe this daye.
10:16 Circumcyse therfore yͤ foreskynne of yor hert, & be nomore styffnecked.
10:17 For the LORDE yor God is God of all goddes, & LORDE ouer all lordes, a greate God, mightie & terryble, which regardeth no personne, & taketh no giftes
10:18 and doeth righte vnto the fatherlesse and wedowe, and loueth the straunger, to geue him fode & rayment.
10:19 Therfore shal ye loue a strauger, for yͤ youre selues also were straungers in the londe of Egipte.
10:20 Thou shalt feare the LORDE thy God, him onely shalt thou serue, vnto him shalt thou cleue & sweare by his name.
10:21 He is thy prayse & yͥ God, which hath done for yͤ these greate & terryble thinges, yͭ thine eyes haue sene.
10:22 Thy fathers wete downe into Egipte wͭ seuentye soules, but now hath yͤ LORDE thy God made the as yͤ starres of heauen in multitude.
11:1 Therfore shalt thou loue the LORDE yͥ God, & kepe his comaundemetes, his ordinaunces, his lawes, & his preceptes all yͥ life loge.
11:2 And vnderstode this daye, that which youre childrē knowe not: Which haue not sene the nurtoure of the LORDE yor God, & his greatnesse, & his mightie hande, & his stretched out arme,
11:3 & his tokens and actes which he dyd amonge the Egipcias, vnto Pharao the kynge of Egipte, & to all his londe,
11:4 & what he dyd to the power of yͤ Egipcians, & vnto their horses & charettes, whan he broughte the waters of the reed see vpo them, as they folowed after you, & how yͤ LORDE hath broughte them to naught vnto this daye:
11:5 & what he dyd vnto you in the wildernesse, vntyll yͤ came vnto this place:
11:6 what he dyd vnto Dathan and Abiram the children of Eliab the sonne of Ruben, how the earth opened hir mouth and swalowed them with their housholdes & tetes all their good that they had in the myddes amonge all Israel.
11:7 For youre eyes haue sene the greate workes of yͤ LORDE , which he hath done.
11:8 Therfore shal yͤ kepe all the commaundementes which I commaunde you this daye, that ye maye be stronge to come in, and to conquere the londe, whither yͤ go to possesse it,
11:9 & that ye maye lyue longe in the londe, which the LORDE sware vnto youre fathers, to geue vnto them and to their sede, eue a londe that floweth with mylke and hony:
11:10 For the londe whither thou commest in, to possesse it, is not as the londe of Egipte, whence yͤ came out, where thou sowedest thy sede, and waterdest it at thy fote as a garden of herbes:
11:11 but it hath hilles and valleys, which drynke water of the rayne of heauen,
11:12 a londe that the LORDE thy God careth for. And the eyes of the LORDE thy God are allwaye therin from the begynnynge of the yeare vnto the ende,
11:13 Yf ye shal herken therfore vnto my commaundementes, which I commaunde you this daye, yͭ ye loue the LORDE youre God, and serue him, with all youre hert and with all youre soule
11:14 then wyl I geue rayne vnto youre lode in due season, early and late, that thou mayest gather in thy corne, thy wyne and thine oyle:
11:15 and I wyll geue grasse vpon thy felde for thy catell, that ye maye eate & be fylled.
11:16 But bewarre, yͭ youre hert be not disceaued, that yͤ go asyde, & serue other goddes, & worshipe them,
11:17 and then the wrath of the LORDE waxe whote vpo you, and he shut vp the heauē, that there come no rayne, and the earth geue not hir increase, & yͤ perishe shortly from the good lode, which the LORDE hath geuen you.
11:18 Put vp therfore these my wordes in youre hertes and in youre soules, and bynde the for a signe vpon youre handes, yͭ they maye be a token of remembraunce before yor eyes:
11:19 and teach them youre children, so that thou talke therof, whan thou syttest in thine house, or walkest by the waye: whan thou lyest downe, and whan thou rysest vp:
11:20 and wryte them vpon the postes of thine house, and vpon thy gates,
11:21 that thou and thy children maye lyue longe in the londe, which the LORDE sware vnto thy fathers to geue them, as longe as the dayes of heauen endure vpon earth.
11:22 For yf ye shal kepe all these commaundementes which I commaunde you, so that yͤ do therafter, that ye loue the LORDE youre God, and walke in all his wayes, and cleue vnto him,
11:23 then shall the LORDE dryue out all these nacions before you, so that ye shall coquere greater and mightier nacions then yͤ youre selues are.
11:24 All the places that the soles of youre fete treade vpon, shalbe yours, from the wyldernes, and frō mount Libanus, and from the water Euphrates vnto yͤ vttemost see shal youre coastes be.
11:25 Noman shal be able to wͭ stonde you. The LORDE youre God shal let the feare and drede of you come vpon all yͤ londes wherin yͤ go, like as he hath promysed you.
11:26 Beholde, I laye before you this daye the blessynge and the curse.
11:27 The blessynge, yf ye be obedient vnto the commaundementes of the LORDE youre God, which I commaunde you this daye.
11:28 The curse, yf yͤ wyl not be obedient to the commaundementes of the LORDE youre God, but turne out of the waye, which I comaunde you this daye, so that yͤ walke after other goddes, whom ye knowe not.
11:29 Whan yͤ LORDE yͥ God hath broughte the in to the londe, whither thou commest in to possesse it, then shalt thou geue the blessynge vpon mount Grisim, and the curse vpon mount Ebal,
11:30 which are beyonde Iordane the waye towarde the goinge downe of the Sonne, in the lode of the Cananites, which dwell in yͤ playne felde ouer agaynst Gilgal, besyde the Oke groue of More.
11:31 For ye shal go ouer Iordane, that ye maye come in to take possession of the londe, which the LORDE youre God hath geuen you, to conquere it, and to dwell therin.
11:32 Take hede now therfore, that yͤ do acordinge vnto all the ordinaunces and lawes, which I laye before you this daye.
12:1 These are the ordinaunces and lawes which ye shal kepe, that yͤ do therafter in the londe, which the LORDE God of thy fathers hath geuen the to possesse, as longe as yͤ lyue vpon earth.
12:2 Destroye all the places, wherin yͤ Heithen (who ye shal conquere) haue serued their goddes, whether it be vpo hye mountaynes, vpo hilles, or amonge grene trees.
12:3 And ouerthrowe their altares, and breake downe their pilers, and burne their groues with fyre, and hewe downe the ymages of their goddes, & brynge the names of them to naught out of the same place.
12:4 ye shal not do so vnto the LORDE youre God:
12:5 but the place which yͤ LORDE youre God shal chose out of all yor trybes (that he maye let his name dwell there) shal yͤ seke,
12:6 and come thither, and thither shal yͤ brynge youre burntsacrifices, & youre other offerynges, and youre tithes and the Heueofferynges of youre handes, and youre vowes, and youre fre wyll offerynges, and the firstborne of youre oxen and shepe:
12:7 and there shall yͤ eate before the LORDE youre God, and reioyse ouer all that yͤ and youre houses haue geue with youre handes, because the LORDE thy God hath blessed the.
12:8 ye shall do none of the thinges, yͭ we do here this daye, euery man what semeth him good in his awne eyes.
12:9 For yͤ are not yet come to rest, ner to yͤ enheritauce which the LORDE thy God shal geue the.
12:10 But ye shal go ouer Iordane, and dwell in the londe yͭ the LORDE youre God shall deuyde out vnto you, & he shal geue you rest from all youre enemies rounde aboute, and ye shal dwell safe.
12:11 Now whan the LORDE thy God hath chosen a place, to make his name dwell there, ye shall brynge thither all yͭ I haue commaunded you, namely, yor burnt sacrifices, youre other offerynges, youre tythes, the Heueofferynges of youre handes, & all youre fre vowes, which ye shall vowe vnto yͤ LORDE :
12:12 and there shal yͤ eate, and reioyse before the LORDE youre God, yͤ and youre sonnes, and youre doughters, and youre seruauntes, and youre maydes, and the Leuites that are within youre gates, for they haue no porcion ner inheritauce with you.
12:13 Take hede vnto thy selfe, that thou offer not thy burntofferynges in what so euer place thou seyst:
12:14 but in the place which yͤ LORDE shall haue chosen in one of thy trybes, there shalt thou offer thy burntofferynges, and do all that I commaunde the.
12:15 Notwtstondinge thou mayest kyll and eate flesh within all thy gates, after all the desyre of thy soule, acordynge to the blessynge of the LORDE thy God, which he hath geue the: both the cleane and vncleane maye eate it, as of the Roo and herte,
12:16 onely the bloude shalt thou not eate, but poure it out as water vpon the earth.
12:17 But within thy gates mayest thou not eate of the tythes of thy corne, of thy wyne, & of thy oyle, ner of yͤ first borne of thine oxen and of thy shepe, or of eny of thy vowes which thou hast vowed, or of thy frewylofferinges, or Heueofferinges of thy handes:
12:18 but before the LORDE thy God shalt thou eate them, in the place which the LORDE thy God choseth, thou & thy sonne, and thy doughter, thy seruaunt, thy mayde, and the Leuite that is within yͥ gates, & thou shalt reioyse before yͤ LORDE thy God, ouer all yͭ thou puttest thine hande vnto.
12:19 And bewarre, that thou forsake not the Leuite, as longe as thou lyuest vpon the earth.
12:20 But whan the LORDE thy God shal enlarge thy bordes of thy londe (as he hath promysed the) and thou saye: I wil eate flesh (for so moch as thy soule longeth to eate flesh) then eate flesh acordinge to all the desyre of thy soule.
12:21 But yf the place that the LORDE thy God hath chosen (to let his name be there) be farre from the, then kyll of yͥ oxen and of thy shepe, which the LORDE hath geuen the, as he hath commaunded the, and eate it within thy gates acordinge to all yͤ desyre of thy soule.
12:22 Euen as a Roo or Hert is eaten, maiest thou eate it: both the cleane and vncleane maie eate it indifferently.
12:23 Onely bewarre, that thou eate not the bloude: for the bloude is the life. Therfore shalt thou not eate the life wͭ the flesh,
12:24 but shalt poure it out like water vpon the earth,
12:25 yͭ thou mayest prospere, and yͥ children after the, whan thou hast done that which is righte in the sighte of the LORDE .
12:26 But whan thou halowest oughte that is thine, or makest a vowe, thou shalt take it, and brynge it vnto the place, that the LORDE hath chosen,
12:27 and do thy burntofferynges with the flesh and bloude vpon the altare of the LORDE thy God. The bloude of thine offrynge shalt thou poure vpon the altare of the LORDE thy God, and eate the flesh.
12:28 Take hede, and heare all these wordes, which I commaunde the, yͭ it maye go well with the, and thy children after yͤ for euer, whan thou hast done yͭ which is righte and acceptable in the sighte of the LORDE thy God.
12:29 Whan the LORDE yͥ God hath roted out the Heithen before the, whither thou commest into conquere them, & whan thou hast coquered them, & dwelt in their londe,
12:30 bewarre then, yͭ thou fall not in the snare after the, whan they are destroyed before the: & that thou axe not after their goddes, & saye: Eue as these nacions haue serued their goddes, so wil I do also.
12:31 Thou shalt not do so vnto the LORDE thy God. For all that is abhominacion vnto the LORDE , & that he hateth, yͤ same haue they done vnto their goddes. For they haue burnt euen their sonnes and their doughters with fyre vnto their goddes.
12:32 All that I commaunde you, shal yͤ kepe, that yͤ do therafter. ye shal put nothinge therto, ner take ought there from.
13:1 Yf there ryse vp a prophet or dreamer amonge you, and geue the a token or a wonder,
13:2 and that token or wonder which he spake of, come to passe, and then saye: Let vs go after other goddes (whom thou knowest not) and let vs serue the:
13:3 Thou shalt not herken vnto the wordes of soch a prophet or dreamer. For yͤ LORDE youre God proueth you, to wete whether ye loue him with all youre hert, & with all youre soule.
13:4 For ye shall walke after the LORDE youre God, and feare him, and kepe his commaundementes, & herken vnto his voyce, and serue him, and cleue vnto him.
13:5 As for that prophet or dreamer, he shal dye: because he hath spoken to turne you awaye from the LORDE youre God (which broughte you out of the londe of Egipte, and delyuered you from the house of bondage) to thrust the out of the waye, which the LORDE thy God commaunded the to walke in, and so shalt thou put awaie the euell from the.
13:6 Yf thy brother, the sonne of thy mother, or thine awne sonne, or thy doughter, or the wyfe in thy bosome, or thy frende which is vnto the as thine owne soule, entyse the secretly, and saye: Let vs go and serue other goddes (whom thou knowest not, ner yet thy father)
13:7 which are amonge the nacions rounde aboute you, whether they be nye vnto the or farre from the, from the one ende of the earth vnto the other:
13:8 consente not vnto him, and herke not vnto him. Thine eye also shal not pytie him, and thou shalt haue no compassion vpon him, ner kepe him secrete, but shalt cause him to be slayne:
13:9 thine hade shalbe first vpon him, to cause him to be slayne, and then the handes of all the people.
13:10 He shalbe stoned to death, because he wente aboute to thrust the awaye from the LORDE thy God, which broughte the out of the londe of Egipte from the house of bodage:
13:11 yͭ all Israel maye heare, and feare him, and do nomore soch euell amonge you.
13:12 Yf thou hearest in eny cite which yͤ LORDE thy God hath geue the to dwell in,
13:13 that it is sayde: There are certayne men, the children of Belial, gone out from amonge you, and haue disceaued the inhabiters of their cite, and sayde: let vs go, and serue other goddes, whom ye knowe not.
13:14 Then shalt thou seke, make search, and enquere diligently. And yf it be founde of a trueth, that it is so in dede, yͭ soch abhominacion is wroughte amonge you,
13:15 then shalt thou smyte the indwellers of the same cite and their catell, with the edge of the swerde, and damne the cite with all that is therin:
13:16 and all the spoyle therof shalt thou gather together in the myddes of the stretes of it, and burne with fyre, both the cite and all the spoyle therof together vnto the LORDE yͥ God, that it maye lye vpon a heape for euer, and neuer be buylded eny more.
13:17 And let nothinge of the damned thinge cleue vnto thy hande, that the LORDE maye be turned from the indignacion of his wrath, and graunte the mercy, and haue compassion on the, and multiplye the (as he hath sworne vnto thy fathers)
13:18 because thou has herkened vnto yͤ voyce of the LORDE thy God, to kepe all his commaundementes, which I commaunde the this daye, so that thou doest the thinge which is righte in the sighte of the LORDE thy God.
14:1 yͤ are the children of the LORDE youre God, Cut not youre selues therfore, & make you no baldnesse betwene youre eyes ouer eny deed.
14:2 For thou art an holy people vnto the LORDE thy God. And the LORDE hath chosen the to be his awne peculier people, from amoge all the nacions that are vpon the earth.
14:3 Thou shalt eate no abhominacion.
14:4 These are the beestes which ye shal eate: Oxen, shepe, Goates,
14:5 Hert, Roo, Bugle, wylde goate, Unicorne, Origen, and Camelion.
14:6 And euery beest that deuydeth his clawe, & cheweth cudd, shal yͤ eate.
14:7 Neuertheles these shal yͤ not eate of them that chewe cudd, and deuyde not the hoffe in to two clawes: The Camell, the hayre, & the conye, for though they chewe cudd, yet deuyde they not the hoffe, therfore shal they be vncleane vnto you.
14:8 The swyne, though he deuyde the hoffe, yet cheweth he not cudd, he shall be vncleane vnto you: ye shall not eate of the flesh of the, and their deed carcases shal yͤ not touche.
14:9 This is it that ye shall eate of all that is in the waters: All that hath fynnes and scales, shall yͤ eate.
14:10 But what so euer hath no fynnes ner scales, that shal yͤ not eate, for it is vncleane vnto you.
14:11 Eate of all cleane foules.
14:12 But these are they, wherof ye shal not eate: The Aegle, yͤ Goshauke, the Cormoraunte,
14:13 the Ixion, the Vultur, the Kyte with his kynde,
14:14 & all Rauens in their kynde,
14:15 the Estriche, the Night crowe, the Cocow, the Sparow hauke with his kynde,
14:16 the litle Oule, the greate Oule, yͤ Backe,
14:17 the Bytture, the Swanne, the Pellicane, the Pye,
14:18 the Storke, the Heron, the Iaye wͭ his kynde, the Lapwynge, yͤ Swalowe:
14:19 And all foules yͭ crepe, shal be vncleane vnto you, and ye shal not eate them.
14:20 (Omitted Text)
14:21 ye shall eate of nothinge yͭ dyeth alone: thou mayest geue it vnto yͤ straunger within yͥ gate, that he eate it, or sell it to a straunger. For thou art an holy people vnto yͤ LORDE thy God. Thou shalt not seeth a kydd, whyle it yet sucketh his mother.
14:22 Thou shalt separate out the tythe all the increase of thy sede, yͭ cometh out of yͥ felde euery yeare:
14:23 & shalt eate it before yͤ LORDE yͥ God ( in yͤ place which He choseth, yͭ his name maye dwell there) namely of yͤ tythes of thy corne, of thy wyne, of thy oyle, & the first borne of thine oxen, and of thy shepe, yͭ thou mayest lerne to feare the LORDE thy God, all thy life longe.
14:24 But yf the waye be to moch for ye, and the place, which yͤ LORDE thy God hath chosen to set his name there, be to farre from the: & thou canst not cary it that yͤ LORDE thy God hath blessed the withall,
14:25 Then geue it for money, & take yͤ money in thyne hande, and go vnto the place which the LORDE thy God hath chosen,
14:26 and geue the money for all that thy soule desyreth, whether it be oxe, shepe, wyne, stronge drynke, or for what so euer thy soule desyreth, and eate there before the LORDE thy God, and be mery, thou and thine housholde,
14:27 and yͤ Leuite that is within thy gates. Thou shalt not forsake him, for he hath no porcion nor inheritaunce with the.
14:28 In the thirde yeare shalt thou brynge forth all the tithes of thine increase of the same yeare, and shalt laye it within thy gates.
14:29 The shal the Leuite (which hath no porcion ner enheritaunce with the) and yͤ straunger, and the fatherlesse, and the wedowe, which are within thy gates, come and eate, and fyll them selues, that the LORDE thy God maye blesse the in all the workes of yͥ handes which thou doest.
15:1 In the seueth yeare shalt thou make a Fre yeare. This is yͤ maner of the Fre yeare.
15:2 Who so euer ledeth oughte with his hande vnto his neghboure, shal not requyre it of his neghboure or his brother: for it is called the Fre yeare vnto the LORDE .
15:3 Of a strauger mayest thou requyre it: but vnto him that is thy brother, shalt thou remytte it.
15:4 There shall be no begger amoge you: for the LORDE shal blesse yͤ in the lode which the LORDE yͥ God shal geue yͤ to inheritaunce to take it in possession,
15:5 onely yͭ thou herke vnto the voyce of the LORDE yͥ God, & kepe all these comaundemetes which I comaunde the this daye,
15:6 that thou maiest do therafter. For the LORDE yͥ God shal blesse the, as he hath promysed the. The shalt thou lende vnto many nacions, & shalt borowe of noman. Thou shalt raigne ouer many nacions, & noman shal reigne ouer ye.
15:7 Whan one of thy brethre is waxed poore in eny cite within thy londe, which yͤ LORDE yͥ God shal geue ye, thou shalt not harden thine hert, ner withdrawe thine hande from thy poore brother:
15:8 but shalt open thine hande vnto him, and lende him, acordinge as he hath nede.
15:9 Bewarre, that there be not a poynte of Belial in thine hert, that thou woldest saye: The seuenth yeare, the yeare of Fredome is at honde. For yf thou lokest not fredly vpo thy poore brother, and geuest him nothinge then shall he crye ouer the vnto the LORDE , and it shall be synne vnto the:
15:10 But thou shalt geue him, and let it not greue thine hert that thou geuest him. For because of it, shall the LORDE thy God blesse the in all thy workes, and in all that thou puttest thine hande vnto.
15:11 The londe shal neuer be without poore, therfore commaunde I the and saye, that thou open thine hande vnto thy brother, which is neady and poore in thy londe.
15:12 Yf thy brother an Hebrue or Hebruesse be solde vnto the, he shal serue the sixe yeare, in the seuenth yeare shalt thou let him go Fre.
15:13 And wha thou deliuerest him fre, thou shalt not let him go from the emptye,
15:14 but shalt geue him of thy shepe, of thy corne, and of yͥ wyne, so that thou geue him of that, which the LORDE thy God hath blessed the withall.
15:15 And remembre that thou also wast a seruaunte in the lode of Egipte, and how that the LORDE thy God delyuered the, therfore commaunde I the this thinge to daye.
15:16 But yf he saye vnto the: I wyll not go out awaye from the, for I loue yͤ and thine house (in so moch as he is well at ease with the)
15:17 then take a botkyn, and bore him thorow his eare to the dore, and let him be thy seruaunt for euer. And with thy mayde shalt thou do likewyse.
15:18 And let it not seme greuous vnto the, to let him go fre from the (for he hath serued the sixe yeares as a dubble hyred seruaunt) then shall the LORDE thy God blesse the in all that thou doest.
15:19 All the first borne that come of thine oxen and shepe, yͭ are males, shalt thou halowe vnto the LORDE thy God. Thou shalt not plowe with the firstborne of thine oxe, and shalt not clyppe the firstborne of thy shepe:
15:20 Before the LORDE thy God shalt thou eate the euery yeare, in the place that the LORDE choseth, thou and thine housholde.
15:21 But yf it haue a deformyte, so that it is lame or blynde, or hath eny other euell blemysh, thou shalt not offre it vnto yͤ LORDE thy God,
15:22 but shalt eate it within thine awne gates) whether thou be vncleane or cleane) euen as the Roo and Hert.
15:23 Onely se that thou eate not of the bloude therof, but poure it out as water vpon the grounde.
16:1 Obserue the moneth Abib, yͭ thou offre Easter vnto the LORDE yͥ God: for in the moneth Abib the LORDE thy God broughte yͤ out of Egipte by nighte.
16:2 And for the Easter vnto yͤ LORDE thy God, thou shalt offre oxen & shepe, in yͤ place which yͤ LORDE shal chose, yͭ his name maye dwell there.
16:3 Thou shalt eate no leuended bred in yͭ feast. Seuen dayes shalt thou eate the vnleuended bred of thy tribulacion: For with soroufull haist camest thou out of the londe of Egipte, that thou mayest remebre the daye of thy departinge out of yͤ londe of Egipte, all yͥ life longe.
16:4 In seue dayes shal there no leueded bred be sene within all thy coastes: & of the flesh that is offred yͤ first daye at euen, there shal nothinge be lefte ouer night vntyll the mornynge.
16:5 Thou mayest not offre Easter wͭ in eny of thy gates, which the LORDE thy God hath geuen the:
16:6 but in the place which the LORDE thy God hath chosen, that his name maye dwell there, there shalt thou offre this Easter, at euen whan the Sonne is gone downe, euen in the same season that thou camest out of Egipte:
16:7 and thou shalt dighte it, and eate it in the place that the LORDE thy God hath chosen, and then turne the on the morowe, & go home in to thy tente.
16:8 Sixe dayes shalt thou eate vnleuended bred, and on the seuenth daye is the gatheringe together of the LORDE thy God. Thou shalt do no worke therin.
16:9 Seuen wekes shalt thou nombre vnto ye, and begynne to nombre whan the syccle begynneth in the corne,
16:10 and thou shalt kepe the Feast of wekes vnto the LORDE thy God, that thou geue a frewylofferynge of thine hande, acordinge as the LORDE thy God hath blessed the,
16:11 and shalt reioyse before the LORDE thy God, thou and thy sonne, thy doughter, thy seruaunt, thy mayde, and the Leuite that is within thy gates, yͤ straunger, the fatherlesse, and the wedowe, that are amonge you, in the place which yͤ LORDE thy God hath chosen, that his name maye dwell there.
16:12 And remembre, yͭ thou wast a seruaunte in Egipte, so that thou kepe and do these ordynaunces.
16:13 The feast of Tabernacles shalt thou kepe seuen dayes, whan thou hast gathered in the frutes of thy barne & of thy wyne presse,
16:14 and thou shalt reioyse in thy feast, thou and thy sonne, thy doughter, thy seruaunte, thy mayde, the Leuite, the straunger, the fatherlesse, and the wedowe that are within yͥ gates.
16:15 Seuen dayes shalt thou kepe yͤ feast vnto the LORDE thy God, in the place that he hath chosen. For the LORDE thy God shal blesse the in all thy frutes and in all the workes of thine hades. Therfore shalt thou be glad.
16:16 Thre tymes in the yeare shal all thy males appeare before the LORDE thy God (in the place that he shall chose) namely, in the feast of vnleuended bred, in the feast of wekes, and in the feast of Tabernacles. He shal not appeare emptie before the LORDE ,
16:17 but euery one after the gifte of his hande, acordinge to the blessinge that the LORDE thy God hath geuen the.
16:18 Ivdges & officers shalt thou ordeyne within all yͥ gates, which yͤ LORDE thy God geueth the amoge thy trybes, yͭ they maye iudge the people with righteous iudgment.
16:19 Thou shalt not wrest the lawe. Thou shalt knowe no personne also, ner take giftes. For giftes blynde the eyes of yͤ wyse, & peruerte yͤ righteous causes.
16:20 Loke what righte is, yͭ shalt thou folowe, that thou mayest lyue & possesse the londe, which the LORDE thy God shal geue the.
16:21 Thou shalt plante no groue (of what so euer trees it be) nye vnto the altare of the LORDE thy God, which thou makest the.
16:22 Thou shalt set the vp no piler, which yͤ LORDE yͥ God hateth.
17:1 Thou shalt offre vnto the LORDE thy God no oxe or shepe, that hath a blemish or eny euell fauourednesse on it: for that is abhominacion vnto the LORDE thy God.
17:2 Yf there be founde amonge you (within eny of thy gates which the LORDE yͥ God shal geue ye) a man or woman, that worketh wickednesse in yͤ sighte of the LORDE thy God, so that he transgresseth his couenaute and goeth,
17:3 and serueth other goddes, & worshippeth them, whether it be Sone or Mone, or eny of the hooste of heauen, which I haue not commaunded,
17:4 and it is tolde the, & thou hearest of it, Then shalt thou make diligent search therfore. And yf thou fyndest that it is so of a trueth, that soch abhominacion is wroughte in Israel,
17:5 then shalt thou brynge forth the same man or yͤ same woma (which haue done soch euell) vnto thy gates and shalt stone them to death.
17:6 At the mouth of two or thre witnesses shal he dye, that is worthy of death. At the mouth of one witnes shal he not dye.
17:7 The handes of the witnesses shal be the first to kyll him, and the yͤ handes of all the people, that thou mayest put awaye the euell from the.
17:8 Yf a matter be to harde for the in iudgmet betwixte bloude and bloude, betwixte plee and plee, betwixte stroke and stroke, and yf there be matters of stryfe within thy gates then shalt thou ryse, and go vp vnto yͤ place that yͤ LORDE thy God hath chosen:
17:9 and shalt come to the prestes the Leuites, & to the iudge which shalbe at that tyme, and shalt axe. They shal shewe the how to iudge,
17:10 and thou shalt do therafter, as they saye vnto the, in yͤ place which the LORDE hath chosen: and thou shalt take hede that thou do acordinge vnto all yͭ they teach the.
17:11 Acordinge to the lawe yͭ they teach the, & after the iudgment that they tell ye, shalt thou do so that thou turne not asyde from yͤ same, nether to the righte hande ner to the lefte.
17:12 And yf eny man deale presumptuously, so that he herkeneth not vnto the prest (which stondeth to do seruyce vnto the LORDE thy God) or to the Iudge, the same shal dye: and thou shalt put awaye the euell from Israel,
17:13 that all yͤ people maye heare, and feare, and be nomore presumptuous.
17:14 Whan thou art come in to yͤ londe which the LORDE thy God shal geue the, & takest it in possession, and dwellest therin, and shalt saie: I wil set a kinge ouer me, as all the nacions haue aboute me,
17:15 the shalt thou set him to be kynge ouer the, whom the LORDE thy God shal chose. One of thy brethren shalt thou sett to be kynge ouer the. Thou mayest not set a strauger ouer the, which is not thy brother.
17:16 Onely let him not haue many horses, yͭ he brynge not yͤ people againe in to Egipte thorow yͤ multitude of horses, for as moch as yͤ LORDE hath sayde vnto you, that from hence forth ye shulde come nomore this waye agayne.
17:17 He shall not haue many wyues also, that his hert be not turned awaye. Nether shal he gather him syluer and golde to moch.
17:18 And whan he is set vpon the seate of his kingdome, he shal take of the prestes the Leuites this seconde lawe, and cause it be wrytten in a boke,
17:19 and that shall he haue by him, and he shall rede therin all the dayes of his life, that he maye lerne to feare yͤ LORDE his God, to kepe all the wordes of this lawe, all these ordinauces, so that he do therafter.
17:20 He shall not lifte vp his herte aboue his brethren, and shall not turne asyde from the commaundement, nether to the right hade ner to the lefte, that he maye prologe his dayes in his kyngdome, he and his children in Israel.
18:1 The prestes, the Leuites, all the trybe of Leui shal haue no parte ner enheritaunce wͭ Israel. The offerynges of yͤ LORDE & his enheritaunce shal they eate.
18:2 Therfore shal they haue no inheritaunce amonge their brethren, because the LORDE is their enheritauce, as he hath saide vnto the
18:3 This shalbe yͤ prestes dutye of the people, & of the that offre, whether it be oxe or shepe, so that they geue vnto the prest the shulder and both the chekes, and the brest.
18:4 And the first frutes of thy corne, of thy wyne and of thy oyle, and the first of thy shepe sheringe.
18:5 For the LORDE thy God hath chosen him out of all thy trybes, to stonde and mynyster in the name of the LORDE , he and his sonnes all the dayes of their life.
18:6 Yf a Leuite come out of eny of thy gates or out of eny place of all Israel, where he is a gest, and cometh with all the desyre of his soule (vnto the place which the LORDE hath chosen)
18:7 to mynister in the name of the LORDE his God, like as all his brethren yͤ Leuites, which stonde there before the LORDE ,
18:8 the shal he haue like porcion of meate with the other: besydes that which he hath of the solde good of his fathers.
18:9 Whan thou commest in to yͤ londe which the LORDE thy God shal geue ye, thou shalt not lerne to do yͤ abhominacions of these nacions,
18:10 that there be not founde amonge you, yͭ maketh his sonne or doughter go thorow the fyre, or a prophecier, or a choser out of dayes, or that regardeth the foules cryenge,
18:11 or a witch, or a coniurer, or soythsayer, or an expounder of tokens, or yͭ axeth eny thinge of the deed.
18:12 For who so euer doth soch, is abhominacion vnto the LORDE : and because of soch abhominacions doth the LORDE yͥ God dryue the out before the.
18:13 But thou shalt be perfecte with the LORDE yͥ God.
18:14 For these nacios whom thou shalt conquere, whom the LORDE thy God hath geuen the, herken to the chosers out of dayes, and to the soythsayers: but so shalt not thou do vnto the LORDE thy God.
18:15 A prophet, like vnto me, shall the LORDE thy God raise the vp euen out of the, & from amonge thy brethren, vnto him shal yͤ herke,
18:16 acordinge as thou desyredest before the LORDE thy God in Horeb, (in the daye of yͤ gatheringe together) & saydest: Let me heare the voyce of the LORDE my God nomore, and se nomore this greate fyre, that I dye not.
18:17 And yͤ LORDE saide vnto me: They haue well spoken.
18:18 I wil rayse them vp a prophet from amonge their brethren like vnto the, and wyl put my wordes in his mouth, & he shal speake vnto them all that I shal comaunde him.
18:19 And who so euer wyl not herken vnto my wordes, which he shal speake in my name, of him wil I requyre it.
18:20 But yf a prophete presume to speake ought in my name, which I haue not comauded him to speake: and he that speaketh in yͤ name of other goddes, yͭ same prophete shal dye.
18:21 But yf thou saye in thine hert: How can I knowe what worde the LORDE hath not spoken?
18:22 Euen whan the prophete speaketh in the name of yͤ LORDE , and the thinge foloweth not, and commeth not to passe, yͤ same is the worde, yͭ the LORDE hath not spoke. The prophet hath spoke it presumtuously, therfore be not afrayed of him.
19:1 Whan yͤ LORDE thy God shall haue roted out yͤ nacios, whose londe yͤ LORDE thy God shal geue the, so yͭ thou hast conquered them, and dwellest in their cities and houses,
19:2 thou shalt appoynte the out thre cities in the myddes of the lode, yͭ the LORDE thy God shal geue yͤ to possesse.
19:3 Thou shalt prepare the waye, and parte the coastes of yͥ londe (which yͤ LORDE thy God shal deuyde out vnto the) in to thre partes, that whosoeuer hath commytted a slaughter, maye flie thither.
19:4 And this shalbe the cause, that whosoeuer hath committed a slaughter, maye flye thyther, and lyue.
19:5 Yf eny man smyte his neghboure vnawarres, and hath not hated him in tyme passed (as whan a man goeth vnto the wod with his neghboure to hew downe tymber, and he turneth his hande wͭ the axe to hewe downe the wod, and the yron slyppeth from the helue, and hytteth his neghboure, that he dyeth) the same shal flye in to one of these cities, that he maye lyue,
19:6 lest the auenger of bloude folowe after the deedsleyer, whyle his hert is whote, and ouertake him, whyle the waye is so farre, and slaye him, where as yet no cause of death is in hi, for so moch as he hated him not in tyme passed.
19:7 Therfore commaunde I the, that thou appoynte out thre cities.
19:8 And whan the LORDE yͥ God enlargeth thy borders, as he hath sworne vnto thy fathers, & geueth the all the lode which he promysed thy fathers to geue
19:9 (so that thou kepe all these comaundementes, and do yͭ I commaunde the this daye, yͭ thou loue the LORDE thy God, and walke in his wayes all yͥ life longe) the shalt thou adde yet thre cities vnto these thre,
19:10 that innocent bloude be not shed in thy londe (which the LORDE yͥ God geueth the to enheritaunce) and so bloude come vpon the.
19:11 But yf eny man beare hate agaynst his neghboure, and layeth waite for him, and ryseth agaynst him, and smyteth him that he dye, and flyeth in to one of these cities,
19:12 then shall the Elders of the same cite sende thither, and cause him to be fetched from thence, and delyuer him in to the handes of the auenger of bloude, that he maye dye:
19:13 thine eye shal not pitie him, and the giltye bloude shalt thou put awaye frō Israel, that thou mayest prospere.
19:14 Thou shalt not remoue thy neghbours marck, which they of olde tyme haue set in thine enheritaunce, that thou enheretest in the londe, which the LORDE thy God hath geuen the to possesse it.
19:15 One witnesse shal not stonde vp alone agaynst a man, ouer eny trespace or synne, what maner of synne so euer it be, yͭ a man can do, but in the mouth of two or thre witnesses shal euery matter be stablished.
19:16 But yf an vnrighteous wytnesse stonde vp agaynst eny man, to testifye eny trespace vpon him,
19:17 then shall both the men that stryue together, stonde before the LORDE , before the prestes and Iudges, which shall be at the same tyme.
19:18 And the iudges shall make diligent inquisicion: & yf the witnesse be founde false, and hath geue false witnesse agaynst his brother,
19:19 then shall yͤ do vnto him, euen as he thoughte to do vnto his brother: that thou mayest put awaye the euell from the that
19:20 other maye heare and feare, and take nomore vpon them to do soch wicked poyntes amonge you.
19:21 Thine eye shall not pitie him. Soule for soule, eye for eye, tothe for tothe, hande for hande, fote for fote.
20:1 Whan thou goest out to battayll agaynst thine enemies, and seyst horses and charettes of the people more then thou, be not afrayed of them: for the LORDE thy God which brought yͤ out of the londe of Egipte, is with the.
20:2 Now wha yͤ are come nye vnto the battayll, the prest shal steppe forth, & speake to the people,
20:3 and saye vnto the: Heare Israel: yͤ go this daye in to the battayll agaynst youre enemies, let not yor hert faynte. Feare not, be not afrayed, ner a drede of them.
20:4 For the LORDE youre God goeth with you, to fyghte for you agaynst youre enemies, yͭ he maye saue you.
20:5 And the captaynes shal speake to yͤ people, and saye: Who so hath buylded a new house, and hath not dedicate it, let him go, and byde in his house, that he dye not in yͤ battayll, and another dedicate it.
20:6 Who so hath planted a vynyarde, and hath not yet made it comen, lett him go, and byde at home, that he dye not in the battayll, and another make it comen.
20:7 Who so hath spoused a wyfe, and hath not yet brought her home, let him go, and byde at home, yͭ he die not in the battayll, & another brynge her home.
20:8 And the captaines shal speake further vnto the people, and saye: He that feareth and hath a faynte hert, lett him go, and byde at home, that he make not his brethrens hert fainte also, like as his hert is.
20:9 And whan the captaynes haue made an ende of speakinge vnto the people, they shall set the rulers of the hoost before the people in the fore fronte.
20:10 Whan thou commest nye vnto a cite to fight against it, thou shalt offre them peace
20:11 Yf they answere the peaceably, and open vnto the, then shal all yͤ people yͭ is founde therin, be tributaries vnto the, and serue ye.
20:12 But yf they wyl not deale peaceably wͭ the, and wyll warre with the, then besege it:
20:13 and whan the LORDE thy God delyuereth it in to thy hande, thou shalt smyte all the males that are therin, with the edge of the swerde:
20:14 saue the wemen and the children. As for the catell, and all that is in the cite, and all the spoyle, thou shalt take them vnto thy selfe, and eate the spoyle of thine enemies, which the LORDE thy God hath geuen the.
20:15 Thus shalt thou do vnto all the cities, that are very farre from the, and are not of the cities of these nacions.
20:16 But in the cities of these nacions, which the LORDE thy God shall geue the to enheritauce, thou shalt leaue nothinge alyue that hath breth,
20:17 but shalt vtterly destroye the, namely the Hethites, Amorites, Cananites, Pheresites, Heuites, & Iebusites, as the LORDE thy God hath commaunded the,
20:18 yͭ they teache you not to do all yͤ abhominacions, which they do vnto their goddes, & so yͤ to synne agaynst the LORDE youre God.
20:19 Whan thou must lye a longe season before a cite, against the which thou makest warre to take it, thou shalt not destroye yͤ trees therof that thou woldest hew them downe wͭ the axe, for thou mayest eate therof: and therfore shalt thou not hew them downe. For it is but wodd vpon the felde, and no man, and can not come & be bullworkes agaynst the.
20:20 But the trees which thou knowest yͭ me eate not of, those shalt thou destroye, and rote out, and make bullworkes therof, agaynst the cite that warreth with the, tyll thou haue ouercome it.
21:1 Whan there is one slayne founde in yͤ londe which yͤ LORDE yͥ God shall geue yͤ to possesse it, & lyeth in yͤ felde, & it is not knowne who hath slaine him,
21:2 then shal thy Elders & iudges go forth, and meet from the slayne vnto the cities that lye rounde aboute.
21:3 Loke which cite is the nexte, yͤ Elders of the same shal take a yoge cowe, which hath not bene laboured, ner hath drawe in the yocke,
21:4 & they shal brynge her in to a valley, where as is nether earinge nor sowinge, and strike of hir heade there in the valley.
21:5 Then shal the prestes yͤ children of Leui come forth. ( For the LORDE thy God hath chosen them, to serue him, and to prayse his name: and at their mouth shal all plees and strypes be tryed.)
21:6 And all the Elders of the same cite shall come forth vnto the slayne, & wash their handes ouer yͤ yonge cowe, whose heade is stricken of in the valley,
21:7 and shal answere and saie: Oure hades haue not shed this bloude, nether haue oure eyes sene it.
21:8 Be mercifull (O LORDE ) vnto thy people of Israel, who thou hast delyuered, laye no innocent bloude vnto thy people of Israels charge: then shall they be reconcyled from the bloude.
21:9 Thus shalt thou put awaye the innocent bloude from the, in that thou doest the thinge whis is righte in the sighte of yͤ LORDE .
21:10 Wha thou goest forth to warre against thine enemies, & the LORDE thy God delyuereth them in to thine handes, so that thou cariest awaye their presoners,
21:11 and seist amoge the captyues a bewtyfull woman, & hast a desyre vnto her to take her to thy wife,
21:12 the brynge her home to thine house, and let her shaue hir heade, and pare hir nayles,
21:13 and put of hir clothes that she was taken presoner in, and let her sit in thine house, and mourne for hir father and mother a moneth longe after that lye with her, and mary her, and let her be thy wife.
21:14 But yf thou haue no fauoure vnto her, then shalt thou let her go whither she wyll, and not to sell her, ner to make cheuesaunce of her, because thou hast dishonoured her.
21:15 Yf a man haue two wyues, one that he loueth, and one that he hateth, and they beare him children, both the beloued and the hated,
21:16 so that the firstborne be hirs that is hated, and the tyme commeth that he dealeth out the inheritaunce vnto his children, then can he not make the sonne of yͤ beloued firstborne before the firstborne sonne of the hated,
21:17 but he shall knowe the sonne of the hated for yͤ first sonne, so that he geue him dubble of all that is at hande: for the same is yͤ begynnynge of his strength, & the firstbyrthrighte is his.
21:18 Yf eny man haue a stubborne and dishobedient sonne, which herkeneth not vnto the voyce of his father, and mother, and whan they teach him nurtoure, wyll not folowe them,
21:19 then shall his father and mother take him, and brynge him to yͤ Elders of their cite, and to the gate of the same place,
21:20 and saye vnto the Elders of the cite: This oure sonne is stobburne and dishobediet, and herkeneth not vnto oure voyce, and is a ryoter and a dronkarde.
21:21 Then shal all the men of yͤ same cite stone him to death: and thus shalt thou put awaye the euell frō the, that all Israel maye heare and feare.
21:22 Yf a man haue commytted a synne yͭ is worthy of death, and is put to death, so that he is hanged on tre,
21:23 then shal not his body remayne all night on tre, but thou shalt burye him the same daye ( For cursed is he of God that is hanged) that thou defyle not thy londe, which the LORDE thy God geueth the to enheritaunce.
22:1 Yf thou se thy brothers oxe or shepe, go astraie, thou shalt not withdrawe thy selfe from them, but shalt brynge the againe vnto yͥ brother.
22:2 But yf yͥ brother be not nye vnto the, & thou knowest him not, then shalt thou take the in to thine house, yͭ they maye be wͭ the, tyll yͤ brother axe after them, & then delyuer him the agayne.
22:3 In like maner shalt thou do with his Asse, wͭ his rayment, & with euery lost thinge of yͥ brother, which he hath lost, & thou hast founde it: thou mayest not withdrawe thyselfe.
22:4 Yf thou se thy brothers oxe or Asse fallen downe by the waye, thou shalt not wͭ drawe thy selfe from him, but shalt helpe him vp.
22:5 A woman shall not weere yͭ which pertayneth to a man, nether shal a man put on womans raymet. For who so euer doth soch, is abhominacion vnto yͤ LORDE yͥ God.
22:6 Yf thou chaunce vpon a byrdes nest by yͤ waye in a tre, or on the grounde, with yonge or with egges, and the dame syttinge vpon the yonge or vpon the egges, thou shalt not take the dame with the yonge,
22:7 but shalt let the dame flye, and take the yonge, that thou mayest prospere and lyue longe.
22:8 Whan thou buyldest a new house, make a battelment aboute thy rofe, that thou lade not bloude vpon thine house, yf eny man fall therof.
22:9 Thou shalt not sowe thy vynyarde with dyuerse sedes, that thou halowe not (to the full offerynge) the sede which thou hast sowne, with the increase of the vynyarde.
22:10 Thou shalt not plowe with an oxe and an Asse together at one tyme.
22:11 Thou shalt not weere a garmet, yͭ is mixte with wollen and lynnen together.
22:12 Thou shalt make gardes vpon the foure quarters of thy garment, wherwith thou couerest thy selfe.
22:13 Yf a man take a wife, and hate her whan he hath lyen with her,
22:14 and layeth eny shamefull thinge vnto hir charge, and bryngeth vp an euell name vpon her, and sayeth: I toke this wife, & whan I came to her, I founde her not a mayde.
22:15 Then shall the father and mother of the damsell take her, and brynge forth the tokens of the damsels virginite before the Elders of the cite, euen vnto the gate.
22:16 And yͤ damsels father shal saie vnto yͤ Elders: I gaue this man my doughter to wyfe. Now hateth he her,
22:17 and layeth a shamefull thinge to hir charge, and sayeth: I founde not thy doughter a mayde. And lo, these are the tokens of my doughters virginite. And they shal sprede out the clothe before the Elders of the cite.
22:18 So shal the Elders of the cite take that man, and chastice him,
22:19 and put a pennaunce vpon him of an hundreth Sycles of syluer, and geue the same vnto the father of the damsell, because he hath brougte vp an euell name of a mayde in Israel, and he shall haue her to wyfe, so yͭ he maye not forsake her all his life longe.
22:20 But yf it be of a trueth, that the damsell is not founde a virgin,
22:21 the shal she be brought forth vnto the dore of hir fathers house, and the me of the cite shal stone her to death, because she hath wrought foly in Israel, and played the whore in hir fathers house. And so shalt thou put awaye the euell from the.
22:22 Yf a man be founde lienge with a woma that hath a maried husbande, they shal dye both the man, & the woma that he hath lien withall. And so shalt thou put awaye euell from Israel.
22:23 Yf a mayde be handfested to eny man, & another man getteth her in the cite, & lyeth with her,
22:24 ye shal brynge them both out vnto the gate of the cite, and stone them both, yͭ they dye. The damsell, because she cryed not, beynge in the cite. The man, because he hath brought his neghbours wife to shame. And thou shalt put awaye the euell from the.
22:25 But yf a man get an handfested damsell vpon the felde, and take her, and lye wͭ her, then the man that laye with her, shal dye alone,
22:26 and vnto the damsell thou shalt do nothinge: for she hath done no synne worthy of death. It is like as yf a man rose against his neghboure, and slewe him, euen so is this also.
22:27 For he founde her in the felde, and the handfested damsell cryed, and there was no man to helpe her.
22:28 Yf a man fynde a mayde that is not hadfested, and take her, and lye with her, and be founde,
22:29 then shal he that laye with her, geue hir father fyftie Sycles of syluer, and shall haue her to wyfe, because he hath shamed her: he maye not forsake her all his life loge.
22:30 Noma shal take his fathers wife, ner vncouer his fathers couerynge.
23:1 There shal none that hath his stones broken or yͭ is gelded, come in to the cogregacion of the LORDE .
23:2 There shal no whores childe also come in to the cogregacion of yͤ LORDE , no not after yͤ tenth generacio, but shal neuer come in to yͤ cogregacio of yͤ LORDE .
23:3 The Ammonites & Moabites shal not come in to yͤ cogregacio of yͤ LORDE , no not after yͤ tenth generacion, but shall neuer come in,
23:4 because they met you not wͭ bred & water in yͤ waye, wha yͤ came out of Egipte. And besides yͭ, they hired agaynst you Balaa yͤ sonne of Beor, yͤ interpreter out of Mesopotamia, to curse ye.
23:5 But yͤ LORDE yͥ God wolde not heare Balaam, and turned the curse to a blessynge vnto the: because the LORDE yͥ God loued the.
23:6 Thou shalt wysh him nether prosperite ner health all thy life longe for euer.
23:7 Thou shalt not abhorre an Edomite: for he is thy brother. An Egipcian shalt thou not abhorre, for thou wast a straunger in his londe.
23:8 The children whom they beget in the thirde generacion, shal come in to the congregacion of yͤ LORDE .
23:9 Wha thou goest out to fighte agaynst thine enemies, kepe the from all wickednesse.
23:10 Yf there be eny man amonge you which is vncleane, so that eny thinge is chaunced to him by nighte, the same shal go out of yͤ hoost
23:11 vntyll he haue bathed himselfe with water before euen: and whan the Sonne is gone downe, he shall come in to the hoost agayne.
23:12 And without the hoost thou shalt haue place to resorte vnto for necessyte,
23:13 & thou shalt haue a shouell vnder the gyrdle: and whan thou wilt set yͤ downe without, thou shalt dygge therwith: and whan thou hast done thine easement, thou shalt couer that which is departed from the.
23:14 For the LORDE thy God walketh in thine hooste, to delyuer the, and to geue thine enemies before the. Therfore shall thy hooste be holy, that he se no vncleane thinge in the, and so turne himselfe from the.
23:15 Thou shalt not delyuer vnto his master the seruaunt, which is escaped frō him vnto the.
23:16 He shall dwell with the in the place that he choseth within eny of thy gates, for his wealth, and thou shalt not vexe him.
23:17 There shal be no whore amonge yͤ doughters of Israel, nether whorekeper amonge the sonnes of Israel.
23:18 Thou shalt not bringe yͤ hyre of an whoore ner the price of a dogg in to the house of the LORDE yͥ God for eny maner of vowe: for they both are abhominacion vnto the LORDE thy God.
23:19 Thou shalt occupye no vsury vnto yͥ brother, nether with money, ner with fode, ner with eny maner thinge that vsury maye be vsed withall.
23:20 (Vnto a strauger thou maiest lende vpo vsury, but not vnto thy brother) yͭ the LORDE thy God maye blesse the in all yͭ thou takest in hade, in the lode whither thou commest in to possesse it.
23:21 Whan thou makest a vowe vnto yͤ LORDE yͥ God, to shalt not be slacke to perfourme it: for the LORDE thy God shal requyre it of the, and it shal be synne vnto the.
23:22 Yf thou leaue vowinge, then is it no synne vnto the.
23:23 But that which is proceaded out of yͥ lyppes shalt thou kepe, and do therafter, acordinge as thou hast vowed vnto the LORDE of a frewyll, which thou hast spoken wͭ thy mouth.
23:24 Whan thou goest in to thy neghtours vyniarde, thou mayest eate of the grapes acordinge to thy desyre, tyll thou haue ynough. But thou shalt put none in to thy vessell.
23:25 Whan thou goest in thy neghbours cornefelde, thou mayest plucke the eares with thine hande, but with a syccle mayest thou not reape therin.
24:1 Whan a man taketh a wife, and marieth her, and she findeth no fauoure in his eyes because of eny vnclennesse, the shal he wryte a byll of deuorcemet, and geue it her in hir hade, and sende her out of his house.
24:2 Yf whan she is gone out of his house, she go, and be another mans wyfe,
24:3 and the same seconde man hate her also, & wryte a byll of deuorcement, and geue it her in hir hande, and sende her out of his house: Or yf the same seconde man dye, which toke her to wife,
24:4 then hir first husbande that put hir awaie, maie not take hir againe to be his wife, in so moch as she is defyled, for that is abhominacion before the LORDE : that thou make not the londe to synne, which the LORDE thy God hath geuen the to enheritauce.
24:5 Whan a man hath newly taken a wyfe, he shall not go awarre fare, nether shall he be charged withall. He shal be fre in his house one yeare longe, that he maye be mery wͭ his wife which he hath taken.
24:6 Thou shalt no take yͤ nethermost and vppermost mylstone to pledge, for he hat set yͤ his lyuynge to pledge.
24:7 Yf eny man be founde that stealeth one of his brethren, from amonge the childrē of Israel, and setteth him to pledge, or selleth him soch a thefe shal dye, that thou maiest put awaye the euell from the.
24:8 Kepe the from the plage of leprosie, that thou obserue diligently and do acordynge vnto all that the prestes the Leuites teach the, as I haue commaunded them, yͭ shal yͤ obserue and do therafter.
24:9 Remembre what the LORDE thy God dyd vnto Miriam by the waye, whan ye were come out of Egipte.
24:10 Yf thou lendest yͥ brother eny dett, thou shalt not go into his house, and take a pledge,
24:11 but shalt stonde without: and he, to who thou lendest, shal brynge out his pledge vnto the.
24:12 But yf it be a poore body, thou shalt not lye downe to slepe, with his pledge,
24:13 but shalt delyuer him his pledge agayne, whan the Sonne goeth downe, that he maye slepe in his awne rayment, and blesse the, so shall the same be rekened vnto the for righteousnes before the LORDE thy God.
24:14 Thou shalt not withdrawe the hyre of yͤ nedye and poore amonge thy brethren, or straunger that is in thy londe,
24:15 or within thy gates, but shalt geue him his hyre the same daye, that the Sonne go not downe theron, for so moch as he is nedye, and his life susteyned therwith: that he call not vpon the LORDE agaynst the, and it be synne vnto the.
24:16 The fathers shal not dye for the children, ner the childrē for the fathers, but euery one shal dye for his awne synne.
24:17 Thou shalt not wrest the righte of the straunger and of the fatherlesse. And yͤ wedowes rayment shalt thou not take to pledge:
24:18 For thou shalt remembre, that thou wast a seruaunte in Egipte, and how that yͤ LORDE thy God delyuered the from thence, therfore commaunde I the to do this.
24:19 Whan thou hast reaped downe thine haruest in the felde, and hast forgotten a shefe in the felde, thou shalt not turne agayne to fetch it, but it shal be for the straunger, yͤ fatherlesse and the wedowe, that the LORDE thy God maye blesse the in all the workes of thy handes.
24:20 Whan thou hast plucked thine Olyue trees, thou shalt not plucke them vp cleane afterwarde: it shal be for the straunger, the fatherlesse and the wedowe.
24:21 Whan thou hast gathered thy vynyarde, thou shalt not gather it vp cleane afterwarde: it shalbe for the straunger, the fatherlesse and the wedowe.
24:22 And thou shalt remembre, that thou wast a seruaunt in the londe of Egipte: therfore comaunde I the to do this.
25:1 Whan there is a stryfe betwene men, they shalbe brought before yͤ lawe and iudged: and the iudges shall iustifye the righteous, and condemne the vngodly.
25:2 And yf the vngodly haue deserued strypes, the iudge shall commaunde to take him downe, and they shall beate him before him, acordynge to the measure and nombre of his trespace.
25:3 Whan they haue geue him fortye strypes, they shall beate him nomore, lest (yf there be mo strypes geuen him) he be beaten to moch, and thy brother be horrible before thine eyes.
25:4 Thou shalt not mosell the mouth of the oxe, that treadeth out the corne.
25:5 Whan brethren dwell together, and one of them dye with out children, then shall not yͤ wife of the deed take a straunge man without, but hir kynsman shal go in vnto her, and take her to wyfe:
25:6 and the first sonne that she beareth, shal he set vp after the name of his brother which is deed, that his name be not put out of Israel.
25:7 But yf the man wyl not take his kynswoman, then shal his kinswoman go vp vnder the gate to the Elders, and saye: My kynsman refuseth to stere vp a name vnto his brother in Israel, and wyl not marye me.
25:8 Then shal the Elders of the cite call him, and comen with him. Yf he stonde then and saye: I wyl not take her,
25:9 then shal his kynswoman steppe forth vnto him before the Elders, and lowse a shue frō his fote, and spyt in his face, and shal answere, and saye: Thus shal it be done vnto euery man, that wyl not builde his brothers house.
25:10 And his name shalbe called in Israel, the vnshodd house.
25:11 Yf two men stryue together, and the wyfe of one renne to, to delyuer hir husbande from the hande of him that smyteth him, & put forth hir hande, and take him by the secretes,
25:12 then shalt thou cut of hir hande, and thine eye shal not pitie her.
25:13 Thou shalt not haue in yͥ bagg two maner of weightes, a greate and a small.
25:14 Nether shalt thou haue in thyne house dyuerse measures, a greate and a small.
25:15 Thou shalt haue a perfecte and iust weighte, and a perfecte and iust measure, that thy life maye be longe in the londe, which the LORDE yͥ God shal geue the.
25:16 For who so euer doth soch (yee all they that do euell) are abhominacion vnto the LORDE thy God.
25:17 Remebre what the Amalechites did vnto the by the waye, wha ye were departed out of Egipte,
25:18 how they buckled with the by the waye, and smote thy hynmost, euen all that were feble, which came after the whan thou wast weerye and fainte, and they feared not God.
25:19 Now wha the LORDE thy God bryngeth the, to rest frō all thine enemies rounde aboute in the londe which the LORDE thy God geueth the for inheritaunce to possesse, then shalt thou put out the remembraunce of the Amalechites from vnder heauen. Forget not this.
26:1 Whan thou commest into the londe that the LORDE thy God shal geue the to inheritaunce, and enioyest it, and dwellest therin,
26:2 thou shalt take of all maner first frutes of the londe, that come out of thy grounde, which the LORDE thy God geueth the, & shalt put them in a maunde, and go vnto the place which the LORDE thy God shal chose (yͭ his name maye dwell there)
26:3 and thou shalt come vnto the prest which shalbe at that tyme, and saye vnto him: I knowlege this daye vnto the LORDE thy God, that I am come in to the londe, which yͤ LORDE sware vnto oure fathers to geue vs.
26:4 And the prest shal take the maunde out of thine hande, and set it downe before the altare of the LORDE thy God.
26:5 Then shalt thou answere and saye before the LORDE thy God: The Syrians wolde haue destroyed my father, which wete downe in to Egipte, and was a strauger there with a small folke, and became there a nacio greate, mightie & full of people.
26:6 But the Egipcias intreated vs euell, and troubled vs, and layed an harde bondage vpo vs.
26:7 Then cried we vnto yͤ LORDE , the God of oure fathers. And the LORDE herde oure cryenge, and loked on oure aduersite, laboure, and oppressio,
26:8 & brought vs out of Egipte with a mightie hande, and a stretched out arme, and with greate terryblenesse thorow tokens and woders,
26:9 and hath broughte vs vnto this place and hath geuen vs this londe, that floweth with mylke and hony.
26:10 Therfore brynge I now the first frutes of the londe, which the LORDE hath geuen vs. And thou shalt leaue them before the LORDE thy God, and geue thankes before the LORDE thy God,
26:11 and reioyse ouer all the good, that the LORDE yͥ God hath geuen the, and thyne house: thou and the Leuite, and the straunger that is with the.
26:12 Whan thou hast brought together all yͤ tythes of thine increase in the thirde yeare, which is a yeare of tithes, thou shalt geue it vnto the Leuite, to the straunger, to the fatherlesse, and to the wedowe, that they maie eate within yͥ gates, and be filled.
26:13 And thou shalt saye before the LORDE thy God: I haue broughte that halowed is, out of my house, and haue geuen it vnto the Leuyte, the straunger, the fatherlesse, and the wedowe, acordinge to all thy commaundement which thou hast comaunded me. I haue not transgressed thy commaundementes, ner forgotten them.
26:14 I haue not eaten therof in my heuynesse, ner taken awaye therof in vnclennesse. I haue not geue therof vnto the deed. I haue bene obedient vnto the voyce of the LORDE my God, and haue done all as he hath commaunded me.
26:15 Loke downe from thy holy habitacion, from heauen, and blesse thy people of Israel, and yͤ londe that thou hast geuen vs, as thou swarest vnto oure fathers, a londe that floweth with mylke and hony.
26:16 In the daye whan the LORDE thy God commaunded the, to do acordynge vnto all these ordinauces and lawes, that thou shuldest kepe them and do therafter with all thy hert and with all thy soule.
26:17 The same daye maydest thou a promysse vnto the LORDE , that he shulde be thy God, and yͭ thou woldest walke in all his wayes, and kepe his ordynaunces, his commaundementes, and his lawes, and to herken vnto his voyce.
26:18 And the LORDE promysed the vpo the same daye, that thou shuldest be his awne peculier people, like as he hath sayde vnto the (so yͭ thou kepe all his commaundementes)
26:19 and that he wolde make the hye in prayse name and honoure aboue all nacions which he hath made yͭ thou mayest be an holy people vnto yͤ LORDE thy God, as he hath sayde vnto the.
27:1 And Moses with yͤ Elders of Israel, commaunded the people, & sayde: Kepe all the commaundementes which I commaunde you this daye.
27:2 And what time as yͤ go ouer Iordane, in to the londe yͭ yͤ LORDE thy God shal geue the, thou shalt set vp greate stones, and playster them with playster,
27:3 and wryte vpon them all the wordes of this lawe: (whan thou art come ouer) yͭ thou mayest come in to the londe, which the LORDE thy God shall geue the, a londe yͭ floweth with milke and hony, as yͤ LORDE God of thy fathers hath promysed the.
27:4 Now whan yͤ go ouer Iordane, ye shall set vp these stones (wherof I comaunde you this daye) vpon mount Eball, and playster them with playster:
27:5 and there shalt thou buylde vnto the LORDE thy God an altare of stone, whervpon thou shalt lifte no yron.
27:6 Of whole stones shalt thou builde this altare vnto the LORDE thy God, and offre burntofferinges theron vnto the LORDE thy God:
27:7 and thou shalt offre healthofferinges, and eate there, and reioyse before the LORDE thy God:
27:8 and vpon the stones thou shalt wryte all the wordes of this lawe manyfestly and well.
27:9 And Moses with the prestes and Leuites spake vnto all Israel, and sayde: Take hede and heare O Israel: This daye art thou become the people of the LORDE thy God,
27:10 that thou mayest be obedient vnto the voyce of the LORDE thy God, and do acordinge vnto all his commaundementes and ordinaunces, which I comaunde the this daye.
27:11 And Moses charged the people the same daye, and sayde:
27:12 These shal stonde vpon mount Grisim to blesse the people, whan yͤ are gone ouer Iordane: Simeon, Leui, Iuda, Isachar, Ioseph, and Ben Iamin.
27:13 And these shal stonde vpon mount Eball to curse: Ruben, Gad, Asser, Zabulon, Dan & Nephtali.
27:14 And the Leuites shal begynne, and saye vnto euery man of Israel, wͭ a loude voyce:
27:15 Cursed be he, that maketh eny carued Idoll or molten ymage (an abhominacion of the LORDE , a worke of the handes of yͤ craftesman) and putteth it in a secrete place. And all the people shal answere and saye, Amen.
27:16 Cursed be he, that curseth his father and mother. And all the people shall saye, Amen.
27:17 Cursed be he, yͭ remoueth his neghbours mark. And all the people shal saye, Amen.
27:18 Cursed be he, that maketh a blynde man go out of his waye. And all the people shal saye, Amen.
27:19 Cursed be he, that wresteth yͤ righte of yͤ straunger, of the fatherlesse, & wedowe. And all the people shal saye, Amen.
27:20 Cursed be he, that lyeth with his fathers wife, to vncouer his fathers couerynge. And all the people shal saye, Amen.
27:21 Cursed be he, yͭ lyeth wͭ eny maner beest. And all the people shal saye, Amen.
27:22 Cursed be he, yͭ lyeth wͭ his sister, which is the doughter of his father or of his mother. And all the people shal saye, Amen.
27:23 Cursed be he, yͭ lyeth with his mother in lawe. And all the people shal saye, Amen.
27:24 Cursed be he that slayeth his neghboure secretly. And all the people shal saye, Amen.
27:25 Cursed be he, that receaueth giftes to slaye the soule of innocent bloude. And all the people shal saye, Amen.
27:26 Cursed be he, that contynueth not in all yͤ wordes of this lawe, to do them. And all yͤ people shal saye, Amen.
28:1 And yf thou shalt herken vnto yͤ voyce of the LORDE thy God, to obserue and do all his commaundementes which I comaunde yͤ this daye, then shall the LORDE thy God set yͤ an hye aboue all nacions vpo earth,
28:2 and all these blessynges shal come vpon the, and ouertake the, because thou hast bene obedient vnto the voyce of the LORDE thy God.
28:3 Blessed shalt thou be in the towne, and blessed in the felde.
28:4 Blessed shalbe the frute of thy body, the frute of thy grounde, and the frute of thy catell, and the frute of thine oxen, and the frute of thy shepe.
28:5 Blessed shal be yͥ baskett, & thy stoare.
28:6 Blessed shalt thou be wha thou goest in, and blessed whan thou goest out.
28:7 And thine enemies that ryse vp agaynst the, shal yͤ LORDE cause to be smytten before thy face. They shal come out agaynst the one waye, & flye before the seuen wayes.
28:8 The LORDE shal commaunde the blessynge to be with yͤ in thy cellers, and in all that thou takest in hande, and shal blesse the in yͤ londe that the LORDE thy God hath geue the.
28:9 The LORDE shal set the vp to be an holy people vnto himselfe (as he hath sworne vnto the) yf thou kepe the commaundementes of the LORDE thy God:
28:10 so that all nacions vpon earth shal se, that thou art called after the name of the LORDE : & they shal be afrayed of you.
28:11 And yͤ LORDE shal make yͤ plenteous in goodes, in the frute of yͥ wombe, in the frute of thy catell, & in the frute of thy grounde, in the londe that the LORDE sware vnto thy fathers, to geue the.
28:12 And the LORDE shal open vnto yͤ his good treasure, euen the heauen, to geue rayne vnto thy londe in due season, and to prospere all the workes of thine handes. And thou shalt lede vnto many nacios, but thou shalt borowe of no man.
28:13 And yͤ LORDE shal set the before, and not behynde: & thou shalt be aboue onely, and not benethe, yf thou be obedient vnto the commaundementes of yͤ LORDE thy God, which I commaunde the this daye to kepe and to do them:
28:14 & yf thou bowe not asyde from eny of these wordes, which I commaunde yͤ this daye, either to the righte hande or to the lefte, yͭ thou woldest walke after other goddes to serue them.
28:15 But yf thou wylt not herken vnto the voyce of the LORDE thy God, to kepe and to do all his commaundementes and ordinaunces, which I commaunde yͤ this daie, then shall all these curses come vpon the, and ouertake the.
28:16 Cursed shalt thou be in the towne, and cursed in yͤ felde:
28:17 cursed shal thy basket be, and thy stoare.
28:18 Cursed shall be the frute of thy body, the frute of thy londe, the frute of thine oxen, and the frute of thy shepe.
28:19 Cursed shalt thou be whan thou goest in, and cursed wha thou goest out.
28:20 The LORDE shal sende in to the, consuminge, and complayninge, and cursynge, in all that thou takest in hande to do, tyll he haue destroyed the & shortly broughte to the naughte, because of thy wicked inuencions, in that thou hast forsaken me.
28:21 The LORDE shall make the pestylence to byde longe with the, tyll he haue consumed the out of the londe, into the which thou commest to possesse it.
28:22 The LORDE shall smyte the with swellynge, feuers, heate, burnynge, venome, drouth, and palenesse, & shall persecute the, tyll he haue destroyed the.
28:23 Thy heauen, that is ouer thy heade, shalbe of brasse, and the earth vnder the, of yron.
28:24 The LORDE shall geue thy londe dust for rayne, and asshes from heauen vpon the, vntyll thou be broughte to naught.
28:25 The LORDE shall cause the be smytten before thine enemyes. Thou shalt come out one waye agaynst them, and seuen wayes shalt thou flye before them, and shalt be scatered amoge all the kyngdomes vpon earth.
28:26 Thy carcase shalbe meate vnto all maner foules of the ayre, and to all the beestes vpon earth, and there shalbe no man to fraye them awaye.
28:27 The LORDE shal smyte the with yͤ botches of Egipte, with the Emorodes, with scalle, and maungynesse, that thou shalt not be healed therof.
28:28 The LORDE shall smyte the with madnesse, blyndnesse and dasynge of hert.
28:29 And thou shalt grope at the noone daye, as yͤ blynde gropeth in darknesse, and shalt not prospere in thy waye. And thou shalt suffre vyolence and wronge all thy lifelonge, & no man shal helpe ye.
28:30 Thou shalt spouse a wife, but another shal lye with her. Thou shalt buylde an house, but another shall dwell therin. Thou shalt plante a vynyarde, but shalt not make it comen.
28:31 Thine oxe shalbe slayne before thine eyes, but thou shalt not eate therof. Thine asse shalbe violently taken awaye (euen before yͥ face) and shal not be restored yͤ againe. Thy shepe shalbe geuen vnto thine enemies, and no man shal helpe the.
28:32 Thy sonnes and thy doughters shalbe geuen vnto another nacion, and thine eyes shal se it, and dase vpon them all the daye longe, and thy hande shal not be able to delyuer them.
28:33 The frute of yͥ londe and all yͥ laboure, shall a nacion eate, which thou knowest not: and thou shalt but onely be he that shalbe oppressed and suffre wronge, all the dayes of thy life.
28:34 And thou shalt be cleane besyde thy selfe for the sighte, which thine eyes shal se.
28:35 The LORDE shal smyte the with a myscheuous botch in yͤ knees & legges, so that thou canst not be healed, euen from the sole of thy fote vnto the crowne of thy heade.
28:36 The LORDE shal brynge the and thy kynge (which thou hast set ouer the) vnto a nacion, whom thou knowest not, nether thy fathers: and there shalt thou serue other goddes, euen wodd and stone:
28:37 and thou shalt go to waist, and become a byworde, & a laughinge stocke amoge all nacions, whither yͤ LORDE hath caryed the.
28:38 Thou shalt cary out moch sede in to yͤ felde, and shalt gather but litle in: for the greshoppers shal destroye it.
28:39 Thou shalt plante vynyardes and dresse the, but thou shalt nether drynke of the wyne, ner gather of yͤ grapes: for yͤ wormes shal consume it.
28:40 Thou shalt haue Olyue trees in all yͥ coastes, but shalt not be anoynted with the oyle: for thyne Oliue trees shalbe roted out.
28:41 Thou shalt get sonnes and doughters, and yet not haue them: for they shal be caried awaye captiue.
28:42 All thy trees and frutes of thy londe shall be marred with blastinge.
28:43 The straunger that is with ye, shal clymme vp ouer the, and be allwaye aboue the: but thou shalt come downe alowe, and lye euer beneth.
28:44 He shal lende vnto the, but thou shalt not lende him. He shalbe before, but thou shalt be behynde.
28:45 And all these curses shall come vpon the, and folowe the, and ouertake ye, tyll thou be destroyed, because thou herkenest not vnto yͤ voyce of the LORDE yͥ God, to kepe his commaundemetes and ordinaunces, which he hath commaunded the.
28:46 Therfore shal there be tokens and wonders vpon the, & vpon thy sede for euer,
28:47 because thou hast not serued yͤ LORDE thy God with a ioyfull and good hert, whan thou haddest abundaunce of all thinges.
28:48 And therfore shalt thou serue thine enemye, which the LORDE shal sende vpon the, in hunger and thyrst, in nakednesse, and neade of all thinge: & he shal put a yocke of yron vpon thy necke, vntyll he haue broughte the to naughte.
28:49 The LORDE shal brynge a nacion vpon the from farre, euen from the ende of yͤ worlde, as a flyenge Aegle: a people, whose speache thou canst not vnderstonde,
28:50 an harde fauoured people, which regarde not the personne of the olde, ner haue compassion on the yonge.
28:51 And they shal eate vp yͤ frute of thy catell, & the frute of thy londe, tyll they haue destroyed the, and shall leaue the nothinge in corne, wyne, oyle, in the frute of yͤ oxen and shepe, vntyll they haue broughte the to naughte:
28:52 and shal laye sege vnto the wͭ in all thy gates, tyll they cast downe thy hye and stronge walles, wherin thou trustest thorow out all thy londe. And thou shalt be beseged within all thy portes, thorow out all thy londe which the LORDE thy God hath geuen the.
28:53 Thou shalt eate the frute of thine awne body, the flesh of thy sonnes and of thy doughters, which the LORDE yͥ God hath geue the, in that straytnesse and sege, wherwith thine enemye shall besege the:
28:54 so that it shal greue the man yͭ afore hath lyued tenderly and in voluptuousnes amonge you, to loke vpon his brother and vpon his wife yͭ lyeth in his bosome, and on the sonne that is left ouer of his sonnes,
28:55 lest he shulde geue eny of them of the flesh of his children that he eateth, in as moch as there is nothinge left him in that straytnesse and sege, wherwith thine enemye shal besege yͤ within all thy gates.
28:56 And the woman that afore hath lyued so tenderly and voluptuously amonge you, that she durste not set the sole of hir fote vpon the grounde for tendernes and voluptuousnes, shal be greued to loke vpon hir husbande that lieth in hir bosome, and on hir sonne, and on hir doughter:
28:57 euen because of hir doughters which she hath norished betwixte hir legges in hir lappe, and because of hir sonnes that she hath borne: For she shall eate them secretly for very scarcenesse of all thinges, in the straytnesse and sege, wherwith thine enemye shal besege yͤ within thy gates.
28:58 Yf thou wilt not be diligent to do all the wordes of this lawe which are wrytten in this boke, that thou mayest feare this glorious and fearfull name, euen the LORDE thy God,
28:59 then shal the LORDE entreate yͤ wonderously, with plages vpon yͤ and thy sede, yee with greate and continuall plages,
28:60 with euell and contynuall sicknesses, and shal brynge vpo ye all yͤ sicknesses of Egipte (wherof thou wast afrayed) and they shal cleue vnto the.
28:61 Therto all maner sicknesses and all maner plages, which are not wrytten in the boke of this lawe, shal the LORDE thy God cause to come vpon the, vntyll he haue destroyed the.
28:62 And there shal be left but a fewe people of you, which afore were as the starres of heauen in multitude: because thou hast not herkened vnto the voyce of the LORDE thy God.
28:63 And as yͤ LORDE reioysed ouer you afore, to do you good, and to multiplye you, eue so shall he reioyse ouer you, to destroye you, and to brynge you to naughte, and ye shalbe waysted from of the londe, whither thou goest now to possesse it.
28:64 For the LORDE shal scater the amonge all nacions, from the one ende of the worlde vnto another, and there shalt thou serue other goddes, whom thou knowest not, ner yet thy fathers, euen wodd and stone.
28:65 And amonge those same nacions shalt thou haue no quyetnesse, nether shal the sole of yͥ fote haue eny rest: for the LORDE shal geue the there a fearfull hert, and dasynge of eyes, and a troubled soule
28:66 so that thy life shal hage before the: Night and daye shalt thou feare, and shalt haue no trust in thy life.
28:67 In the mornynge thou shalt saye: Who shall geue me the euenynge? And at euen shalt thou saye: Who shal geue me the mornynge? For the very greate feare of thine hert, which shal make the afrayed: and for the sighte of thine eyes which thou shalt se.
28:68 And the LORDE shal brynge the agayne in to Egipte by shippe fulles, euen thorow the waye wherof I sayde vnto ther Thou shalt se it nomore: and there shal ye be solde vnto youre enemies for bonde seruauntes and bonde maidens, and there shalbe no man to bye you.
29:1 These are yͤ wordes of the couenaunt, which the LORDE comaunded Moses to make wͭ the children of Israel in the londe of the Moabites, besyde yͤ couenaunt which he made with them in Horeb.
29:2 And Moses called all Israel, and sayde vnto them: ye haue sene all that the LORDE dyd before youre eyes in the londe of Egipte, vnto Pharao with all his seruautes, and all his londe,
29:3 the greate tentacions which thine eyes haue sene, that they were greate tokes and wonders.
29:4 And yet vnto this daye hath not the LORDE geuen you an hert that vnderstondeth, eyes that se, & eares that heare.
29:5 He hath caused you to walke fortye yeares in the wyldernesse. Youre clothes are not waxed olde vpon you, nether is thy shue waxed olde on thy fote.
29:6 ye haue eaten no bred, and dronken no wyne, ner stronge drynke, that yͤ mighte knowe, that he is yͤ LORDE youre God.
29:7 And whan yͤ came vnto this place, Sihon the kynge of Hesbon, and Og yͤ kynge of Basan, came out agaynst vs vnto battayll, and we smote them,
29:8 and toke their londe, and gaue it to enheritaunce vnto yͤ Rubenites and Gaddites, and to the halfe trybe of the Manassites.
29:9 Kepe now therfore the wordes of this couenaunt, and do therafter, that ye maye haue vnderstondinge in all that yͤ do.
29:10 yͤ stonde this daye all before the LORDE youre God, the chefe rulers of youre trybes, youre Elders, youre officers, euery man in Israel,
29:11 youre children, youre wyues, yͤ straungers that are in thine hoost, from the hewer of yͥ wodd vnto yͤ drawer of yͥ water:
29:12 that thou shuldest enter in to the couenaunt of the LORDE thy God, and in to the ooth which the LORDE thy God maketh with the this daye,
29:13 that he mighte set the vp this daye to be a people vnto himself, and that he mighte be thy God, as he hath sayde vnto the, and as he sware vnto yͥ fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Iacob.
29:14 For I make not this couenaunt and this ooth with you onely,
29:15 but both with you yͭ are here this daye, and stonde with vs before the LORDE oure God, and also with them that are not here with vs this daye.
29:16 For ye knowe how we haue dwelt in the londe of Egipte, and how we came thorow the myddes of the Heythen, whom yͤ passed by,
29:17 and sawe their abhominacions and their Idols, wodd and stone, syluer and golde, which were with them:
29:18 Lest there be amoge you man or woman, or an housholde, or a trybe, which turneth awaye his hert this daye from the LORDE oure God, to go and to serue yͤ goddes of these nacions: and lest there be amonge you some rote, that beareth gall & wormwodd:
29:19 so that though he heare the wordes of this curse, he blesse him selfe yet in his hert, and saye: Tush, it shal not be so euell. I wil walke after the meanynge of myne awne hert, that the dronken maye perishe with the thyrstie.
29:20 Then shall not the LORDE be mercifull vnto him, but his wrath and gelousy shall smoke ouer soch a man, and all the curses that are wrytten in this boke, shall lighte vpon him: and the LORDE shal put out his name from vnder heauen,
29:21 and shall separate him vnto euell out of all the trybes of Israel, acordinge vnto all the curses of the couenaunt, that is wrytten in the boke of this lawe.
29:22 So the posterities of youre childrē which shal ryse vp after you, and the straungers that come out of farre countrees, shall saye (whan they se the plages of this londe, and the diseases wherwith the LORDE hath smytten it)
29:23 that he hath brent vp all their londe with brymstone and salt, so yͭ it cannot be sowne, ner is frutefull, nether groweth there eny grasse therin, Like as Sodom, Gomor, Adama and Zeboim are ouerthrowne, which the LORDE ouerthrewe in his wrath and anger.
29:24 Then shall all nacions saye: Wherfore hath the LORDE done thus vnto this londe? What greate wrothfull displeasure is this?
29:25 Then shalt it be sayde: Euen because they haue forsaken the couenaunt of yͤ LORDE God of their fathers (which he made with them whan he broughte them out of the londe of Egipte)
29:26 and they wete, and serued other goddes, and worshipped the, euen soch goddes as they knewe not, and whom he had not deuyded vnto them.
29:27 Therfore the wrath of the LORDE waxed whote ouer this londe, to brynge vpon it all the curses that are wrytten in this boke.
29:28 And the LORDE thrust them out of their londe wͭ greate wrath, indignacion & displeasoure & hath cast them into another londe, as it is come to passe this daye.
29:29 These are the secretes of the LORDE oure God, which are opened vnto vs and oure children for euer, yͭ we shulde do all the wordes of this lawe.
30:1 Now whan all this commeth vpon the, whether it be the blessinge or yͤ curse which I haue layed before the, and thou goest in to thine hert, beynge amoge the Heithen, whither the LORDE thy God hath thrust the,
30:2 and thou turnest vnto the LORDE yͥ God, so that thou herkenest vnto his voyce, thou and thy children with all yͥ hert and with all thy soule, in all that I commaunde the this daye,
30:3 then shal the LORDE thy God turne thy captiuyte, and haue compassion vpon the, and shal gather thy congregacion agayne from amonge all the nacions, whither the LORDE thy God hath scatered the.
30:4 And though thou werest thrust out vnto the vttemost partes of the heauen, yet shall the LORDE thy God gather the from thence, and from thece shal he fetch the,
30:5 and shal brynge the in to the londe, which thy fathers haue possessed, and thou shalt enioye it, and he shal do the good, and multiplye the aboue thy fathers.
30:6 And the LORDE thy God shall circumcyse thine hert, and the hert of thy sede, that thou mayest loue the LORDE yͥ God with all thy hert and with all yͥ soule, that thou mayest lyue.
30:7 But all these curses shall the LORDE thy God laye vpon thine enemyes, and vpon them that hate the and persecute the.
30:8 But thou shalt turne, and herken vnto the voyce of the LORDE , to do all his commaundementes, which I commaunde the this daye.
30:9 And the LORDE thy God shal make the plenteous in all the workes of thine hades, in the frute of thy body, in the frute of thy catell, in the frute of thy londe to good. For the LORDE shall turne, to reioyse ouer the to good, as he reioysed ouer thy fathers,
30:10 so that thou herken vnto the voyce of the LORDE thy God (to kepe his commaundementes and ordinaunces, which are wrytten in the boke of this lawe) and turne vnto the LORDE thy God with all thy hert and with all thy soule.
30:11 For the commaundement which I commaunde yͤ this daye, is not to wonderfull for the, ner to farre,
30:12 ner yet in heauen, that thou neadest to saye: Who wil go vp for vs in to heauen, and brynge it vnto vs, that we maie heare it and do it?
30:13 Nether is it beyonde the see, that thou neadest to saye: Who wyll go ouer the see for vs, and fetch it vs, that we maye heare it, and do it?
30:14 For the worde is very nye vnto the, eue in thy mouth and in thine hert, that thou do it.
30:15 Beholde, I haue layed before you this daye, life and good, death and euell.
30:16 For I comaunde the this daye, to loue the LORDE thy God, and to walke in his wayes, and to kepe his commaundementes, ordinaunces, and lawes, that thou mayest lyue and multiplye, and that the LORDE thy God maye blesse the in the londe, whither thou goest to possesse it.
30:17 But yf thou turnest awaye thine hert, so that thou wilt not heare, but fall a waye, to worshipe other goddes and to serue them,
30:18 I certifye you this daye, that ye shal perishe, & not lyue longe in the londe, whither thou goest ouer Iordane to possesse it.
30:19 I take heauen and earth this daye to recorde ouer you: I haue layed before you life and death, blessinge and cursinge, that thou mayest chose life, and that thou and thy sede maye lyue,
30:20 yͭ ye maye loue the LORDE youre God, and herken vnto his voyce, and cleue vnto him: (For he is thy life and thy loge age) that thou mayest dwell in the londe, which the LORDE sware vnto thy fathers Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, to geue them.
31:1 And Moses wente, & spake these wordes to all Israel,
31:2 and saide vnto them: I am this daye an hundreth and twetye yeare olde, I can nomore go out and in: the LORDE also hath sayde vnto me: Thou shalt not go ouer this Iordane.
31:3 The LORDE thy God himselfe shall go before the ouer Iordane: and HE himselfe shal destroye these nacions before the, that thou mayest conquere them: and Iosua he shall go ouer before the. as the LORDE hath sayde.
31:4 And the LORDE shal do vnto them, as he dyd vnto Sihon and Og the kynges of the Amorites and vnto their lode, which he destroyed.
31:5 Now whan the LORDE shal deliuer the before you, ye shal do vnto them acordynge vnto all the commaundementes which I haue commaunded you.
31:6 Be manly and stroge, feare not, and be not afrayed of them. For the LORDE thy God himselfe shal go with the, and shal not fayle the, ner forsake the.
31:7 And Moses called Iosua, and sayde vnto him before all Israel: Be stronge and bolde, for thou shalt brynge this people in to the londe, which the LORDE hath sworne vnto their fathers to geue them, and thou shalt parte it amonge them by lott.
31:8 But the LORDE himselfe that goeth before you, euen HE shal be with the, and shal not fayle the, ner forsake the: Feare not, and be not afrayed.
31:9 And Moses wrote this lawe, and delyuered it vnto the prestes the children of Leui ( which bare the Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE ) and vnto all the Elders of Israel.
31:10 And he commaunded them, and sayde: At the ende of seuen yeares, in the tyme of the Fre yeare, in the feast of Tabernacles
31:11 whan all Israel come to appeare before the LORDE thy God, in the place that he shall chose, thou shalt cause this lawe to be proclamed before all Israel in their eares,
31:12 namely, before the congregacion of the people, both of men, wemen, children, and thy straungers which are within thy gates: that they maye heare and lerne to feare the LORDE their God, and be diligent to do all the wordes of this lawe:
31:13 and that their children also which knowe nothinge, maye heare and lerne to feare the LORDE yor God, all youre lyue dayes which yͤ lyue in the londe, whither yͤ go ouer Iordane to possesse it.
31:14 And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Beholde, thy tyme is come that thou must die, call Iosua, and stonde in the Tabernacle of witnesse, that I maye geue him a charge. Moses wente with Iosua, and stode in the Tabernacle of witnesse.
31:15 And the LORDE appeared in the Tabernacle in a cloudy pyler and the same cloudy pyler stode in the dore of the Tabernacle.
31:16 And the LORDE sayde vnto Moses: Beholde, thou shalt slepe with yͥ fathers, and this people wyll ryse vp, and go a whoringe after straunge goddes of the londe in to the which they come, and wyll forsake me, and breake the couenaunt which I haue made wͭ them.
31:17 And then shall my wrath waxe whote agaynst them, at the same tyme, & I shal forsake the, and hyde my face frō them, that they maye be consumed. And so whan moch aduersite & trouble commeth vpo the, they shal saye: Is not all this euell come vpo me, because God is not with me?
31:18 But I shal hyde my face at the same tyme because of all the euell that they haue done, in that they haue turned vnto other goddes.
31:19 Wryte now therfore this songe, & teach it the children of Israel, and put it in their mouth, that this songe maye be a witnesse vnto me amonge the children of Israel.
31:20 For I wil brynge them in to the londe which I sware vnto their fathers, that floweth with mylke and hony. And whan they eate, and are full and fatt, they shal turne vnto other goddes, and serue them, and blaspheme me, and breake my couenaunt.
31:21 And so whan moch myschefe and tribulacion is come vpon them, this songe shall answere before them for a witnesse. It shall not be forgotten out of the mouth of their sede: for I knowe their ymaginacion, that they go aboute euen now, before I brynge them in to the londe, which I sware vnto them.
31:22 So Moses wrote this songe at the same tyme, and taughte it the children of Israel.
31:23 And the LORDE gaue Iosua the sonne of Nun a charge, and sayde: Be stronge and bolde, for thou shalt brynge the children of Israel in to the londe, which I sware vnto them, and I wil be with the.
31:24 Now whan Moses had wrytten out all the wordes of this lawe in a boke,
31:25 he commaunded the Leuites (which bare the Arke of the LORDE S couenaunt) and sayde:
31:26 Take the boke of this lawe, and laye it by the syde of the Arke of the couenaunt of the LORDE youre God, that it maye be there a wytnesse agaynst the:
31:27 for I knowe thy stubburnesse and thy harde neck. Beholde, whyle I am yet alyue wͭ you this daye, ye haue bene disobedient vnto the LORDE : how moch more after my death?
31:28 Gather now vnto me all the Elders of youre trybes, and youre officers, yͭ I maye speake these wordes in their eares, and take heauen and earth to recorde agaynst them.
31:29 For I am sure that after my death ye shall marre youre selues, and turne asyde out of the waye, which I haue commaunded you: and so shall mysfortune happen vnto you herafter, because ye haue done euell in the sighte of the LORDE , in prouokynge him thorow the workes of youre handes.
31:30 So Moses spake out the wordes of this songe euen to the ende, in the eares of all the congregacion of Israel.
32:1 Herken (O yͤ heauens) I wyll speake: and let the earth heare the wordes of my mouth.
32:2 My doctryne droppe as doth the raine, and my speach flowe as doth the dew. Euen as the rayne vpon the grasse, and as the droppes vpon the herbe.
32:3 For I wyl call vpon the name of the LORDE , geue yͤ the glory vnto oure God.
32:4 Perfecte are the workes of the Stone, for all his wayes are righteous. God is true, and no wickednes is there in him, righteous and iust is he.
32:5 The frowarde and ouerthwarte generacion hath marred them selues to himwarde and are not his children, because of their deformyte.
32:6 Thankest thou the LORDE yͥ God so, thou foolish and vnwyse people? Is not he thy father and thy LORDE ? Hath he not made the, and prepared the?
32:7 Remembre the dayes that are past, considre the yeares of the generacions afore tyme. Axe thy father, he shall shewe the: thine elders, they shal tell the.
32:8 Whan the most Hyghest deuyded yͤ nacions and scatred the children of men. Then set he the borders of the nacions acordinge to the nombre of the children of Israel.
32:9 For the LORDE S parte is his folke, Iacob is the meetlyne of his enheritaunce.
32:10 He founde him in the wyldernesse, euen in the drye deserte where he roared. He led him aboute, and gaue him vnderstondinge: He kepte him as the aple of his eye.
32:11 As an Aegle stereth vp hir nest, and flotereth ouer hir yonge: Euen so stretched he out his fethers, and toke him and bare him on his wynges.
32:12 The LORDE onely was his gyde, & there was no straunge God with him.
32:13 He caried him ouer yͤ heigth of the earth, and fed him with the increase of the felde. He caused him sucke hony out of the rocke, and oyle out of the harde stone.
32:14 Butter of the kyne, and mylke of the shepe, with the fat of the lambes, and rammes of the sonnes of Basan, and he goates with the fat of the kydneys, and wheate: And gaue him drynke of the very bloude of grapes.
32:15 And whan he was fat and had ynough, he waxed wanton. He is fat, and thicke, and smothe, & hath letten God go, that made him, and despysed the rocke of his saluacion.
32:16 He hath prouoked him to indignacion, thorow straunge goddes, and thorow abhominacion hath he angred him.
32:17 They offred vnto felde deuels, & not vnto their God. Vnto goddes whom they knewe not, eue vnto new goddes, yͭ came newly vp, whom their fathers honoured not.
32:18 Thy rocke that begat ye, hast thou despysed: and hast forgotten God that made the.
32:19 And whan the LORDE sawe it, he was moued vnto wrath ouer his sonnes and his doughters.
32:20 And he sayde: I wyll hyde my face from them, I wyll se what their ende shal be: for it is a frowarde generacion, they are childrē in whom is no fayth.
32:21 They haue prouoked me in it that is not God: wͭ their vanites haue they angred me. And I agayne wil prouoke them, by those that are no people: by a foolish nacion wil I anger them.
32:22 For the fyre is kyndled in my wrath, and shal burne vnto yͤ nethermost hell, and shal consume the londe with the increase therof, and set the foundacions of yͤ mountaynes on fyre.
32:23 I wil heape myscheues vpo them, I wil spende all myne arowes at them.
32:24 They shal pyne awaye thorow honger, & be consumed of the feuers, and of bytter sicknesses. I wil sende amonge them yͤ tethe of beestes, and furious serpentes.
32:25 Without shall the swearde robbe them, & feare in the chambers, both the yonge man and yonge woman, the suckynge children wͭ the gray headed man.
32:26 I wyll saye: Where are they? I shall make their remembraunce to ceasse from amonge men.
32:27 Yf the wrath of the enemies were not gathered, lest their enemies shulde be proude, & might saie: Oure hande is hye, and: The LORDE hath not done all this.
32:28 For it is a people, wherin is no councell, and there is no vnderstondinge in them.
32:29 O that they were wyse & vnderstode this, that they wolde cosidre what shulde happe vnto them her after.
32:30 How cometh it, yͭ one shall chace a thousande of them, and yͭ two shal put ten thousande to flyghte? Is it not so, euen because their rocke hath solde them, and because the LORDE hath geuen them ouer?
32:31 For oure rocke is not as their rocke, of this are oure enemies iudges themselues.
32:32 Their vyne is of the vyne of Sodom, and of the feldes of Gomorra: their grapes are the grapes of gall, they haue bytter clusters.
32:33 Their wyne is the poyson of Dragons, & the furious gall of Adders.
32:34 Is not this hid with me, and sealed vp in my treasures?
32:35 Vengeaunce is myne, and I wyll rewarde in due season. Their fote shall slyde, for the tyme of their destruccio is at honde, and the thinge that is to come vpon them, maketh haiste.
32:36 For the LORDE shall iudge his people, and shal haue compassion on his seruauntes. For he shal considre that their power is awaie, and that it is gone with them, which were shut vp and remayned ouer.
32:37 And he shal saye: Where are their goddes, their rocke wherin they trusted?
32:38 Of whose sacrifices they ate yͤ fatt, and dranke the wyne of their drynkofferinges? Let them ryse vp and helpe you, and be youre proteccion.
32:39 Se now that I I am, and that there is none other God but I. I can kyll and make alyue: what I haue smytten, that can I heale: and there is noman able to delyuer out of my hande.
32:40 For I wil lifte vp my hande to heauen, & wyl saye: I lyue euer.
32:41 Yf I whet yͤ edge of my swerde, and my hande take holde of iudgment, then wyll I auenge me on myne enemies, and rewarde them that hate me.
32:42 I wil make myne arowes dronken with bloude, and my swerde shal eate flesh ouer yͤ bloude of the slayne, and ouer the captyuite, and in that the enemies heade shall be discouered.
32:43 Reioyse yͤ Heythen with his people: for he wil auenge the bloude of his seruauntes, and wyl auenge him on his enemies, & wil be mercifull vnto the londe of his people.
32:44 And Moses came and spake all the wordes of this songe in the eares of the people, he and Iosua the sonne of Nun.
32:45 Now wha Moses had made an ende of speakinge all these wordes vnto all Israel,
32:46 he sayde vnto the: Take to hert all yͤ wordes, which I testifye vnto you this daye, that yͤ commaunde youre children, to obserne and do all the wordes of this lawe.
32:47 For it is no vaine worde vnto you, but it is yor life: & this worde shal prolonge youre life in yͤ londe, whither yͤ go ouer Iordane to conquere it.
32:48 And yͤ LORDE spake vnto Moses yͤ same daie, & sayde:
32:49 Get the vp to this mount Abarim, vpon mount Nebo, which lyeth in yͤ londe of the Moabites ouer agaynst Iericho, & beholde the londe of Canaan, which I shall geue vnto the children of Israel in possessio.
32:50 And dye thou vpon the mount, whan thou art come vp, and be gathered vnto thy people, like as Aaron thy brother dyed vpon mount Hor, and was gathered vnto his people:
32:51 Because yͤ trespaced agaynst me amonge the children of Israel by the water of stryfe at Cades in the wildernesse of Zin, and sanctified me not amonge the children of Israel.
32:52 For thou shalt se the londe ouer against the, which I geue vnto yͤ children of Israel but thou shalt not come in to it.
33:1 This is the blessynge, wherwith Moses the man of God blessed yͤ childrē of Israel before his death,
33:2 and saide: The LORDE came from Sinai, and rose vp vnto the from Seir. He appeared frō mount Paran, and came wͭ many thousande sayntes. At his righte hande is there a lawe of fyre for them:
33:3 O how loued he the people? All his sayntes are in his hande, they shall set them selues downe at thy fete, and receaue of thy wordes.
33:4 Moses commaunded vs the lawe, which is the enheritaunce of the congregacion of Iacob.
33:5 And he was in the fulnesse of the kynge, & helde yͤ rulers of yͤ people together, with the trybes of Israel.
33:6 Let Ruben lyue, and not dye, and his people be fewe in nombre.
33:7 This is the blessynge of Iuda. And he sayde: LORDE heare the voyce of Iuda, and brynge him vnto his people: Let his hades multiplye him, and let him be helped frō his enemies.
33:8 And vnto Leui he sayde: Thy perfectnes and yͥ lighte be acordinge vnto the man of thy mercy, who thou hast tempted at Massa, whan yͤ stroue by the water of stryfe.
33:9 He that sayeth vnto his father and to his mother: I se him not: and to his brother, I knowe him not: and to his sonne, I wote not of him, those haue obserued thy wordes, and kepte yͥ couenaunt:
33:10 they shal teach Iacob thy iudgmentes, and Israel thy lawe: they shal laie incense before thy nose, & burntofferinges vpon thine altare.
33:11 LORDE , blesse thou his power & accepte the workes of his handes: smyte the loynes of them yͭ ryse vp agaynst him, & of them that hate him, that they lifte not vp them selues.
33:12 And to Ben Iamin he saide: The beloued of the LORDE shal dwell in hope on him: All the daye longe shal he wayte vpon him, and shal dwell betwene his shulders.
33:13 And to Ioseph he sayde: His londe lieth in the blessynge of the LORDE , there are noble frutes of heauen, of the dew, and of the depe that lyeth beneth:
33:14 There are noble frutes of the increase of the Sonne, and noble rype frutes of yͤ monethes:
33:15 And of yͤ toppes of the mountaynes of olde, and of the hilles allwaye,
33:16 and of the noble frutes of yͤ earth, and of the fulnesse therof. The good will of him that dwelleth in the busshe, come vpon the heade of Ioseph, and vpon yͤ toppe of his heade that was separated frō amonge his brethren.
33:17 His bewtye is as a firstborne oxe, and his hornes are as yͤ hornes of an Vnicorne: with the same shal he pusshe the nacions together, euen vnto the endes of the worlde. These are the thousandes of Ephraim, and the thousandes of Manasse.
33:18 And vnto Zabulon he sayde: Reioyse Zabulon of thy outgoynge: but reioyse thou Isachar of thy tentes.
33:19 They shall call the people vnto yͤ hyll, and there shal they offre yͤ offeringes of righteousnes. For they shal sucke the abundaunce of the see, and the treasures hyd in the sonde.
33:20 And to Gad he sayde: Blessynge haue Gad, which maketh rowme. He dwelleth as a lyon, and spoyleth the arme and the toppe of the heade.
33:21 And he sawe his begynnynge, that yͤ heape of the teachers laye hydd there, and came with the rulers of the people, and executed the righteousnesse of the LORDE , and his iudgment on Israel.
33:22 And to Dan he sayde: Dan a yonge lyon, he shal flowe from Basan.
33:23 And to Nephtali he saide: Nephtali shal haue abundaunce of pleasure, & shalbe full of the blessynge of the LORDE : his possession shalbe towarde the west and south.
33:24 And to Asser he sayde: Asser be blessed wͭ sonnes, accepted be he with his brethren, and dyppe his fote in oyle.
33:25 Yron and brasse be on thy shues. Thyne age be as thy youth.
33:26 There is no God as the God of the iust. He that sytteth vpon heauen, be thy helpe. And his glory is in the cloudes,
33:27 that is the dwellynge of God from the beginnynge, and vnder the armes of the worlde. And he shal dryue out thyne enemye before the, and saye: Be destroyed.
33:28 And Israel shall dwell safe alone. The eye of Iacob shalbe vpon yͤ londe where corne and wine is, heauen also shal droppe with dewe.
33:29 Happye art thou Israel, who is lyke vnto the? O thou people yͭ art saued by the LORDE , which is thy helpe, shylde, and the swerde of thy glorye. Thyne enemies shal pyne awaye, and thou shalt treade vpon the height of them.
34:1 And Moses wente from the felde of yͤ Moabites vp vnto mount Nebo, vpo yͤ toppe of mout Pisga ouer agaynst Iericho. And the LORDE shewed him all the londe of Gilead vnto Dan,
34:2 and all Nephtali, and the londe of Ephraim and Manasse, and all the londe of Iuda, vnto yͤ vttemost see,
34:3 and towarde the south, and the region of the playne of Iericho the cite of the palme trees euen vnto Zoar.
34:4 And the LORDE sayde vnto him: This is the londe that I sware vnto Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, and sayde: I wyll geue it vnto thy sede. Thou hast sene it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not go ouer thither.
34:5 So Moses yͤ seruaunt of the LORDE died there in the londe of the Moabites, acordinge vnto the worde of yͤ LORDE .
34:6 And he buried him in a valley, in the londe of the Moabites ouer agaynst the house of Peor. And noman knewe of his graue vnto this daye.
34:7 And Moses was an hundreth and twentye yeare olde whan he dyed: his eyes were not dymme, and his chekes were not fallen.
34:8 And the children of Israel weped for Moses in yͤ felde of the Moabites thirtie daies, and the dayes of the wepynge and mournynge for Moses were fulfilled.
34:9 And Iosua the sonne of Nun was filled with yͤ sprete of wysdome ( for Moses had layed his hande vpon him) and the children of Israel herkened vnto him, and dyd as the LORDE commaunded Moses.
34:10 And there arose no prophet more in Israel, like vnto Moses, whom the LORDE knewe face to face
34:11 in all tokens and wonders (which the LORDE sent him to do in yͤ londe of Egipte, vnto Pharao, and to all his seruautes, and his londe)
34:12 and in all this mightie hande and greate visions which Moses dyd in the sighte of all Israel.